Chairman we do have a quorum all
right awesome good morning
everybody again hope you all are
doing well
Representative read the asked to
be dropped down the order I
don't see chairman meant they
yet so we're gonna go ahead with
one of our members who is here
leader lane so Leader lanes
House Bill three forty two
please thank you Mr chair a good
morning Mr members the committee
I'm here with Natalie Cordova to
my right executive director of
the TV and to my left is could
Steinborn legal counsel for ATV
I guess we're stuck in the bench
here this more of a couple
lawyers so.
This is Mr chair this is one of
those bills that actually I I'm
excited to present in a genuine
way these for no other reason I
get a chance to talk to New
Mexico about five twenty nine
accounts.
Are these are really need
accounts that that we have in
the state really across the
nation and so just brief intro
about one five two nine account
is so it what those do is they
allow you whether for yourself
for a grand child child friend
you can open up an account
make a
Donation into the account you
can take a deduction off of your
income taxes for that you have
the opportunity best typically
in in mutual funds index funds
the balance in the account grows
over time.
And then you're allowed to take
distributions of account for
qualified expenses qualified
higher expenses
and really that's what today's
bill is about is trying to get
New Mexico's statutes consistent
with the Internal Revenue Code
so there was some updates that
were made in twenty seventeen
New Mexico's one last states
that hasn't brought our state
statutes up consistent with
federal statutes and that
affects New Mexicans in a in a
few ways that I want to
highlight one of those is right
now in New Mexico if you have
money in a five twenty nine
account you can't use that money
for apprenticeships that does
not count as a qualified
educational expense.
And so this bill would would
bring in the ability to to make
contrada make expenditures out
of this account for friendships
the other thing that this bill
does.
In terms of bringing us up with
the federal statutes is if you
actually have student loans all
right now in New Mexico you
can't use money in a five twenty
nine account to repay student
loans so this would would bring
a change to that as well which I
think is is needed
and the other thing now that we
have the opportunity scholarship
established is this bill would
allow any remaining money in a
five twenty nine account to
actually roll over into a Roth
IRA and so let's say you know I
have a grandchild for example
and open up a five to nine
account in her name.
if she goes to U. N. M. and
doesn't have to end up paying
tuition you can use the account
to pay for books and then
expenses.
But there's a balance left over
I can actually roll that into a
Roth IRA for my granddaughter
and I think that's a the an
exciting changes well so
that's really what this bill
we're trying to do is just get
state law consistent with
federal law that way there's not
confusion amongst the taxpayers
and I think actually this will
encourage more people to
participate in these five to
nine account so with that Mr
chair will stand for any
questions.
Thank thank you for the
presentation all right so we
will go to our audience if
you're online please indicate by
raise your hand if you're in
support of House Bill three
forty two.
Support so we'll go to our
online audience first so Carla
good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee karla
Kugler president of associated
builders and contractors we are
a commercial construction
association we also have one of
the largest multi trade
construction apprenticeship
programs in the state and we
stand in strong support of House
Bill three forty two thank the
sponsors for bringing it forward
you know now more than ever we
need to encourage your students
to pursue paths towards career
certifications vital skills
occupations good jobs and for
parents that have saved their
grandparents anyone is state for
their child's future I'm really
to tell them that because their
child did not choose a
traditional college pathway that
their savings you know it's
basically useless kind of the
meeting the entire process if
the state is going to push CTE
as important valued pathways
then it only makes sense that we
would allow parents grandparents
anybody to use their savings to
help with that process so for
those reasons we we stand strong
support thank you
thank you.
All right and see anybody else
online we'll go to our audience
those in support of my right
hand side of House Bill three
forty two.
Please forgive up to two minutes
welcome Mr Chairman.
All from public charter schools
of New Mexico we actually been a
partner of the education trust
for for a number of years find
that parents feel empowered when
they learn about the the program
we appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward to
honestly federal thank you thank
thank you others on my right
hand side and support.
Please Sir I am chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Dale as far as a speaking on
behalf as an account holder for
over twenty years makes this by
far nine plan the education plan
this is not appropriation
request included is merely
suggested that New Mexicans
experience the same benefits
that I twenty nine account
holders have in other states as
a stand right now Campbell
there's no states follow the
federal language relies much
more benefits of the Cavaliers
in New Mexico strongly encourage
you to support the bill and
thank you for your time
consideration thank thank you
others American center hi I'm I
left inside those in support.
Please madam secretary have up
to two minutes welcome thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee I am I mean again
secretaries in New Mexico higher
education department and the
education transport is actually
attached to our department and
we are in favor of this bill
thank you thank thank you others
on my left hand side the wish to
speak please my name is what
we're Allison today as that
before you as a mother of three
children I support this bill
speaking on behalf get as myself
as a mother is something that I
look forward to using to support
my children in the future thank
thank you others on my left hand
side which speak in support.
All right we'll go to opposition
is there any opposition either
online or in our audience to
house bill three forty two.
All right thank you welcome to
Canadian Canadian.
Questions comments concerns Mr
Kerry wood to pass all right we
have a due pass motion by
Representative Garrett second by
Representative Ezzell have any
questions come up on that motion
with me.
All right the discussion thing
then is there any opposition to
the past motion.
The yes Representative but.
Right.
You have to pass on have three
forty two I think that was the
quickest we've gotten through
thank you Mr graduations later
we did our homework Mr chair all
right so we're waiting on a
Sanchez the chairman landed
should be on his way our reach
out again but we'll take a brief
break we'll come back in a
moment.
I guess.
We are down to thirty.
Things.
I was.
Yes.
Is.
Here's the Dallas.
Isn't.
All right so we will come back
give everybody could retake
their seats please and quiet
down we have our sponsor thank
you all.
Given the moment.
The chairman and say good
morning we're running on house
bill two the.
Good morning at that thank you
Mr chairman thank you a
committee member sorry for the
delay this morning I am
presenting house bill two
eighty.
how's the two eighty will help
schools and education programs
the team guidance and technical
assistance to better meet the
needs of native students
according to the tribal remedy
frame it that I've been working
on for the past six years in
this legislature we have long
recommended the creation of two
technical assistance centers led
by indigenous education experts
want to assist serving students
from the Navajo and Zuni
pueblo's have a great pagination
and another to assist entities
serving problem Mescalero
students geographically position
in our state the higher
education thankfully has come to
come on board and and is willing
to work with us on these
initiatives the house bill two
eighty will create a support
system for Indian education by
establishing to technical
assistance centers again to work
with tribes school districts
schools and educators to provide
expertise guidance and hands on
support for better serving
native students according to the
ruling and Yazzie Martinez the
court found that the public
education department firstly did
not have the capacity to provide
technical assistance on Indian
Education the quote attributed
the continued failure to
implement the Indian Education
Act party to this lack of
assistance what the legislature
had created has also created
regional education cooperatives
to support schools across the
state there is no unfortunately
no specialized supportive
structure or infrastructure that
exists for Indian education
therefore what house bill two
eighty six to do is direct that
higher education department to
status to assistant technical
assistance centers for Indian
Education require the head at
higher education department
issued requests for proposals
with tribal input for two
centers operating geographically
distinct regions of the state.
To require the higher education
department to prioritize
applications and tribal colleges
universities from native led
programs at native New Mexico's
public higher education
institutions from tribally
controlled entities finally yes
those centers with assisting
tribal education departments
partnering with state agencies
and collaborating with native
students serving school
districts to improve those
native students outcomes that
being said Mr Mr chairman I do
have members of that higher
education department here with
me this morning as my expert
witnesses so if there are
questions that I cannot answer
for you I will ask for their
expertise as well and so that
being said we are ready for
questions I appreciate that I
feel out of breath from your
speech that it is thank you Mr.
We will go to our folks online
so if you are online in support
of house bill two eighty if you
would please indicate by raising
your hand and then we will keep
them there so if you're in
support for and you wish to
speak please indicate by raising
your hand online.
And then we will go to our
audience so we'll start off on
the left hand side this time
those in support of house bill
two eighty if you please
indicate by raising your hand if
you wish to speak.
Okay we will start in the back
so Sir please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
For sure thank you Mickey
Barnett the rest of this request
of Santa Ana and they appreciate
uh representative Lente bring
this bill they want to support
we hope you all of those yes
thank you great thank you so
much all right anybody else in
the same room we'll go to the
next row please Sir welcome you
have up to two minutes Mr
members of the committee John
urged them to Mexico we serve
many districts that serve a high
population of American students
were here to support the
bill urge your guest from today
thank you anybody else in that
room all right we were up
anybody else so we speak in
support in the next row of.
Right we'll move approach for
speaking support house bill two
eighty right we're not yet
we'll get there right now we're
in euro interim secretary so
please.
Mr chairman of the committee my
name is.
And cabinet secretary of the
public education department I
would just like to say that this
legislation is an effort to
collaborative effort across the
three education agencies as well
as an effort our tribal partners
this bill is really critical to
ensuring the success of our
tribal education department
efforts this is something that
has come out of our government
to government education meetings
that we hold twice a year as
well and so I strongly support
this bill thank you for thank
you others in that same that
wish to speak in support.
Sir please have up to two
minutes welcome Mr chair Senator
members of the committee I'm
James mountain and the secretary
designate for the Indian Affairs
Department and in support of
house bill two eighty and
Representative lefty's efforts
and my colleagues efforts in
this collaborative effort we
wanted to express our support
support from the department and
appreciate the time.
Thank you anybody else in the
steam room wish to speak in
support okay we will go to my
right hand side there's a wish
to speak in support okay so
we'll start in the front will
start on the answer please give
up to two minutes.
Members of the committee.
Mexico State University
the end of the Indian Indian
resources.
And families you would program
very much we have to be able to
benefit and testify
And the vehicle we have a number
of programs that with the
support of this.
Thank you for thanks plus the
chair
They pay for.
And your support thank right
those are please Sir you have up
to two minutes for this morning.
Members of the committee more
controls.
Your available account so.
The New Mexico and Texas.
To the ones that are being.
Thank you.
All the work that we do this
for.
Thank you chairman others in the
same room alright we'll go to
the next.
Sir respond with the college and
we finish part of this piece of
legislation thank you.
All right competing for the
record thank you others in that
row right the next.
All right so is there for them
in the classes welcome you have
up to two minutes.
Assistant Secretary Stewart with
the CCG we do support this bill
as it is
We hope that it provides a hope
for indigenous peoples in the
north and south of the want to
focus on consultation cultural
language but I really just
providing the support and tribal
communities so we strongly
support this thank you Susan
secretary others in the same
room please ma'am about two
minutes welcome share more
members of the committee my name
is Jenny parks and the president
and CEO of the legal foundation
we are the largest education
nonprofit in the state and
recover seven county area that
touches eighteen tribal nations
today we stand in support of
health go to eighty it will do
many things including career
pathways for American Indian
educators many of our native
American students don't have
even one eight American educator
during their school career would
like to see that change
professional development and
culturally and linguistically
relevant pedagogy and culturally
and linguistically relevant
instructional materials we
support this in collaborations
with institutions serving native
students in northern New Mexico
state and to do pass thank you
very much.
Thank you others not rather
speak in support thank you ma'am
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for
translocation axis of the staff
for support of this bill along
with our New Mexico Center on
public my background for cities
is also.
And I just can't say enough
about the.
To
finance the position.
And we also support to the
developments of the match thank
thank you anybody else not
rather speak support I will go
to the next.
Thank you madam welcome you have
up to two minutes.
Many of them will Taos New
Mexico voices for children it we
are expertise B. two eighty and
would like to take care of this
bill we support this because
these education technical
assistance centers will
contribute to the state's
response to housing Martinez by
providing additional spaces for
native American politicians
develop culturally
linguistically relevant
materials can find ways to
strengthen careerpathways
reduces educators school
employees and administrators
as well as providing
opportunities for native
communities to continue
development of education policy
that will best serve creative.
To join us in support of the
need to.
Thank you anybody else in that
row that which speak in support
house bill two eighty.
All right we'll go to the next
anybody that we speak to support
please Sir you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Committee members my name is
also reacted with the feeling of
New Mexico and we stand today in
strong support of HB two eight
as this is an essential step in
the integrated stations the
committee has already approved
and moved through and provides
visual educational
infrastructure to implement good
tribal educational policy if we
are to.
Great thank you anybody else on
my right hand side that was
speaking for.
Okay we were online so.
Dr Martinus thank you for being
patient you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Dr Martinus we cannot hear you.
All right Dr Martinez we still
can't hear you I'm gonna try to
remove your permission and then
give you permission again.
All right Dr Martinez are you
with us.
Your microphone is off if you
internal.
And Dr Martinez we still can't
hear you so.
If you wish to you may write
your comments in the chat I
believe the chat features on if
you would do that for us I'm
sorry about the technical
problem.
But thank you for being with us
we'll go to opposition than if
we try to get Dr Martinus sorted
opposition to house bill two
eighty of your online please and
keep it right here and.
in the audience please raise
your hand if you wish to speak
in opposition to house bill two
eighty.
All right.
Nobody supposed anything today.
So far good.
We will come to committee.
Committee member okay
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Lente thank you
for this bill but I do have a
question.
In light of us because budget
yesterday for a huge amount.
You're asking for two million
two hundred fifty thousand.
Has was that approved through
the budget process yesterday.
Mr chairman and and
Representative that was not part
of the budget was passed
yesterday okay that was my
concern there I also see that
it's recurring Mr chairman and
Representative Lente my question
is what happens if our.
I've heard too many people call
it bonus money referred to as
other things it's a.
Is due to the oil and gas
industry we know how that
fluctuate so Mr Chairman
representative Lente what
happens in case we have a
downturn in that particular
industry or even the
agricultural industry both of
those are pretty volatile those
are the two side contributors to
our budget so what happens is
that that's a great question Mr
Chairman representative so let
me give a little background on
in regards to your first
questions the first question was
if it's in the budget and and it
is not in the budget it was in
the governor's budget under the
higher education department but
in the formulation of house bill
two it was elected that we would
follow in some in some
frameworks the L. E. S. C. of
budgetary recommendations and so
it was it was lost in transition
somewhere but none the less we
are still hopeful and and the
department is still hopeful with
as long as in addition with the
administration that we will be
able to pick this up on the
Senate side in regards to your
second question Mr chairman and
and Representative you know the
volatility of oil and gas is is
one that we all are are very
much aware of and so at the end
of the day there are some things
that are within higher education
and is within education
framework within the state that
I think you regardless of the
volatility of of.
Of oil and gas or agriculture or
what any other industry in the
state that that helps to supply
our revenues for our budget that
this is one of those initiatives
that in its infancy is one that
we are trying to get off the
ground but none the less is too
important to to give it
I guess that the bed of not
being able to continue based on
the on the volatility of
something that is out of our
control we understand we can
control production and stuff
like that but the but the fact
that the volatility volatility
of of prices something else but
at the end of the day I would
expect that once we get this off
the gun on up and running that
it's a recurring revenue source
would be a continuous throughout
the years.
Thank you for that for your
thoughts we are on the same line
there I do want to see if if
there's something of this nature
that comes up.
And we are putting money into it
but it should be maintain my
concern is can we sustain that
then that's my concern Mr
Chairman I was looking at the
FIR and then a under phys fiscal
implications I noticed that the
two point two five million
dollars from the general fund
going to hire it of.
This is that can at it's going
to be used to establish the
American in Indian Education
technical assistance centers
which includes paying for staff
and to maintain operational
expenses are you fully in
agreement with that even though
they are not asking for and any
additional full time employees
Mr Chairman representative yes
okay that's good enough.
One other question that.
And this is coming from the
Indian Affairs Department of.
And this is two American Indian
education assistance centers
will be in geographically
distinct regions of the state
and she'll serve all American
Indian students and federally
recognized Indian nations tribes
and pueblos located Holly
partially in New Mexico.
Mr chairman I guess my concern
is with the Mescaleros had do
you plan to fit them in because
they are quite a ways down there
what two hundred and seventy
miles I believe from the next
closest reservation or tried
right so I'd like an explanation
there because.
They're porting to absolutely so
Mister chairman and
Representative all all the
tribes are important the state
thank you for pointing that out
but the in regards to the
Mescalero Apache folks I I think
that's that's the beauty of of
something like this is that
potentially it could be one that
that Mr Abbey talked about
regards to N. M. S. U. N. S.
proximity toward to the
Mescalero Apache or it could be
one where there's already a
robust native American faculty
and programs at the university
of New Mexico in Albuquerque
that in this day and age with
with the internet and and being
able to work remotely can
absolutely without a doubt a
hundred percent support the
initiatives of so supporting our
students at the Mescalero Apache
tribe as well okay Mr chairman
that's all I have thank you very
much for your responses thank
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
chairman the two for bringing
this forward you know I I
appreciate and I respect your
tenacity with these things
because you see the need and you
address sitting you attack any
you go about it and I really
really appreciate that about you
I have a quick question Mr
chairman Representative Lente so
what do you give it to what how
do you envision this helping
of the students what what's what
we do what it what he trying to
accomplish this bill so Mr
chairman and representative so
so currently as mentioned in in
the introduction is that there
have been a regional education
cooperatives already supported
in the state and establish in
the state but none of them focus
on Indian Education aspects are
focusing on native American
students and so that that's a
huge hole that the the public
education department and I think
departments in the state they
just don't have the capacity to
feel and to provide that kind of
expertise or or or or in some
cases development of curriculum
and and different aspects of
education for native kids and so
in in our specimens you know it
it's this practice is a lot
better than that than us saying
okay.
As a state if PED may not have
the capacity to use PED as as
simple because I love the PED
they've gone through some issues
with with secretaries it's I
mean it's no secret right but
sometimes they just don't have
the capacity by their own fault
I don't know but you know in
many cases that the option is to
say well let's go out to RFP to
assist company out of state to
help us develop curriculum or it
goes to to RSVP to someone out
of state to help us bring in
something that we could probably
develop in house in the state
within our own
amazing public higher education
institutions that they're
already working on currently so
why don't we provide them the
opportunity to be our experts to
do everything in the state to
develop these for our own people
and so they think that's the
beauty of their here the experts
are here we don't have to re
develop or reinvent the wheel so
let's let's just allow them to
work with us and for us.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chairman and chairman Lente I
really appreciate you saying
that because I think it's it's
it's all of these P. all of
these pieces that we're trying
to do with education with public
education and what you're trying
to do it's it's we're all
working towards the same goal
and all of these fit together
and I I really appreciate you
doing this and please know that
you have my full support thank
you Mr.
Thank you Representative good or
not.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representative Lente for
bringing this legislation
I I'm very happy with whatever I
right here I'm I believe the
students who see themselves in
the curriculum have a chance to
succeed they're more engaged
they are they're more likely to
stay in school and achieve in my
experience if the students feel
connected to whatever that
experience it even in math
science in any company area the
more likely to to close that
blessed achievement gap I have
seen it I have experience that
so that is I believe that the
the chain has to come within the
communities I hope this comes in
other communities know their a
motion lights groups who also
can develop their own programs
and decide for themselves what
is the best on top are relying
well the people things I have
just one question I'd read that
he sent some reports provided
will be provided but is there
any way to monitor these so we
can actually use it and provided
to all the other areas.
You know I I I think I'd like
for our to to bring in our our
experts to to give them a little
bit of of a a short time here to
answer some questions so Mr
Moquino project into the yes
thank you Mr chair and
representative as far as
reporting you know there's
that's really necessary and and
something like this for the
partnership aspect that ties the
state agencies together with the
Senators to really get a sense
of you know all the work that's
being done and led by the
experts that representative
madam so you know having these
reports and and just getting a
sense of you know the work
that's being done will just help
with the accountability piece
which is you know obviously a
place that we want to support
and work with them on so we
fully believe that you know the
reporting is inherent in the
process with especially with the
R. F. P. because that's what's
part of that's what's been
required in any RFA's R. he's
not the department has set out
and provided.
Thank you.
If I may
Mr chair Representative also
written into the bill is that
there would be a required annual
report that would be submitted
to HUD and then it would be
agencies responsibility to
distribute it to other
legislative bodies into the
governor's office and other
interested parties thank you Mr
Shipp Representative and thank
you for the answer up and I
think so that part with that
report.
What is the report can what
would be that report it is
current I'm sorry Mr chair
representative I currently that
is undefined because we still
are going through the RFP
process will be working with
tribal consultation PED ECECD
and in that process we will be
creating the framework for the
report but as you can imagine it
would demonstrate the number of
students serve the number of
educators serve the types of
programs that they're working on
we really believe in actionable
data at ATV and so the report
would definitely be framed
around data that's going to help
us to continuously improve the
TAC's Mr chair and
representative and
Wilson I'm assuming able full
low
that long he through the ninety
of study right probably to see
the outcomes ventrally Mr chair
representative yes of course AGD
is a big proponent of
longitudinal data in this area
in all of the areas that we
serve thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative dear.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
bringing this bill forward
representative Lente I just have
one small question so the bill
outlines Fund six B. page three
that the higher education
department is going to do the R.
F. P. with lots of input it
tells the types of technical
assistance that might happen it
suggests the kinds of
partnerships that might happen.
And it gives on page four
section see the preferences that
will be considered in those who
who respond to the RFP who will
actually decide who gets the two
centers is that a decision just
of HEP of the herd perfect we'll
make that decision.
At.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for vice chairwoman thank
you for that question it was
important knowing that this the
concept in itself was one that
was established by and through
the tribal remedy framework that
was that was a that is supported
and was developed by the tribes
in its in its parents and
students and so forth and so it
was important that tribal
control B. of a huge part of
that as well so this will be a
collaboration between AGD and
the powers that be within the
state level as well as
collaboration from tribal
leaders throughout the state so
Mister.
Chairman and chairman Lente so
the decision of who gets the two
centers will be collaborative
decision headed up by a to do
but with some of the same
partners involved absolutely
okay thank you and good luck on
the budgetary process that's my
question all right thank you
Representative meadow of Milan.
Thanks chair representative I
really love this idea I have a
quick question more as a the the
practical usage of this is this
of the the centers of are they
mostly going to be focusing on
helping like.
Tribal schools or like let's say
bland school who has a
population of a native American
students would they be able to
utilize the the the
the support from from the
centers in order to better to
help of find for their students
Mr Chairman representative
that's a great question and and
the question is yes in regards
to but the black screen this
would help to serve and support
any school in the state New
Mexico that has a native
American student population that
would include that would go to
obviously include
public schools and charter
schools and early childhood
centers and and homes and and
tribal programs as well
excellent thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
legislation forward it is sorely
needed and I can remember
earlier renditions you know
maybe fifteen years ago I sat in
on a meeting where the
legislature in good faith to try
to put in here they had the
parents meet with the
superintendent tried to do you
know programs that would help
native American kids and that
invited me to this meeting
because you know I had money and
of course it was underfunded and
death
I listen.
I don't know who I feel more
sorry for the parents trying to
explain what they need or their
superintendent trying to figure
out how she was going to do
something it was just an
impossible situation what we
need are experts in education
with tribal communities working
to help build curriculum and
programs that actually work for
native American kids and and
lets you know I have friends who
will not step foot on and on
their home high school campus
tribal friends who will not go
back because there's treated so
poorly in the schools and public
education so I it this is just.
This is just a hopefully a step
that can start changing that
they can start making you know
native American kids feel and
their parents feel like their
welcome like they're part of
their schools and we have a way
to them in a in a professional
environment so I I really think
you all I really don't have a
question except to say amen.
Thank you Representative Verona
Mr chair right to move a past
I do pass on house bill two
eighty we have a due pass motion
by Representative of a second by
Representative Roybal Caballero
madam secretary called the roll
on a do pass motion please.
Representative aka yes
Representative Representative
Ezzell yes Representative
Figueroa yes.
Representative.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara yes
Representative match with
Representative more money the
more yeah yes.
Representative for fall company
at all yes Representative
Christine Trujillo yes.
Representative.
The vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman yes all right you have
a unanimous to pass on house
bill two eighty thank you
committee members off I'm good
thank.
All right before we transition
Representative Trujillo has some
guests in the audience so if our
next presenters Representative
McQueen Representative Harper
when.
All have some space.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize for not being here
earlier was in and in tax
committee getting my diaper bill
would so.
I would like to.
I would like to there's.
I would like to introduce my
very special guests from the
Chicano studies at the center
that I saw the Nate if you'll
stand when I call your name and
your major Joanne of Reese's and
communications Kobe paras is
mechanical engineering cari
Sabel Smith is in finance Shalom
so leases elementary education
focus on social studies zero to
nvidia is she gonna do you gonna
studies and Mallory Pettus is a
film and digital arts and I want
to introduce their director of
size and said one this all right
welcome.
Thank you.
All right so we'll move on to
house bill three sixty nine
gentleman when you already
please.
Thank you chairman and the
committee members it's a
pleasure to join you this
morning and education
before you is
a measure that does really two
things maybe three.
It changes the name of the
lottery scholarship to the
legislative scholarship.
It repeals all questions in
state law that refer to the
lotteries program the state of
New Mexico so effectively
abolishing the lottery.
And the last thing it does it
makes appropriation from the
general fund for forty six
million dollars which is really
the average actually kind of a
high mark of what the lottery
actually brought in for the
lottery scholarship.
And just a couple comments on
why I think this is really
something that we should
strongly consider.
And not just Representative is
this by saying
I think the lottery scholarship
has been instrumental in New
Mexico actually my wife was the
very first class of people that
were able to qualify for the
lottery scholarship and it it
helped her get through college
and we're actually more to the
point so it helped us you know
as we're going through college
and I and I'm sure all of us
have some experiences are no
people that I've been blessed by
the lottery scholarship so it's
not at risk ownership at all in
fact this is
Renaming it to the legislative
scholarship and then making sure
that it has funding stable
funding.
But the issue at hand here is
we've we've known for a long
time that the lottery.
Is really a tax on the lower
class on those with lower
incomes can we actually now have
data that supports this this is
an article that was actually in
the New Yorker in October and
bank right did a study.
And what they found was that.
Years of state lotteries making
more than fifty thousand dollars
per year spend about one percent
of their income on the lottery.
Which makes sense right I mean
my my in laws my mother father
in law the wood jokes you know
they go out maybe once a month
once every other month by more
tickets with our help and our
daughters pay for their college
you know.
But.
What the also found is that
those making twenty seven
thousand dollars or less.
of sorry it's actually thirty
thousand dollars or less spend
thirteen percent of their.
Income on the lottery so that
means a family that's making
twenty seven thousand dollars is
spending.
Three thousand five hundred
dollars a year on lottery
tickets.
So those people that are helping
to fund our kids education are
the ones that really can afford
it the least.
And then there's also a study
that came out.
That showed.
It's a nationwide investigation
of state lotteries by the Howard
Hughes for investigative
journalism did.
found that stores that sell
tickets are disproportionately
clustered in low income
communities in nearly every
state including New Mexico.
So
I guess the question I'd like us
to ponder on his you know in the
lottery was first started our
state budget was like.
For three and a half four
billion dollars right it was
really a challenge for the state
to try to generate the the money
to cover tuition and so was kind
of like at wealth.
Let's put a lottery in I guess
for a good cause.
Now that we're in a very
different place.
In our budget.
we already have decided with the
opportunity scholarship.
That to the taxpayer dollars can
go to fund tuition should we not
consider doing that as well with
the lottery scholarship and.
And take that burden off of
those folks that really cannot
afford to settle through but
sponsor.
Thank you Representative Harper
Mr chair members of the
committee you know I am on the
same page as Representative
Harper I think.
It's problematic that I mean I
would be perfectly clear we're
not trying to do away with the
scholarship aspect which is
trying to replace the funding.
we rename it because we're
getting rid of the lottery I
don't think we're what it's in
the legislative scholarship it
seemed to fit.
We're funding education through
gambling.
In the gambling is a drain on
New Mexico it's a drain on
individual New Mexicans and it's
a dream to the state because a
lot of money that's spent on
gambling end up leaving our
state it doesn't get returned as
prizes it doesn't get returned
as scholarship it's it's
overhead it's expenses it's
expenses it's nationwide
prizes you know in in the
national lottery's.
But this isn't a good investment
for New Mexico I think the
scholarship is an excellent
investment but funding it with
gambling it hasn't been a good
return in it's not just that
we're allowing the gambling.
We're actually fostering it and
participating in I mean it's
it's it's a publicly run
Authority.
You know and and I find that the
troubling given the.
Given the research given the
impacts I think that's something
we should be part of the thank
you Mr chair thank you
committee.
Thank you all right so we will
go to our audience if you're
online and in support of house
bill three sixty nine indicate.
And.
Or for house bill three sixty
nine.
Those in our audiences are
support for house bill three
sixty nine.
All right see none we'll go to
opposition for opposition to
house bill three sixty nine hi
there online please indicate
areas your hand or in our
audiences are opposition to
house bill three sixty nine all
right some ma'am welcome you
have up to two minutes please.
Thank you
members of the committee my name
is Rita Jones height and the
chairman of the New Mexico
lottery's forty.
End up obviously we believe that
we have done a great service to
the citizens of the state of New
Mexico provided.
The New Mexico lottery's.
In a desert friendly reminders
nineteen ninety for the citizens
of the state of New Mexico
passed a referendum to create
the lottery Authority
since it has for the lottery
scholarship has been funded by
approximately forty five dollars
forty five million dollars on an
average year for scholarships it
provides a second steady stream
that is not subject to annual
appropriations.
I believe that
Water use for the most part find
attainment dollars even if it is
when we talk about the returns
to the scholarship people who
play the lottery also receive
funding back for the play so it
is not going out of state a very
small portion of it goes out of
state even the lottery national
games return fifty percent back
to the state for the money spent
so we believe in the lottery
scholarship we believe that we
have run a very efficient
organization that we find that
steady stream of revenue for the
scholarship and we hope that you
oppose this legislation.
Thank you Sir please you have a
two minutes welcome to committee
money saving coupon I'm also a
lot of reports there for a
couple three years now and just
still learning the ropes of
Health.
But I think it is a great
program unfortunately my kids to
go out of state college I could
think of into the water
scholarship for one back pocket
but the people of participating
moderate the participate
voluntarily spend their money of
the you go to the percentages of
the pay off on a lottery over
fifty percent of the money spent
on the lottery is returned to
the people plan lotteries prizes
so fifty percent of that.
Thirty percent more mandated the
state law those back to the
students that's eight percent of
the money stand right here in
the state of off the bat the
other twenty percent is
administrative expenses and
that's fine I don't know the
number but I would guess at
least have that administrative
expenses stays within the state
distribution of state companies
to run some of the of the
programs and stuff that we have
but the.
That money on state of the money
dollar spent probably eighty to
ninety percent state within the
state and those are the numbers
I'm kind of guessing and I don't
want to respect it he said the
ten percent of the people low
income there might want to ask
you know I don't have any
statistics the way the fact that
for your effort to speak that
figure but that does seem like a
high amount of money for some is
have a hard time buying a
groceries no further kids
clothes for their kids put that
much money into the water this
is true they we have to do some
marketing to discourage Act
activities we do part of money
as we do spend those as I meant
it state law goes back the
gambling resources the people
have gambling problems just like
all the the scene of stuff like
that.
Do with lottery I'm all that
though she said it is
entertainment value where would
that money go C. mobile to go
someplace else.
The go for food and stuff I
don't know another present but I
think a lot of stuff for the
outstanding value for the kids
she said forty to forty five
million dollars a year the
spending.
Your thank you for those two
minutes thank you so much all
right others in opposition.
Wish to speak.
Okay will come to committee
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
first and foremost I have a
problem with the new title
you're coming in with.
You're going to be called in
that the legislative hold on
here just a minute.
Help me out.
That too many papers.
If you are going to be.
I can't tell.
Really see said above you have
to confiscate the telephone.
You're going to be calling this
the Legislative tuition
scholarship is that correct.
Mr Chairman.
There is another scholarship
program out there that is very
close to the same name your use
in and I'm not going to have
this discussion this March to
that is the General Mills
provided scholarship that has
been in place for a long long
time which is help pay.
For the majority of the cost of
the students that are going to
New Mexico military institute
and they are nominated by each
and everyone of us in the
legislative body on the Senate
side in the house side and I I
don't like the name the dollar
using their it it didn't it
defeats of what we are trying to
do and what general those
Knowles put in place once he
left this body to go return to
Ross and therefore I I I cannot
support this bill just because
of that name right there and and
I'll be very blunt with you I'm
not going to of.
Put scholarship that I hold dear
near to where dear to my heart.
With people thank you I will
this is the work that I do I'm
just not going to simple as
that.
The question I have for you of.
Paid for additives of course
it's your.
It is on page twenty one of your
bill of section thirteen.
You're asking for an
appropriation of forty six
million dollars was that
included in the budget
yesterday.
Since I understand you're coming
from on the the name change I
think my co sponsor mention
we're not wedded to that that
just felt appropriate and we're
happy to consider other name
changes.
when it comes to your second
question about the budget you
are correct this was not built
in a house bill two and we've
been doing some pondering on
that.
I was there's option in the
Senate
to get that placed in their but
also
we don't have to have an
effective date of
this year for actually
considering if we make it out of
this committee
that putting an amendment that
would push it out maybe a year
or two so that we can actually
build that into the budget over
the next year too but that is a
great question.
Thank you Mr chair in Mr chair
representative so if I may we're
open to suggestions on the name
you mean that that was sort of a
place holder
it could easily be changed.
Mr Chairman representative so I
guess you could call it the
former lottery scholarship if
you want to go down that way but
I take great I cannot support it
wait any way shape or Mr call
it.
What might be confused here Mr
chairman and representative on
the FIR that I'm right and I'm
assuming that you do you have
one of front of you this is the
fact the date of this bill is
July the first twenty twenty
three and it is going to be
recurring and.
It is also state HB three sixty
nine would increase spending
from the general fund by forty
six million dollars per year to
offset the loss of lottery
revenue.
Which the higher it Department
states has averaged forty point
seven million dollars per year
from FY eighteen three twenty
two Mr chairman I also know that
they got some money from the
American rescue plan and twenty
twenty one so are we taking into
account whenever that statement
is made in the FIR that it does
include that so the offset there
is balancing out Gasol chairman
and result thank you again for
for the great question.
So.
Forty six million dollars that
we chose was kind of a high mark
of the dollars that went into
the lottery scholarship so so it
would include offsetting and
right now the lottery as is only
paying in forty one million this
year into the lottery
scholarship.
so would help off offset that.
Okay.
Appreciate the response Mr
chairman and representatives.
Who has oversight of the New
Mexico Law lottery Authority.
chairman and of Representative
there is a lottery board
and there is a lottery executive
director
and.
I just by way of
information in regards to that
the CEO David Barton.
He.
receives a salary of state paid
salary in two thousand nineteen
it was to earn twenty thousand
dollars I think he's.
That's the highest rate or
second highest paid state paid
official.
and participate in the past you
know right now there's a thirty
percent requirement of proceeds
going to the scholarship.
Yes they've made arguments that
if we remove that.
That gives the flexibility pay
more enterprises.
And then that would mean more
people play and we would
eventually get more money.
I have concerns about that and
then we've also heard that
they're trying right now they're
investigating looking into
electronic lottery which we know
is
Very damage especially to you.
So I have some concerns about
the oversight
and this board and where the
lottery's going but that's kind
of that's how it's structured
that's.
I hope that your question
chairman.
Okay Mister chairman
Representative.
Hello if we do away with this
lottery program in stages Mexico
and that's kind of where I see
in this going.
How will it affect our local
business small businesses that
are participating.
Yeah so so chair and
representative out another great
question so we know that those
small businesses that to
participate there's an incentive
for them to participate they get
a portion of prices and and some
some benefits so there will be
a negative impact to those
businesses and
And I don't want to
Say that the they should just
yeah that that this is not just
an insignificant impact I I
understand that but I think in
the larger context we need to
understand.
the bigger impact is to these
families who are struggling to
buy milk and food and diapers
and and retention Lee are you.
So your point is well taken
chairman and and Representative.
Well Mr chairman of.
Representatives I appreciate
your response there it will
negatively affect our small
businesses I feel.
And Mr chairman even if we do
what dollar processing to do
here in the small businesses are
learning to lose that extra
income they might have gotten
from people coming in and
visiting their stores and
everything we can't change.
People with bad habits if
they're not able to.
Take the chance on winning the
lottery.
They might step off the cliff
and say Hey.
I'm not spend my money on that
because it's not available
anymore what can I do with that.
Hey the school bus more
basically let's go out and.
Become the new the greatest drug
dealer that there is more
community now.
But we cannot change their
behavior I appreciate the fact
that we do have help for the the
gamblers I think that's very
important to some people do go
overboard.
But we has the legislative body
can't change anybody's.
Bad habits less they decide to
judge themselves.
Mr Chairman representative in
light of what you're your bill
is proposing to do.
He said that I heard comments
from the crowd over there.
This is the eighty and ninety
percent of this money to stay in
the state of New Mexico.
So Mister chairman and
representatives whenever we're
talking about the bigger.
Egolf lotteries.
We know that that money is not
staying in New Mexico at all.
List well I'm sorry I do know
of.
Particular group that did hit it
big about ten years ago.
With that.
you see where I'm going with
them balance on this.
Chairman representative yeah I I
appreciate that and and just to.
Harken back to your your last
comment hi I agree that it's
very hard for the legislature to
change people's behaviours we
try to do that the tax code all
the time I disagree with that
approach
But I don't think the the reason
behind why we should before with
this is because if people don't
have the lotteries are gonna
resort to something worse like
becoming drug sellers right I
don't think the I think that's
point out I was because yes
Gretchen a little bit Mr
chairman but it's still bad
behavior.
I'm just.
At Mr Chairman representative is
I really feel that will small
business plans can we sustain
this Mr chairman because I have
rating here and one of the other
analysis that the forty six
million dollars shall not refer.
to the general fund and that's
where that money's going to come
from is that we're going to have
to come up with forty six
million dollars again every
year.
In in in to infinity and I don't
know just as I was telling the.
Prior presenter of the bill can
we keep that.
Keep that going.
It all hinges yeah so Chairman
representative that is a great
question and I was here when
the.
There wasn't enough money in the
lottery scholarship and really
was the one that carried the
flag to try to fix that and put
in a good place I will say chair
representative of we do have
another scholarship program the
opportunity scholarship and but
I can't over the exact number
out of any of our friends and
appropriations remember but it's
close to a hundred million
dollars that we're putting into
that scholarship and so I feel
like we've.
Hundred nineteen hundred
nineteen thank you madam vice
chair so I really feel like
having another steady stream
about forty six million dollars
is.
Probably not a lot in the grand
scheme of things especially
considering the current state of
our our budget that's exactly
right yes Mr chairman we do have
a lot of money and we have spent
at all and one of these days it
will start raining if you get my
drift of where I'm going with
that and we're gonna be left
high and dry.
Analogy there so Mister chairman
I appreciate all y'all's
responses like I said it in
total opposition to the name of
it.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for allowing me this time thank
you Sanchez thank you
Representative with your analogy
I don't know if it's rain that
evaporates before it hits the
ground.
Representative anymore way us
has some guests so we're gonna
take a quick break from from the
discussion she has some gas just
I have some of the Lynn middle
school students along with their
teacher Daniel so lease and of
Mr Salie's would you be so kind
as to introduce what group of
students who have here and then
we can have the students
introduce themselves.
Right here we have a handful of
level school student council so
these are behind the ears of the
school themselves and if they
can start on the far end in just
introduce yourself the first
last name please.
Jeez
my.
State news wires there was
always someone by the thank you
could say just build this much I
need to get a bill.
And that here we have for not
too is our driver but also part
of the district as well was
Happy to have you with us
excellent excellent welcome to
health education.
Mr chair of many of these poor
students had to put up with me
as a P. E. teacher and and when
when the and I'm sure they they
they have nightmares of me
making them run so they'll
they'll they'll enjoy me a
little bit better with science
when they get to high school.
But when they have a break from
you now well yes this is my size
because students that they're
not looking at the.
Thank you welcome to health
education you all all right so
we'll go back to debate
Representative it up please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I I really find
this fascinating I I was kind of
inclined to vote against this
and then I started listening and
reading more it really is a
predatory practice what we're
doing here
and I was very curious in the
LFC report that most of these
scholarships actually they don't
go to our poor schools in on a
the lake northern only gets what
about ten percent and eight as
opposed to I and I don't know
why this happens spent most of
the scholarships go to I you
know maybe it's the numbers
there but but the percentage of
total students fifty nine forty
three and forty and then you go
down to the smaller schools in
our state and they I don't know
if that's just a practice of the
financial aid office do you know
anything about that yeah so
chairman and our reserve
Ferreira yes I
We're talking about the lottery
scholarship when I was working
on it about you know ten years
ago and it's a combination of
two factors the first you
mentioned was just numbers right
when you look at just the sheer
number of students to go to like
UNM versus you know one of our
smaller colleges so you get it
harborcenter students going but
also.
The the way the scholarship is
structured it pays for tuition.
And so the tuition is also
higher at those colleges and it
is the other.
Can you tell me with the either
of you Mr chair and and them
Representative is with the what
is the what how much do we pay
on the other hand right to the
the lottery scholarship for the
administration of this fund.
That we have that information
right here.
So Mr chair representative this
is the according to the lottery
of Authority thirty percent
because tuition fifty four
percent goes to prizes six and a
half cents on the dollar six
percent goes to commissions read
so point of sale commissions
six and a half percent goes to
the cost of the product so we're
we're buying the scratchers or
you know other things from out
of state in about three percent
for administrative costs so that
it's about it's about ten
percent of the Riverhead if you
if you don't count the retailer
commissions as part of the over.
And their total budget I'm sorry
help me with the total budget so
Mr chair yeah.
Your Representative Herrera
Mexico's lottery for the rest of
our regenerated one hundred and
forty three million dollars.
In I do not believe this is
twenty nineteen we are your
numbers and that what are you
know hundred forty three million
dollars you know roughly forty
goes to the scholarship the rest
is all the other parts of the
program in prices and such yes
so
Mr chair Senator Stewart in
twenty twenty to the gross
revenues were under thirty seven
million in the returns for forty
one million.
So the return to the
scholarship.
The you know I'm sure it Mr
chair I'm I'm curious why you
didn't on just put more money
into the opportunity scholarship
instead of creating a separate
Scott did you think about that
Madam chair of the for a great
question and and
this is where I might get a
little ahead of my skis I don't
understand the opportunity as
well as I understand the lottery
but the way the lottery set up
it really is designed for those
exiting high school.
For those who
you know the there may be some
you know some of those on a
mission or military service or
something like that they could
come back and qualify for the
lottery but the opportunity into
the chair I'm sure knows is much
better than I do but the
opportunity is really designed
for those who fall outside of
that those who want to go back
to school and and if the water
doesn't quite cover the entire
cost the opportunity kicks and
Mike speaking correctly
chairman.
Yes the kind of the the kind of
target two different groups of
people and with both of them
together really everyone who
wants to go back to college or
go to college can do it with
some significant help in Mr
chair is ever a
Certainly that the two programs
could be administered together
and in fact we could simply roll
the what was the lottery
scholarship into the opportunity
scholarship have been
administered for specific
purpose and we would address
representative was else concern
over the name by doing so.
Mr chair and representative.
I.
I am.
I know how how many sales going
on in my district you know if
you're in any drug store gas
station you know other people
lined up to and and they really
did go after the lottery I went
power ball is too but there's a
lot of there's a lot of
attention to the lottery
scholarship in parts I think
because people think they are
doing a good thing when they do
it
event
those numbers you know how it
affects the poor.
is is really compelling to me so
I I really appreciate this bill
being brought forward of might
need some more work but I and I
think it's a compelling idea
thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Representative it's
but thank you Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
Up and Representative at issue
with
Along the same lines as I have
had some I have some
suggestions maybe that you
already Mr chair and
Representative McQueen I think
you offered the possibility of
sharing administrative costs I'm
a strong proponent of if we have
a body of a home programs that
are similar rather than be
competitive they can just come
under one roof so to speak share
administration but deliver in
their different manner that's
always the best way I think for
us this as a as government and
public entities to be able to
re reduce costs and increase the
service because the whole idea
is to make sure that we have
higher in this case amount of
scholarships going out for the
intended stated intended
purposes and I was concerned
about the chart as well I was
reviewing the tried and I also
was looking at the significant
issues and take this out for a
moment.
I think I'm coming down with
something respite soon having a
little bit of trouble but anyway
The and think it's in the FIR
there's a section on page two
that indicates that you do
reports and my concern is and
and this is always been the case
and Representative Harper knows
I've been a along with him
kind of involved in the past few
years in reviewing and examining
the impact of the lottery
scholarship.
Direct impact that it's having
on our communities both from the
scholarship recipient point of
view Mr chair as well as the
businesses and in what to small
businesses and so.
For the most part.
I can probably say maybe
referring to my district in
particular that my district more
every district in the state.
When people line up for those
tickets.
For the most part I believe
they're not lining up for the
purpose of contributing to a
scholarship fund.
They're lining up for the
purpose of buying a lottery and
winning a chance I mean taking a
chance on winning something
whether it's us smaller larger
or whatever the case is and I
remember Representative Harper
I know you have to sorry an
incident you don't have to
answer directly but there was a
time when we had a report that
indicated that some sort of
study or data collection of
those individuals individuals
they did a random poll or
something that sort of support
at this because we were at about
eight years ago trying to make
changes to the lottery
scholarship so I just wanted to
mention that I and and for your
information before you leave I
am inclined to support this bill
for the reason that I'm gonna
continue speaking on select the
thank you for bringing it
forward I don't know I
appreciate that I apologize
ending someone back to thank you
members in this thank you for
your time are you so
So I had a a couple of questions
and I'm one question
Representative Mr chair is.
Do we actually know right now
what kind of the sites
some what kind of impact it.
Small businesses are having a
two they receive a significant
amount I think you mentioned
something a minute ago and it
didn't seem like it was
a large percentage.
The Mr chair Representative
Roybal Caballero according to
the analysis submitted by the
lottery Authority in fiscal year
twenty twenty two eight point
nine million of which is that
six and a half percent went to
retailers as commissions I don't
know hemi retail retailers that
is I I certainly think it's a
lot you know you know if any gas
almost any gas station I think
so I read scratchers and stuff
at this point so that's six
that's eight point nine million
spread out statewide over many
retailers thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative.
The so the other question when I
was reading through this is
I was looking at a at a weight.
To because there's a difference
between.
What the intent and purpose of
the opportunity scholarship is.
The lottery scholarship and
then.
The scholarship fund is there a
way.
To accomplish what three sixty
nine wants to do
In addition to rather than
In lieu thereof can we still
have a lottery.
But.
Not necessarily I don't know
what the statute or how we're
governed legally but not
necessarily have a lottery
scholarship fund.
Mr chair representative rebel
cover here that's essentially
the system we have now because
the the lottery occur twenty
these numbers the lottery the
revenues the thirty percent
isn't covering the tuition as
you know that the agency reports
that in the last year receive a
little under forty two million
but the cost of the tuition for
fiscal year twenty three is
sixty four so that's really only
about two thirds so we're we are
supplementing it
with this bill proposes yes
specifically.
It would shift the burden to the
general fund but the point is
that the lottery is training
resources from New Mexicans in
the specially New Mexicans who
can least afford it so that
that's why the the a key aspect
of the bill would be
getting rid of the water.
Thank you Mr chair
representative and I did see
that and I have been very at
least for the last eleven years
that I've been here to the fact
that we keep.
Putting more into supplementing
supplementing and supplementing
and it seems like it we're
supplementing but it's not it's
a good return and not at all a
good return and that's why I see
a lot of positives in this piece
of legislation
Mr chair for all of those for
all the reasons that were raised
in the significant issues by HB
and others in the fiscal impact
report and then one final
Question Mr chairman
Representative finely.
Think question.
This.
I I think I asked that
Mr chair and representative.
The I think that was that I
think the Aston of the questions
so I you know I have
In your opening you mentioned
The the notion of.
Gaming and betting and
The.
Associations with what
Representative are indicated are
predatory practices which in my
view I also believe they are
especially since we're not
necessarily.
Experiencing the return in areas
that I thought well we it
anticipate it the lottery would
The standing on its own.
When it was first instituted
nine I think in the nineties
nineteen nineties and so
I'm just I'm I'm I've been
concerned throughout my tenure
with how the lottery scholarship
is
Not producing.
The results that were
anticipated nor with the return
on investment anticipated for
the students and in addition the
fact that the state has had to
continuously provide subsidies
or supplements to this
scholarship fund so for right
now I think I answered all the
questions I needed to kind of
confirm where I was leaning so
Mister chair and and
Representative thank you very
much for bringing this forward
thank you Representative boxed.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
the sport
I'm gonna be just like I am kind
of short succinct and do have a
couple questions first I I kind
of struggle with this I think I
do but I struggle with when
you're taking is you know kind
of.
People's person chose to do the
same now I'll be honest I
haven't spent thirty five
hundred dollars in lottery my
hold off adult life.
But I know that that's so I'm
really are kind of on the fence
of that so Mr Chairman
representative where did you get
your data that showed about for
people that maybe thirty
thousand that was a thirteen
percent of their income was on
the lottery.
Mr chair Senator okay it was
from the study done by your
existing call Bankrate
A twenty nineteen survey of two
thousand three hundred seventy
seven Americans surveyed them
and ask them.
How much they spent on on
different activities and then if
you had income information and
ran the numbers that way thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative that did you say
the the two thousand people
roughly was was that New
Mexicans or that Americans
business without the United
States Mr chair Representative
Baca this was a national service
so two thousand surveyed over
the country okay
okay
Thank you Mr chairman the other
question about is forced.
I do have the concern for small
businesses because I do know of
Mr chairman and the
Representative McQueen this
farce how much these local gas
stations get per the cost of
your to the seller because I
think right I know I I've I have
seen all of number one of one
hundred dollars or more whatever
the limit is under been paid out
there how do you to pay out but
a.
Do you know what the actual of
business gets for the sale which
lottery ticket.
Mr chair isn't talking no I I
don't know the the the breakdown
I don't thank you Mr reckon I
can get back to
the other question I have Mr
chair Mr chairman
It it appears with the lottery
scholarship currently the
practices the money is dispersed
more kind of statewide is the
money from the casinos in
racinos how are those are doing
those monies contribute to the
education fund to your knowledge
Mr Chairman R. and of
Representative McQueen
Mr chair sent Baca I I believe
those are subject to gaming
compacts with the state and the
stick it to portion those
revenues I could not tell you
what the state does with those
revenues I thank you that I
understand I I know how it is
Representative some of these
questions are beyond us but the
do one question I do want to ask
about is actually the I think
it's called the.
Compulsive gambling council Mr
chairman to use this starts to
be referred reference on page
three
of the of your bill yes Sir
The on page three I want to talk
about.
The compulsive gambling Council
okay
Mr Chairman can you tell me.
Who makes up who will make up I
see the different positions
there were all these positions
Mr chairman be appointed by the
governor.
Mr chair representative I have a
first look let me just note that
this is existing law correct yes
Sir and the reason it's in years
because reducing the council
from fifteen to fourteen because
we would no longer have the
lottery Authority.
and.
Each.
To recall who makes the
appointments I'm sure it's in
there somewhere thank you
believe Mr chairman of the state
government but the last my last
question about it and again I I
will say this you know publicly
I think the idea is actually you
know it's good I I but there I
think there's some.
Some things that we I would like
to see refined but my last
question is really
Regarding the reporting of this
Council is our other resources
that are out there for people
that may have a compulsive
gambling habit or other
resources are we you know is
this is this the soul of group
or council to address compulsive
gamblers or other groups that
are out there the Mr chair sent
back at your will be on my
expertise I do believe there are
some nonprofit organizations
that work on these issues okay
well it in thank you like said
might might might might might Mr
chairman my answer my question
about the stuff you I'm just
trying to see how this all fits
into it as far as with all of
this I can touch base offline if
we're able to we can get some of
those answers
I do think it's just that for it
I do think there's a lot of good
ideas in here so I do appreciate
drafters of Representative
McQueen thank you Mr chairman.
Right thank you Representative
get.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I understand that
the lottery was established
through a constitutional
amendment in nineteen ninety
four this bill abolishes the
state lottery can it be done by
legislation or does it have does
it need a constitutional
amendment to end a
constitutional amendment that
not sufficient question
Mr chair of the present here
without having looked at the
constitutional language my guess
is it's enabling legislation so
it would authorize the
legislature to create a lottery
I doubt it requires the
legislature to create a lottery
so in that sense because the
legislature passed these these
acts and statutes we can repeal.
Okay thank you
chair and representative there's
been a lot of talk about the
opportunity scholarship but I
happen to be a sponsor of a
Senate bill one forty with Liz
Stefanics that establish that do
you know the original
legislators who founded the
lottery scholarship.
You know who they are Mr chair
representative your I think I
heard the date nineteen ninety
four that was created
I have I do not know I certainly
wasn't in the legislature at
that point.
Mr chair representative of I
bring it up because when we work
for the higher education
department to do the legislation
for the lottery for excuse me
for the opportunity scholarship
one of the ideas was to combine
them and to make it part of the
free college system however due
to the legislative legacy of the
lottery scholarship I think
senator Michael Sanchez might
have been one of the sponsors
and I've been trying to find it
out and I couldn't find it out
here but that was not possible
to do so I just want to share
that information yes I have
just.
Higher thirty so just said yes
he was
So so that's just an issue that
came up with the higher
education department looking at
this
my other I have a lot of
questions but my main question
is did you bring this
legislation to any of the
interim committees over the
summer late spring and fall.
The Mr chair is in here no and
the emphasis on the legislation
sort of came up when we start
reading about this Bankrate
study so it wasn't something the
been the works it wasn't
something Representative Harper
and I discussed before the even
before the session he brought it
to me and we discussed the
merits and we decide to move
forward so we could you know
start the start discussion now
but no was not presented and any
interim committees thank you and
and Mr Chairman representative
are you aware of the battle that
we had in house appropriations
and finance committee to fund
the opportunity scholarship for
the next semester and upcoming
here.
Mr chair Senator uncertainly
certainly recall the battle on
the floor to pass the bill in in
knowing at that time that it
didn't have a dedicated funding
source so being aware that it is
something that we need to fund
going forward this would we're
proposing to you know certainly
include this I think there is
Madam chair representative
widespread support in the
legislature for continuing this
scholarship whether its name
might be
in I I I would hope and expect
that that
that we go forward you know from
the general fund thank you it I
guess my last statement as I
think it's a worthy thing to
work on but I am learning that
the the interim process is the
time to discuss all the business
and economic impacts what does
it mean to abolish the lottery I
feel like there's a lot of
issues that need some really
people from all the different
stakeholders groups coming
together looking at funding
looking at what it would mean to
have a free college opportunity
scholarship that embraces the
aspects of the lottery
scholarship I I just feel that
the intent is really really
important and needs to be looked
at but I feel because of the
financial impact in the impact
on and I in full disclosure I do
buy lottery tickets.
And I buy them at high scale gas
stations I might say not and and
lower economic areas
I just feel like it it needs a
more in depth look
that that's what I'm feeling.
And I just wanted to share that
that's my comment great
questions thank you I feel
fancier just sitting by.
Representative Trujillo.
Mr chair I move to table.
We have a table in motion if I
could hold off on the motion we
have further discussion
Representative Lara thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
for bringing this forward I I
under I understand the intent of
this but to me Mr chair
representative seems it's a
gaming bill discusses education
bill hi I should know because I
think I attended the same thing
a couple years ago
So what I'm trying to understand
Representative is you can help
me with this because I'm really
concerned Mr chair that if we
move forward with this.
What the impact is going to be
our race tracks are restricted
State knows and our tribal
casinos because I see this as
the first domino falling against
gaming in New Mexico Mr chair
representative yeah am I am I
correct and and and with my
concern
Mr chair Representative percent
Lara I don't think so
in in fact I does it never
occurred to me this I think the
difference between the lottery
and all those other activities
is that.
The lottery's really run by the
state of New Mexico and I I I
honestly think that we're re to
abolish the lottery.
Those those other business would
see an uptick in business rights
of people who wanted to gamble
in in couldn't you know by a
scratcher or by a parable ticket
you maybe that stuff by the
racetrack maybe the to the
casino and you know the honestly
they actually have a better
return on their bets at the
casino than the deployment
lottery thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative so these
would be the same people who are
low income we were just we would
just be sending to the casinos
as opposed to just buy lottery
tickets Mr chair representative
Laura we would certainly would
be sending them those are but
those other opportunities would
still be available thank you for
that Mr chair representative so
it it is so then the the idea
of.
Of keeping low income persons
from from gambling is an with
still the same situation the
only difference is it's gonna be
higher stakes games that they
would be playing as opposed to
buying dollars scratcher
that I once again Mr chair
Representative I totally
understand the intent and I
totally understand the need to
provide a of a permanent solid
permanent source of funding for
the water for the lottery
scholarship because this helps
our students are graduating from
high school they can go directly
to college and they can get the
water to the lottery scholarship
I think that's essential I
believe in educating all the
Mexicans and I think giving them
those opportunities is very
important.
But the the matter it's just I'm
just very I have a lot of
concerns about the manner of
which were going by this because
once again Representative Mister
chair I feel like you know who's
tax is gonna be the racetracks
is going to be the the tribal
casinos and I ate I personally
see this as maybe an effort to
to reduce or restrict gaming in
New Mexico and I I I I just I
don't feel comfortable with this
and I'm I I apologize but I'm a
couple support bill thank you Mr
chair representative.
In my haste I said table
amendment rollover I move to
roll this bill of thank you
Representative I don't think we
need a motion for that but I
certainly appreciate the
suggestive would like to move
that we roll this bill over and
re tracked everything I said
prior to that.
Thank you all right so we have a
second on that as you suggest
rolling this over because I
think this is a great
conversation to be having
certainly Representative McQueen
and and Representative Harper in
your work in this you've kind of
brought up my struggles as a
young college student as
certainly a recipient and
benefactor of the lottery
scholarship however the funding
source was always something of a
concern to me and had
lots of thoughts to myself about
the funding source and accepting
the money for the lottery
scholarship knowing that it was
coming from gaming gaming and
gambling that it
disproportionately affects our
our our low income communities
and those in the community that
I was raised in still live and
and the people that I work
around
But.
I mean members have brought up
the fact that does bring up a
larger conversation what do we
do with the opportunity
scholarship the lottery
scholarship do we just go for a
complete.
State.
Eight four.
Program for free college here at
the state level and what sort of
responsibility do we as a
legislature have for.
What that may look like what the
qualifications we look like and
then of course the funding
source for that
by I think as far as issues with
the bill their issues around
specifically appropriating money
for out years which is typically
not done we've heard that from
the opportunity scholarship we
read that in the FIR
We also have the date so you and
I have talked to Representative
McQueen about the effective date
being this year right twenty
twenty three
and the fact that if we don't
have that money in the budget
currently we are we gonna
getting be getting that funding
you know our vice chair brought
up the fact of the.
which I think this is a great
conversation starter to start
having the conversation I I
certainly think it's gotten a
lot of members thinking in their
misperception and being hold in
several different ways in this
bill and I think that's part of
the beauty of our process
imparted and especially the
beauty of our interim process is
to be able to take this
information in at first hearing
reading and then give it some
time to sink in about which
direction we're going to go on
because I would imagine I'm not
the only on this committee
that's being pulled in.
The two different ways of how to
vote on this bill so I think as
far as technical clean up
there's some cleanup that needs
to get on we're about to hear a
bill that rolled over for some
technical clean up because we
like to have good clean bills if
we're going to be voting on it
at least in terms of like I
mentioned effective date
The provisions around
appropriation language in the
out years so that's my
suggestion Representative
Trujillo is in agreement
Representative care at in the
committee in order to roll over
this bill see if we get those
amendments to hear it again and
bring it back.
Is there any objection to that
Representative yes one more
statement
Representative currently the
lottery is funded I think for
three more years four years
counting this year so how would
we address the existing lottery
scholarship holders so there
there's a lot of things to look
at.
Mr chairman match before you
rolled over made to share Google
closing thought.
so I I I appreciate input.
In the details of occurs and
carrot I I agree the given the
house bill two is our left the
building as it were you know
that this couldn't couldn't get
through this year I I what I
want to strenuously state this
is not an attack on tribal
gaming.
It would not lead to that
sovereign nations in New Mexico
have built entire economies
around casinos this is not that
the I want to emphasize that in
the the point of interest for
the committee representative
appeared as the constitutional
question I'm told that the
constitutional provision was
passed by the voters an
overturned by the Supreme Court
as a logrolling issue and then
the lottery was intact
instituted by statute so that's
very.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee the
police and then when you get
those amendments the please
bring them back and let us know.
Can we bring you all back
hopefully Representative Harper
continues for the for me.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative all
right so we'll roll over
House Bill three sixty nine we
have our other roll over that
has rolled back to us
Representative read.
Please yes bill one fifty six
and I understand we have a
committee set up if we can get
that distributed please.
The bill that we heard on.
Monday.
So if you would Representative
give us a moment so that we can
have the committee said
distributed to our committee.
Thank.
To.
All right so I think all of our
members here have a copy we'll
stick to the committee set up to
represent brief if you would
please committees of thank you
Mr of excuse me I need a motion
on the committee said.
The that we consider.
All right so we have a motion to
consider to discuss the
committee said by Representative
second by Representative Baca
now the committee said
Representative roof please thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee so the committee said
point two two five two seven
zero point three I went back and
we did a lot of changes after
speaking with the committee
we went ahead and at clarified
that sections one through seven
will be cited as cannabis school
use prevention resource act and
we pushed back the
implementation implementation
date of the cannabis you use
prevention resource program from
July one twenty twenty three to
July first twenty twenty four we
also included as requested a
detailed list of the required
reporting data by D. O. H. to
the legislative education study
committee and the Legislative
Health Human Services and we
listed that the report I believe
that's on page three of it under
section see if I recall there
were some concerns about that
and we listed one two three four
and five about the different
things that we would required at
that would need to be at
reported based and in those were
drug assessments contacted
during the school year students
that were assessed multiple
times times at a parent or
guardian was contacted in
response to the students drug
use times poison control was
contacted students are at risk
of immediate harm and then we
also took out in section five
the date The New Mexico poison
and drug information control
and.
Impairment we change that to FY
twenty fourth or twenty five as
requested and we took out that
re done didn't reporting
requirement to the poison
control and just did it to the
poison control I think we got
everything that the committee
suggested right thank you
Representative read for for your
diligence on this committee
questions on the committee so.
Mr chair move a.
Do not pass of HB one fifty six
but I do passive house Education
Committee substitute for house
bill one thirty six right thank
you to have a second right we
have a second by Representative
me know Lana I'll hold off on
the motion for enrollment if
there's discussion digestion of
the committee sent.
All right so we have a do not
pass on house bill one fifty six
but he to pass on house
Education Committee substitute
for house bill one fifty six
madam secretary called rule on
that motion.
Representative of all.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative Ezzell.
Representative corolla yes.
Representative Herrerra.
Representative Lara yes
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative money vital more
yeah yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
no.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Madam vice chair Gareth yes.
Chairman yes I.
All right before I announce of
both the only thing I would say
is that it may be hard on page
three line eighteen to
disaggregate the information on
parents been contacted in
response to drug use but I think
it's good you've heard the
issues of our committee very
well clear I appreciate your
work on this and with that you
have a ten to one to pass thank
you where thank you.
All right so that concludes our
business for today
we will not have a Saturday
session for you all on Monday
Hey.
