I
Representative Thomson is here
we have the committee is the who
are we waiting on those.
Police have my copy.
And then so we'll wait a moment
to get that distributed here.
All right deserve I have a copy
Representative you could read
the two to five number I'm
getting used to saying that but
I know I number so that we have
the correct committee so Mr
chair it's two two five five or
four point five right so for
more of a house at twenty seven
House Bill for a full twenty
five prescriptions all right so
we have a motion to discuss the
committee substitute second
there any objection.
No awesome we're on the
committee serve and I just want
to let everybody know that this
since this is the role of the
bill we will not take additional
public comment we did that last
week so those of you online
welcome those in the room
welcome but we've done public
comment will go straight to the
committee sub and if you could
discuss the changes that have
been made representative
Thompson okay thank you Mr chair
so for I want to start out with
we heard a lot of concerns so we
got input from that the whole
team got input from L. E. S. C.
Mr chair madam vice chair and
the special ed director so I'll
just go through so number one
the appointment of the director
of the office of special
education remove the appointment
of the director by the governor
and simply made this and exempt
position.
professional development
relevance for the professional
development requirements
clarified that the office of
special education will determine
which type of professional
development is appropriate for
which staff administrators and
school board members third
professional development on
inclusion and integration added
inclusion and integration to the
list of professional development
topics replacing structured
literacy.
Case number four PED
responsibilities versus office
of special ed responsibilities
move the following
responsibilities of the OSD to
the P. E. D. in coordination
with the OSCE so develop an
update the annual plan for
special education develop and
submit the annual report on
special education evaluate the
state's compliance with I. D. E.
A. and special education laws
including ensuring that
collection of specific data and
monitor spending of state and
federal funding resources for
inclusion and integration added
a requirement to provide
adequate staffing and resources
for successful inclusion
integration in the least
restrictive environment a state
role in special education
workforce support clarifies that
the state role in workforce
support is to conduct activities
to promote recruitment and
retention of special education
educators not just prioritizing.
Multi layered systems of support
added references to and a
definition of multi layered
systems of support to reverse
replace response to intervention
in statute as a holistic school
based improvement model of
progress measures for students
and additional support.
process for differential special
education salaries added
legislative involvement in
examining these levels and
requires a recommendation on a
professional development at a
coordinating with school
districts to track develop and
provide professional development
programs and materials for
special education staff aligning
rulemaking with on it specified
that the office of special
education would examine rules
for performance review issues
identified in the audits.
And I know that was a lot right
all right we probably gonna have
questions so members.
Questions.
No questions.
As a representative please.
Thank you Mr chair.
I have one question I'm sorry
maybe you talk about this
because I want to hear the time
and.
One of the concerns that this
will we have with special
education is with them and I'm
over without the Google by the
by the vision which cultural
education we usually don't have
enough teachers will kind of
both
how would these be others that
institution that met Mr chair
representative federal at one
thing for sure is that looking
at a differential in pay and I
would just tell you a quick
story my sister is that masters
special ed teacher working with
the lowest functioning kids she
retired and she wanted to come
back in APS they have stalled
her since the beginning of the
year now she's working as an EA
so we have a teacher with thirty
years experience who can't get
hired as a teacher in APS so
there's a lot that we need to
work on but if any my experts
have a better answer Mr chair
representative we do have a
eight point out specifically in
the statute that the office will
be working with not only other
divisions of apartment but with
other agencies across state
government and with the schools
that districts to implement the
culturally and legally because
linguistically responsive
inappropriate services that's
going to take a conversation in
partnership among all those
entities to figure out what that
looks like but it is
specifically addressed in the
statute thank you because this
can Mr chair representative
because usually it is what the
cheapest would have to choose
between me and I are in what
program are to services and we
have seen the students with
special needs can succeed in a
minute program but somehow.
If it gets bad okay yes thank
you Mr Chairman representative
Carrillo nother section of the
bill requires a new office of
special education to conduct
activities that would promote
recruitment and retention
throughout the state working
with school districts to do that
so it's another provision that
would help improve expand the
workforce special education
educators and Mr chair special
educators feeling supported
we'll go a long ways in keeping
them in the press in the
profession because lots of folks
are cut feel like they're out on
an island with no support no
training and all that kind of
stuff so I think there's a lot
in this bill that will help to
recruit and retain.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative box.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee
It also I do want to I do want
to recognize and thank for the
hearing with the committee
had brought board for before
okay I do appreciate it I guess
Mr chairman and committee is.
Although some of the terms have
been changed it's still.
The the the the part of the the
parts of this as far as creating
a new position for a position or
for activities that are echoing
on is what I'm having a hard
time dealing with I mean we
change words we've change we're
like collaborate we take getting
input but the but Mr chairman
and
And representative.
It for me I need to understand
is why I mean because.
We my job understand my job as a
as a lawmakers and
appropriators.
Is that we are trying to address
the need.
That's how I see it.
And what I see here is that if
these activities have not been
going on then there's no law in
the country or in the state that
we can pass to make people
collaborate to make people get
input from schools that and
really to hear from our school
district because Mr chairman and
representative since our last
meeting I have had countless
people superintendents reach out
and say.
This is not working this is not
good you know last week when we
talked about reaching out to New
Mexico case which again for you
guys don't know is a coalition
of the special education
administrators for
administrators of special
education.
Even after that there has
reached out and countless times
saying.
That yes they were contacted so
I appreciate that thank you but
no the input and really for the
was not was not getting in here
so
Mr chairman and Representative
Thomson
Please understand this and I and
I say this
as a as a administrator as an
educator as a family man who
have family members with
disabilities and my own family.
I don't understand what the
intent of this bill is I don't
understand.
How this differs from our
current situation so if you can
please at a high level I mean
tell me.
Why and why this is needed Mr
Chairman.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair representative
so we've heard from family
members and you all heard from
family members out at the last
hearing and from teachers and
the teachers unions that and
family members who've been in
the you know in the system for
decades and they're seeing the
same types of issues we've also
heard from superintendents that
say the system right now we're
doing a lot of these things
we're doing them well we've also
heard from
Special education directors that
said things have been really
terrible for us for a long time
but they're getting better now
they're getting better now we're
doing a lot better now we don't
want to mess with that system we
don't want to we don't harm it
and all of this together shows
us that we're heading in the
right direction but if we don't
take action now what we can to
submit the good work that's been
done so far and to make sure
that future leaders future you
know generations folks sitting
in all of our chairs I'm in the
future don't do something about
it
You know there's nothing we can
do about what happens and except
for putting it into the law
making sure that there something
holding all future leaders
accountable for the good work
that's being done now and that
will be done the future the
system is far from
I'm far from perfect we all
acknowledge that I think there
there's lots of discussion it
does need to happen with all the
stakeholders about how to fix
that problem but this is an
effort to bring all those voices
together and to make sure that
we get it all done well we're
all here
for in thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that for that
answer
I also and I'm just going to say
is that is that looking at the
supporters of this it looks like
it's family advocacies is really
behind this this creation of
this new department and I I I
advocacy part is is a very much
a part of of what we need to do
parents need to have a voice
okay but as I see that I went
through before looked at the
supporters of this.
These are family advocacy type
situations or we is intended to
create a department or bureau
that's going to handle them all
family advocacy or is it or is
it too I don't understand how
that how that works Mr Chairman
representative Baca families are
the core of this families are
who live it every single day so
I think that's an important
voice to listen to permit
perhaps the most important voice
and as we heard the last time we
were here Jon Arango and his son
Nick forty years ago started in
special ed in the problems that
were then are still here so we
have made some improvements I
think it's a great thing that
this is a family advocate
Issue because they are the ones
whose kids are being affected.
Thank you Mr chairman but when
we first brought this bill
forward we're talking about
serving the needs of all
students and all in support
school districts as a that's
what my understanding this was
that Mr chairman and
representative that that this
was to create somebody that's
going to collect data it is
going to work with provide
support training otherwise and
now Mr chairman I'm hearing that
with this really is it's about.
In a of the department for
parent advocacy
And so.
I think I I I kind of feel that.
That maybe this was the intent
of this is somewhat was
misleading because again I'll
tell you what I was hearing
about Mr chairman and and
the committee that okay we need
to provide to staff to
assistance for schools I agree
that we need to close that we
need to recruit teachers okay
but not to special teachers we
need to recruit bilingual
teachers we need to report
recruit other hard to the
science teachers.
Which I do believe Mr chairman
is it is a responsibility the
department.
But I kind of feel that you know
this is what was the intent
which again I I was very very
much saying okay well maybe we
need to but now it's the
sweetest kind of shifted that I
really want to know is how much
are school districts going to be
involved in this how much input
is going to get from
superintendents because since
our last conversation
superintendents not even in my
district are reaching out and
saying.
We this is the changes have been
made in the still is not.
Where we need to to do so I I
really need to know is far as Mr
chairman and and Representative.
Why is this necessary and what
is the primary intent behind
this department Mr Chairman Mr
speaker Mr chairman and
Representative Baca I think it
every part of schools should be
family and child focused and
that we're not asking for an
advocate actually I passed a
bill last year two years ago for
non but program for families
with special ed but if we don't
listen to the needs of the
families and and to be perfectly
honest we are under the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit children with
disabilities were one of the
named plaintiffs and since that
lawsuit has come out those of
you who've been around for a
while have heard me say at many
many Ellie S. C. meetings we're
doing this for bilingual ed
we're doing this for native
we're doing this and will
support special at so this is to
bring special lead up to the
level of all the other so that
the people the families the kids
and the people who work at
special I don't feel like red
headed step children and then
also at Mr chair representative
that
I don't see I think we need to
order framing in the state a
This for this type of way when
we talk about Education
generally so it's not
families or schools
administrators but it's an and
situation and this is a bill
that puts those two people
together those parties that
always want to talk about each
other as if they're you know
they're they're enemies we're we
don't want that we want to bring
folks together we want to
collaborate and the truth is
that the people with the power
in this room and in New Mexico
in education all those folks are
and the the schools and Mr chair
doing really fantastic work and
a we want to support those
people and not only that but you
know I think this is such an
opportunity to show the families
you know and the advocates and
folks who are coming to the
table in these different ways
that we're we're going to try to
the NC a band together to do
something and how powerful would
be if the folks with the most
power in the system take that
leap of faith and say we want to
do this with you we want to do
it together this is an
opportunity for collaboration
coordination I don't think that
lot we should let it go I don't
think that we should kick this
can down the road I think this
is the perfect time to build
that bridge we need to do it Mr
chair I may add Representative
aka the the whole point of
collaboration and working
through across agencies is
really the the heart of this
bill it's about our agencies
working together working
together to improve the system
from beginning to the end it's
about collaboration with our
educators who we've heard also
support this bill and working
with all of our school districts
and our charter schools and
administrators to make sure that
we're we're together serving
students at the highest and best
level and I'll just remind you
that you know fifteen prince
percent of our special education
students are not are proficient
and an early literacy only nine
per.
Percent are proficient in
language arts and science and
only six percent are proficient
in math and we also they have
the lowest graduation rates we
really need to make sure that
we're supporting the system and
every possible way that we can
and to work collaboratively
across the entire system to make
that happen thank you Mr
chairman and thank you committee
you know
I currently hold the level three
three a special license
and I've been around I've been
in this a special educator for
thirty one years Mr chairman and
committee
a lot of the folks that are on
there actually attorneys right
their their attorney groups
folks have actually filed the
the process is that complaints
against school districts in the
past is that correct Mr chairman
and
Mr looking at the group of
doctor who supported this budget
speaking support I'm looking at
the.
as far as the analysis of the
supporters of this bill.
Is that correct.
Mr chair representative back at
we have supporters that include
educators that include parents
that we this this bill really is
coming from
perspective and input from from
parents this comes out from a
multi year effort
at part of our special education
transformation team which was
led by the public it Department
M. in collaboration with various
agencies this this bill is
rooted and really.
The perspective of families
students and and teachers as
well as our administrators thank
you Mr chairman and
thank you committee of our
presenters you know I I I think
that another comment that I want
to make is that you know the the
area of special education and
support for our families and our
schools and something that we
need to do my question now is we
have this bill before Senate so
income seeing my question Mr
chairman and to the committee is
why don't we study this through
the at eight K. let legislative
education study committee let's
look at the data many times we
think we know what's best for
our schools.
We know what's best for our
programs we know is best for our
families okay but my my question
really is.
I would like to hear from them I
would like to hear not just from
the not just from this bill this
place of for me I would actually
go out there and look to see
because Mr chairman and.
Representative.
I I believe is in you live this
every day and I've knowledge
that I've knowledge the
challenges that are families
face and I'm gonna say that
right now and my thing about it
I will also say this you know
for time on building is I am an
advocate for for children with
special needs as well.
But I also believe that we have
to write the responsibility to
make decisions based upon what
we see out see other and what we
hear and what we get from our
families I would love to have
of conversation superintendents
we're talking about this I would
love to have conversations with
the families saying this was
their experience I would love to
hear us conversations with
special ed director's because
the two groups that I've heard
the most from.
Our special directors and
superintendents and so my my
question if it's saying Hey we
need we need to to do something.
Yes we need to do something can
we would kick the can down the
road ten years no we can't but
when we make decisions here
decisions are affect not only
the families first and foremost
but also this can affect schools
and prior and and recurring
funding because this again this
is just is not just a we're
craving this recurrent funding
we need to make decisions based
upon the data data driven
decision making one a one so
Mister chairman of the those are
my thoughts on it I I do
appreciate what you're trying to
do I do
but I will I will say that in
its current form I cannot
support this legislation Mr
chair just a quick response to
that the special ed
transformation team meetings
occurred for three years they
included departments they
included special educators
family members and different
state agencies including the
development disabilities council
and and I am part of the
disability world I parents talk
to me and parents email me and
text me so it's not like we're
just pulling this out of thin
air we had three years of
monthly meetings including
during the COVID and got input
from a whole lot of people.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this this is one of
those bills that I started out
wanting to be for it I I want to
I thought we know this is a good
idea will will you know why are
we not already consulting and
coordinating we should be
consulting and coordinating why
are we not already maximizing
this provisions of special ed
services you can go down this
bill and read all the things
that we're going to do my
thought is why aren't we already
doing those things so I thought
well maybe if we just shake
things around restructure will
we'll get this done a little
better when we rolled the build
out of this committee the other
day we said it would give time
to kind of consult with people
that have problems with the bill
and and to rectify some of the
things that we didn't agree on
now do not holding licenses
special education but I looked I
have thirteen school districts
in my district thirteen not
thirteen schools thirteen school
districts so I kinda look to
them to advise me if if bill is
ripe is it ready to pass or does
it need some work and so far on
this bill my advice from the
people that I trust and respect
has been just not ready and I
and I appreciate the fact that
you work for three years out I
don't know if the people from
out in the eastern plains were
part of that work I I have no.
No knowledge of that but I I
think that maybe it's not right
maybe it needs a little time
maybe it needs hopefully not
three years more work the maybe
one more year maybe through the
interim to make it go
I I just a you know the people
that advise me have told me that
that is not a bad bill but it
needs a little more work thank
you Mr.
Thank you Representative
Representative where.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and and our
experts I have I I to like
Representative Chatfield was
really trying to find.
A way to like this bill because
I like the idea and and and the
passion behind it
but and and to be honest with
you like I I I agree and we've
had these conversations I agree
that a lot of times both sides
yeah I have talked a lot but a
lot of people have talked to not
really listened
and so we need to have that that
a you know both groups listening
to each other and actually
starting to make change
there's there's a few things
that I have still gotten
substantial emails and and
feedback from from a
superintendents and and and and
special ed that they don't like
this and I know that the the
last time that we talked about
it that was one of the
suggestions is that you know.
Get with them and and and and
and have them be a part of this
now I know that you guys have
said that you have but but what
I hear from these two of these
two entities is is it was just
kind of like you inform them of
what you're gonna do not ask for
their feedback so so that's my
thing is that I really think
that they need to be a
collaborative part of this and
because one the offices of of of
special it is the one that has
to implement that or has to do
this they're the ones in the
trenches right those special ed
teachers are right there with
these with these students on a
daily basis and so they should
have that input to the
superintendent should be on
board because they're the ones
that have implement this there
that next level up they have to
have to do this so why are we
not really listening because if
if you were listening they
wouldn't be reaching out to us
in numbers telling us that they
don't like this Mr chair
representative Maria I will say
that we've had many meetings
many meetings at I personally
meets with
Mr stand rounds with a Mister
Joe again with the educator
unions in a sit down formal
meeting twice a week and we have
discussed this bill and almost
every single one of those
meetings we have had several
conversations with
Representative and in case we
have had lots of opportunities
to share ideas we've made
significant amendments the
amendments that representative
Thompson discuss this morning
are just the major ones we have
made lots of changes to this
bill we have been committed
throughout this process to
listen and to be collaborative
again that is the heart of this
bill that is the intent of this
bill I will also mention that we
have a year to rollout the staff
was.
Achievement of this office over
the duration of that year we
have this.
lots and lots of opportunity to
sit down we've offered that
we've said this is the approach
this is the intent is the same
approach that we took when we
establish the early childhood
education and care department
that year rollout is there for a
reason there's opportunity for
further study with the LFC and
collaboration with agencies so
it's it's difficult to hear that
there isn't conversations when
there actually is an and you
know perhaps I haven't spoken
with every single supertech
intendant around the state but
we are talking to the
representatives we've done that
and we will continue to do that
and I will tell you we have a
year to make sure that we
continue to have deep
conversations to study and to
establish an office that will
best serve all involved in a
collaborative effort.
Thank you thank you for that
answer thank you Mister chair I
have a the I'm gonna share with
you a few of the concerns that
some of the superintendents of
of giving me one of the major
ones is that this this bill
removes local control what what
can you tell me about that.
Mr chair representative Maria I
I don't understand what they're
referring to this bill is about
train providing training and
support about building a
workforce about looking at data
together and improving our
practices for the betterment of
our students so I I don't
understand where there's a loss
of control
this is also aligned with IDA
these are things that they're
already required were all
required to do not only at the
district and charter school
level but also at the state.
thank you Mr chair and
representative in
madam secretary so one of the
things that I can in one of your
your the your points in the
changes that you made I can kind
of give you a reference of a
kind of losing a little bit of
the control of this is the
office of the special education
will determine which types of
professional development is
appropriate for which staff
speaking as a as a teacher when
when people tell me which PED I
need a lot of it I don't use
because it's doesn't apply to me
or what's not something like I
would I really wish that there
was more departments and
actually listen to the people in
the trenches that said Hey we
need this because we're lacking
in this we need more PED on this
because we need this so having
someone up here that's not in
the trenches telling us where
exit what exactly we're going to
be trained on is not local
control.
That Mr chair and representative
so if you look at number nine on
the changes at at at
coordinating with school
districts to track develop and
provide professional development
and part of the reason for this
Mr chair is that as a physical
therapist I had to go to
professional development on
looking at data in reading that
that really wasn't helpful for
what I did I needed specific
types of things for the job that
I was doing and that's what this
is attempting to do is to target
maintenance bus drivers and
cafeteria people need some
knowledge about autism for
instance so they will know how
to respond all those so it's
instead of everybody does this
one but it fits more into the
type of services that you
provide.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
representative I'm gonna read
you one more of a COVID and that
you guys of respond to this
This is this is from a
particular superintendent he
goes he tells me this bill still
seems to put forward to believe
that schools are not meeting the
needs of the students with an IP
and may actually be doing damage
to the students
and the language of this bill
allows great oversight by the
proposed a proposed department
of education what can you say
that.
Mr chair Representative this
bill I think has two sides of
the same coin the first site is
recognizing it the great work
that is being done out there.
Expanding it promoting it
supporting it and making sure
that it's being replicated
statewide it also identifies
where school districts are still
struggling because it's true we
you know across the board we
don't get the same level of
quality of services that we need
to provide to our students we're
hearing from all sorts of people
including teachers about that
and so we need to be able to
help the struggling school
districts and we do that by
learning from the ones are doing
well supporting their work
expanding it and giving the
resources that we need to school
districts that need it and in
order to do that kind of
coordination statewide there
needs to be a centralized
responsibility taker at the top
who's gonna do all this who's
going to coordinate all of this
and we're going to have those
conversations and bring the
necessary parties and to make
sure that we're having this
consistent system across the
state thank you thank you for
that thank you Mr chair that's
all I have for today.
Representative Trujillo.
S. thank you Mr chairman thank
you for bringing this bill
again.
You know I've.
I stated in my last at your last
presentation that I still had
reservations about some of the
things you when around and you
talk to a lot of people make a
lot of changes and they stated
this to my chair earlier today
that I thought that those were
really made in good faith there
are strong a different changes
and one of the things that I'm
that I think Mr chairman is.
That sometimes school districts
in the leadership a resistant to
change because it's new it's.
It's comfortable doing the
status quo we've been doing a
look at the struggle we've had
with implementing bilingual
education look at the struggle
we've had implementing internet
look at what it ended up what
ended up happening we ended up
having a the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit because we.
We figured if we didn't get
pushed all the way.
Forward in some capacity that we
wouldn't have to do it and now
we're in under a lawsuit.
This bill falls into that same
lawsuit and Mr chairman I taught
for twenty four years and I
taught my last few years in the
special that inclusion class.
And and.
It was with resistance not just
from teachers but some of the
leadership in the school simply
because it's difficult for
people who don't understand and
I don't know anything about
special that I'm not a special
ed teacher but I talked.
The inclusion class and and
those students came with a lot
of of of folks that were
supportive of that students
needs.
But they do need extra support
and it's easier to ignore it.
Then it is to implement it and
and I think it's not because
people don't want to because it
but I think that's because they
fear.
The differences in special ed
kids it's it's just part of I
think being a human.
I have
Been on this on this committee
for ten years and we have pushed
and pushed and pushed and pushed
this subject around for many
many years moved around and we
don't make really substantive
changes this is a wake up call
kind of bill it's telling.
Educators that we have got to
start treating everyone equally
the the prop I in my opinion the
the purpose of public school
isn't just providing education
but equalizing the playing field
so that everyone who walks into
those stores actually has equal
access to some kind of education
we shouldn't be inferior
education it should be a good
education regardless of what
stature or what status here in.
Mr Chairman I couldn't support
this bill
last week I can't remember the
day anymore.
But I do support it now because
I think that that good faith
effort to make the changes have
occurred.
And I think that we have to
rethink what our presenters said
about the one year
implementation to move things
along it's not going to happen
overnight but I think the
collaboration I know Mr rounds
has been here for every single
meeting and he's the voice of
the of the superintendents.
So again has been the voice of
of the school board says has
Yes really may and so there it's
not like they've they've been
excluded from any of these
conversations they have gone
back and told them all these
changes so I don't believe that
they've not been included I
think that they could have given
voice at any time.
And if they haven't or if
they're saying that they haven't
I think it's.
Unfortunate I support this bill
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
thank you Representative and
panel for all the work that
you've put in an improving this
bill and I think Mr chair the
the ultimate goal and and I
thought written somewhere is to
improve the delivery of services
and accountability to students
and schools that's really
important because accountability
has been one of the factors that
led to
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit there
have been we you know we have a.
Shown that we have historically
failing systems.
And when you have historically
failing systems then there's a
problem.
And it's not just it didn't just
happen yesterday this is been an
accumulation of time and we've
been saying over and over again
and thanks to Representative
Trujillo for mentioning the
violence the struggle of
bilingual education so.
There's a lot of I think an
unfounded to resistance and I
agree there's the fear of the
unknown the fear of change
but this is you know and I'm
speaking speaking as having been
a special education teacher and
one of the beauties and having
had that experience is that we
experimented with bringing
parents into the classroom.
To help ease the
The I'm comfortable in this that
the students were feeling
students with special needs that
we're feeling so the comfort
level was having the parents
come in and assist the teacher
and assist we had I had a
classroom of students that
weren't expected to make it be
on first grade in that year and
we made it to third grade level
and one year with the fact that
we brought in caregivers parents
and and the interactive it was
beautiful and that encouraged
again the encouragement to the
students it was a great model it
worked it was successful and and
it's been continued so I wanted
to ask one one question to
clarify.
This is not a department this is
an office dedicated office
within the department is that
correct Mr Chairman
representative yes thank you I
just wanted to make sure because
we we've been referring to
another department and it's and
it's not so all of this with
makes this beautiful is that the
office within this department is
set up to it to collaborate
that's the whole effort if I.
In my final point is on page
twenty two of the committee
substitute.
And and the starting with line
sixteen through twenty two.
this is the other really great
thing about this bill is the
multi.
Layered systems of support I
hate I can't stress enough how
important it is this is a
family.
And students bill this is not
meant to placate or to make
anyone else feel comfortable in
I mean they have to obviously
feel comfortable with that but
this is a family and student
bill and we've got to address
and listen to our families and
we have to address
the systemic failures of the
past and the only way you can do
that is to create systemic
change and this is how I see
this bill this bill is
incredibly important to ensuring
that our students receive.
Improve the delivery of services
and that there's accountability
in the systems because it's only
Mr chair and accountability of
the systems that we have a way
as legislators to evaluate and
to to question so the
legislative education study
committee will have the
opportunity during the interim
to provide these on going
reports and updates to encourage
us to look at and and evaluate
what we just did and then the
one year that you put in here is
really important I just Mr chair
and representative of an panel
just want to say that I think
this is a long time coming we've
got to do it we've got to be
full full and we have to have
the courage and the trust in our
leadership to
to implement and make this
successful model that we can use
and for the success of our
students and to help them feel
wanted to help them feel safe
secure so that they can open up
and be able to learn thank you
Mr.
Thank you Representative.
Thanks Mr chair thank you
Representative and various
people from the governor's
office and the PED for spending
time with many of us because I
see a lot of the things I
suggested are incorporated
The question because I think but
I am going to vote for it but
with reservations I think
regardless of right and it may
not even pass I don't know
because we have to vote on our
committee has another committee
has the floor but
I think what Representative
office said it's.
It involves the structure of the
PED right in this bill who is
going to hire or appoint the
director of this office.
Madam chair Matt Mr chair my
madam vice chair this position
will be identified as all of our
exempt positions it's posted
it's advertised people who are
qualified are interviewed that
interview is done by the
department
the governor's office also will
will interview and people are
selected based on their
experience their knowledge and
their their qualifications these
are open processes that are done
in every agency for every exam
position and our director
positions are exempt positions
thank you and and what Mr chair
and everybody on the panel what
came to my mind is the structure
PED like there's
excuse me how many W. secretary
are there.
Is there W. secretary that up to
this point has overseen you know
how it's divided up because on
page two it talks about
the twelve divisions and then
the office and for the deputy
secretaries currently lined up
in is there W. secretary that
until this point oversaw the
division of special education Mr
chair madam vice chair the
public education department has
three deputy secretaries there
there is a W. secretary position
over special education
At so in statute PED has eleven
division's special lad is
actually not and I is not a
division in statute
we referred to it as a division
but it's actually not a
division.
that is in part why we're doing
this bill we feel that special
education needs to be elevated
needs to be seen as a priority
within the agency at PED but as
well as other agencies and that
it needs to be integrated into
all aspects all bureaus and all
divisions of the department.
Thank you
Of the in the government and
executive budget was thirty
three point one million was
dedicated for special education
in the current budget I think
it's two million
Can you comment on the Mr
chairman he comment on the
current budget as it stands.
Mr chairman and vice chair
you're right the we had an
additional thirty three point
one million request to support
special education that was not
intended to be.
For the status then of this
office although some of it would
be but the majority of that
funding was going to be utilized
for professional development
training
others supports for students
really to support the full sort
of system of special education
we have not seen yet with Senate
finance will be moving forward
but we're hopeful that we will
have some additional funding
there for special at.
Thank you.
I also think Mr chair and and
panel that Representative
Figueroa made a very good point
because as the instructional
coach involved in student
placement is a constant battle.
Should how do we address
those dual language learners
because sometimes there's miss
placement of student might be a
native speaker of Arabic or
Spanish or whatever and they're
put in special ed and it's a
language issues so that's really
vital I think the other thing is
often in this bill Mr chair it
talks about the depart some it's
I I will it should possess
Committee I some additional
things to talk about but
Sometimes and this particularly
struck me on page let's see.
Page seven the authors show
coordinate with G. the office of
coordinate with other units of
the department and other state
departments to develop targeted
strategies to ensure
identification of testing on one
and two to ensure that students
with disabilities are educating
the least restrictive
environment.
I feel there's many places where
districts should be added in
districts has been defined as
inclusive of charter schools.
Because how the office is going
to coordinate with units of the
department and other state
agencies to do on page eight
number to ensure that students
with disabilities are educating
the least restrictive
environment but you can't just
do it with the office and other
agencies you have to totally
involved the school districts
and the actual schools so I feel
there's places where there
should be an intentional
inclusion of districts
to ensure that that happens as
as Representative Baca and
representative of my appointed
out sometimes this is such a
high level thing that sometimes
it forgets about the classroom
in the district so I do think
it needs to be intentional
included in some places and then
my final comment Mister chair
and panel is.
Of if this passes or if it
doesn't pass I think it should
be a priority discussion in L.
E. S. C. and that colleges of
education have to be included
because it starts when we talk
about our special ed teachers
are one three unit special ed
course I had been a volunteer to
exceptional children's home
dealing with ages basically
three to twenty one if I hadn't
had that experience I would have
been very clueless walking into
a regular classroom and and then
becoming inclusion teachers so
thank you very much system my
comments right thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
So.
I I guess I'm a little confused
these are three executive
agencies can I get some
understanding as to why we need
a statutory change.
Misstep Mr chair representative.
Can you clarify a statutory
change for what exactly Mr chair
to do what's being contemplated
by this bill.
Mr Mr chair representative lane.
I think it's important to call
to be clear in statute to direct
agencies to coordinate on
specific aid efforts I can tell
you as the children's cabinet
director my job is to work with
agencies across work across
agencies and specific specific
initiatives and efforts.
However that doesn't always
happen I think that if you don't
prioritize that in
administrations often times that
coordination does not happen and
so it's important to have that
in statute.
Mr chair doesn't the governor of
the thirty to require the
coordination among Sir agencies.
Mr chair representative the
governor does but not all
governors have prioritize that
we've seen that in previous
administrations.
Mr chair can I get some.
Clarification I guess there's
been a lot of session about the
stakeholders are involved in the
committee so.
so as I understand the testimony
you had conversations with
Mexico cases are right on the
committee sub.
Mr chair that's right we I
personally sat down with that
Christina Velasquez but there is
also other means that we're
health.
Mr chair and regarding this
committee sub there is a
discussion New Mexico
superintendents association Mr
chair representative going
that's correct in regard to
committee so there is a
discussion of the medical school
board association Mr chair
Representative lane that's
correct can you walk me through
the specific changes that you
incorporate in this committee
some from those stakeholders.
Mr chair representative lane
representative Thompson did all
of that at the beginning of the
hearing we also have a document
that I can I do that outlines
all of those happy to and I
don't know if that's appropriate
Mr chair so there's some clear
saying that that the changes
that are.
In the committee sub came from
those three stakeholder groups
Mr chair representative lane
that's correct as well as from
the LFC we had very valuable
helpful input from the director
of the LFC and her staff as well
as from members of this
committee.
Mr chair the the model that's
being put forth here and is
there other states that have
done this is there any research
behind effectiveness of this
model.
States this.
Mr chairman and Representative
lane
we do know is that the transfer
of the early childhood preschool
education party six nineteen
that is a current other states
and we do know that there are
states with special education
administration that are and more
prominent positions in their
education apartments we can do
some more research and find out
more thorough answer to your
question if.
Mr chairman I mean this seems
like a pretty.
Foundational change and so I'm
just wonder is there any data to
to solidify that this model
doesn't fact work.
Mr Chairman Representative Lane.
As secretary Padilla mentioned a
minute ago what we're trying to
do is to elevate this bills
proposing to elevate the issue
special education from a bureau
level under the W. secretary
it's acting as a division to the
office directly under the
secretary to increase the
prioritization and the authority
within the department so can
enhance
they can hands coordination
within the department and with
other departments I also want
Mister chair if it's okay to
also respond your question
before but input from the
superintendents and in case in
addition to the number one item
on this list which is moving the
appointment or hiring of the
director two examples issued
from a direct appointment from
the governor we also took the
advice to remove administration
of gifted students dyslexic
students and still students
under section five oh four out
of this department and excuse me
this office and to instead have
the office collaborate and
support with other units of the
department to support those
students as another important
suggestion that we incorporate
into this draft Mr chair so it
sounds like there isn't any
research to to
Point that when you have a
specific concentration when you
have a specific Education Act
focus on an area such a special
education you have more clear
focus on funding more
coordination across programs and
introduce
you do see improved outcomes for
students and that's what this
bill does.
Again Mr chair is there any data
to support this model that
you're proposing has been
effective.
Mr chair and representative lane
I wouldn't call it a model I
would call it a basically
getting people to work together
for the benefit of children with
disabilities.
Mr chairman if I could
Representative Lane.
I would also ask is there any
data to support the current
model we have this effective.
Mr chair I'm not the one
suggesting we need to change so.
and I would hope that the
pandemic actually has data on
the current model if not
actually find that to be a
little troubling.
so I think the answer is no
despite being asked about four
times which I find also to be
troubling.
That we're talking about a
substantive change in our
approach and we don't have any
data to back that up and these
are some of our most vulnerable
students.
Mr chair it seems that.
What's being contemplated here's
gonna expand the work of PED is
that fair.
Mr chair representative laying
I don't think that it does
expanded more I mean they have
the same requirements that
they're doing they provide
professional development I think
if anything they'll receive more
support and attention from the
leadership of the public and
depart they'll receive more
support and attention from other
agencies that will help them
improve
practices and I think that
overall they will have more
opportunity to move forward the
efforts that that they're
working on and then add to that
to make sure we're strengthening
the system.
Okay semesters with just some
where your position is this is
not going to expand.
The responsibility rate in
anyway Mr chair and
representative this is what
they're already responsible for
it's just a a rearrangement and
and as the secretary said
putting some more emphasis on
this but everything that's in
this bill Mr chair is already a
requirement that they do Mr
chairman I kind of question why
we need the bill of thirty doing
all this
I find it hard to believe this
is an increase workloads for PED
and if that's the case I don't
know how we do that without any
new additional FTE ease or
nothing in agencies budget
request.
Mr chair I.
Have a question about I don't as
I understand there's some
accounting accountability
provisions written in this bill
is that right.
Mr chair representative claimed
that is correct and those
provisions are in alignment with
the federal ID.
Mr chair can you just walk me
through what are some of the the
practical components of that
Of that accountability for a
local school district.
This so.
We have seen in the history of
this state.
Interpretation and
implementation of IDA as well as
the varied range and the way I
dust interpret across the
country that there is a lot of
there's there's a lot of wiggle
room for how I. D. A.'s
interpret and implement it and
the purpose of this bill is to
really laser focus our
implementation of IDA to ensure
that we're doing the the bass
work that we're doing best
practices when I just doing a
bare minimum check enough yeah
we're doing IDA yeah we're doing
it okay that the Feds are offer
backs but we're actually going
to take leadership and try to be
and we're going to be one of the
best special education systems
in the country but we have to
have something like this that
really focuses not just the
current is ministration which
will end in three years but all
future ministrations the state
this is a party we've taken
together in the state by the all
the leaves States to tell the
state we have to do this work we
have to make it right we have to
continue to work.
Mr chair can I get some
understanding of what what will
the the corrective action click
towards of local school
district.
Please go ahead Mr chair of
Representative this is part of
the one your process we have
rulemaking there's going to be a
lot of discussion back and forth
about what that's going to look
like PED's going to take the
leadership to roll out a plan
after a lot of consultation and
then there will be additional
opportunities for feedback on
that so that's not something
that you know you put in statute
something that you go through a
very extensive rulemaking
process and get a lot of sick or
in pain Mr chair representative
lane I would say it would look a
lot like identifying
looking at Act The.
Activities that are occurring
supports that might be needed
from the state level technical
assistance other sort of
opportunities to improve
practices
that that would be part of that
action.
The Mr chair inside I guess it
it bothers me a little bit to
say that this is going to be
left up to rulemaking with
padded no I'm not sure that path
and local districts have the
greatest of relationship to
begin with and if we.
Start putting these kind of
compliance and corrective
actions that that can take a
thing that concerns me.
Can I get some understanding on
on section seven what the intent
is of this for the bill.
Mr chair what page.
It's on page twelve Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Representative Lane
section seven entails the
transfer of part B. six nineteen
which is preschool special
education to the state early
childhood education and care
department ECECD through a
detailed memorandum of
understand written formal
agreement with the.
Public education department that
would outline in detail those
are specific actions and this
will help consolidate and
coordinate the both the
provision of preschool and early
childhood education and
preschool and early intervention
for children with disabilities
before age five and as I
mentioned before is been done in
several other states.
Mr chair will consolidate and to
what into one department into
the ECECD with coordination
collaboration with PED.
Mr chair so.
When you say with coordination
with PED where does it say that
and in the section sorry Mr
Chairman Mr Chairman
representative of lane it says
it here in the words written
formal written agreement lines
eighteen and nineteen that's
where that information on that's
how it's been done in we've had
in other states have had
conversations with federal
office of special education
programs us up in the US
Department education they say
that's how that's been done
Wyoming and North Dakota two
examples.
So Mister chair can you explain
what PED's of all of the for pre
K. for three four year olds.
Mr Chairman Representative Lane
the written agreement will
outline those on that involving
from PED as has been done other
states PED in ECECD will
coordinate on those exact
requirements to make sure that
it's streamlined and seamless
for school district involvement.
Mr chair
I have some concerns.
The pre K..
Involvement with.
With disabilities out of head.
I'm not sure how.
That kind of cross court news
cross coordination is going to
work and I think it is kind of
highlights for me really the.
The big issue that I have with
this concept is we're taking our
most vulnerable of students.
And now we're gonna try to offer
services across three executive
agencies.
and it's has nothing to do with
the three agencies are being
discussed here but in my
experience often times across
state government they have a
very difficult time coordinating
communicating.
The left and knowing what the
right hand is doing and that's
okay maybe in the context of
business or.
Permitting or something else
that we're talking about the
most vulnerable population are
you aware that we have.
And on and and I'm afraid that
if we take this approach that
those of the students are going
to be left behind so thank you
Mr chair very briefly Mister
chair struggles on question
thank you thank you of the any
or further discussion.
Representative Trujillo Mr
Chairman was a compact for a
second right so we have
Representative Trujillo a
second.
Roybal Caballero is German as so
to motion to a table all right
so we have such to motion to
table fire Representative Baca
second by Representative Ezzell
so this is to table so.
And secretary if you call the
roll please okay please take us.
Representative Baca yes.
Representative yes.
Representative Ezzell yes
Representative Figueroa no.
Representative.
Representative Lane yes to
table.
Representative Lara no to table.
Representative Madrid.
Representative for my father
more apt yes to table.
Representative Roybal Caballero
no to table.
Representative Christine
Trujillo no to table.
Madam vice chair Garrett no.
Chairman no.
Thanks to.
All right so.
Back in the bill we had a motion
however I need to correct motion
please Mr chair I move that we
you do not have to do a new pot
I move a do not pass on Senate
bill.
I'm lying.
On house bill.
It two eighty five and a do pass
on substitute house bill two
eighty five.
Thank the most Representative
Trujillo my room Representative
Roybal Caballero.
And secretary called role in the
past.
If I have so.
Representative Chatfield nope.
In that.
Representative corona yes
Representative Herrerra.
Representative Lane.
Nope.
Representative Lara yes.
In a portrait.
Representative my divide Maria
no.
Representative provides coverage
at all yes.
Senator Christine Trujillo yes.
Madam chair by Gerrit yes and
I'd like to explain.
Chairman yes.
Thanks to five all right have a
due pass on the committee set
for two eighty five
Representative care to explain
wrote please yet Mr chair and
panel I totally understand why
some people wanted to table it I
do believe that not having to go
three L. E. S. C. over the last
interim was a short coming and I
do think it needs more work.
But I understand the intent and
because I support the intent I
voted yes but it needs
additional work thank you thank
you Mr thank you all.
Members.
The we will move on to the house
bill four four eight
he
Thank you.
Morning madam chair.
Can you.
Okay.
With one.
Give us a second well we just
make sure our.
we are now hearing house bill
four forty eight dropout
recovery act.
Okay Representative is fine yes
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
House Bill for forty eight is a
bill that will allow the state
to have a renewed focus on
children who have dropped out of
school a New Mexico's graduation
rate has hovered between seventy
five and eighty percent since
twenty sixteen and then the
typical senior cohort there are
approximately thirty thousand
New Mexican students this means
that about six thousand students
don't graduate.
Or do not graduate from high
school every year over a five
year period the equivalent of
the entire statewide senior
cost leave high school without a
diploma.
There are a handful of schools
in New Mexico already trying to
re engage this population and
the work deserves additional
support from the state we must
also encourage more schools to
work with our students with
dropped out of high school the
house believe the house bill
four forty eight creates a
framework so we may have a a
statewide approach in ensuring
the this population is supported
and can complete high school my
expert witness is scary robin
Brander and she can go through
the specifics of the bill madam
chair.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee on
house bill four forty eight is a
bill that has been a long time
coming there were some
conversations I hope it happened
over the interim with the L. E.
S. C. and we've been really
trying to focus on this
population ever since we place
it H. cap on our students and
number of years ago on what
house bill four forty eight
would do is it would allow
schools to raise their hand and
say that they want to very
actively work with drop out
student populations across the
state the whole point is to try
to support the schools that are
already doing this work in our
state while also incentivizing
more schools to raise their hand
and say we would like to have a
specific program that's going to
re engage and recruit students
who left high school without a
diploma before they reach the
age of twenty two which is our
age cap in the current statutes
in order to incentivize the
schools the bill would do
several things first if there
were schools that had raise
their hand those schools would
be allowed to enroll students on
a year round basis and receive
funding in the same year in
which the student in rules one
of the barriers that happens
with our drop out population is
is schools have to recruit those
students hope and pray that they
stay for the entire year and
then get funding one year after
the student has actually arrived
this student population moves
around a lot and so we need to
be able to say if you're ready
to start school in July come to
school in July allow your school
to get funding in July so that
we can make sure that we're
working with you to get your
diploma as quickly as possible
the second thing that bill would
do is it would allow those
schools that have recruited
students under the age of twenty
two which is the age cap but
stay in those schools so long as
they were continuously rules so
here's what happened when we put
the eight.
It's cap on our student
population we said as soon as
you reach the age of twenty two
your school is not going to get
money for you at all anymore but
this bill would do is it would
basically codify the the
grandfathering clause that we
put into the original H. cap
point page that says if you're
student who start school before
the age of twenty two and you
stay in that school continuously
until you finish your diploma
then that school can continue to
get funding for you and there's
not a funding cliff if all of a
sudden you turn twenty two when
you still have three months left
of school we would allow the
schools to be able to get the
funding for those students the
third thing the bill would do is
it would allow schools that
raise their hand some
flexibility around
accountability we still want the
schools to be reporting adequate
academic progress for students
who are enrolled in a drop out
program and the coal for for the
students that they have
recruited back into school and
they're graduating so let's say
you're school you've recruited a
hundred students in New seventy
five of them actually graduate
with their diploma you should
get credit for the seventy five
students and not have a double
dean when a student has dropped
out and then potentially drops
out again the fourth thing part
one of the most important things
that this bill does is it would
create a state wide list of
students who have left school
and meet the definition of a
drop out it would then allow any
school that has raised their
hand to say we want to work with
this drop out program access to
that list this would be a change
in our mentality around drop
outs to say it's all of our
responsibility to deal with the
students and we need to be able
to recruit students statewide to
drop out recovery programs
regardless of geography so in
return for that flexibility
schools have to do a couple of
things they have to make sure
that students are completing all
of their credits in a in a
diploma of excellence.
They have to provide specialized
support for students who are
drop outs and they have to find
estimated enrollment numbers
every year which is really
important for budgeting for you
all as a legislature to make
sure that there's appropriate
dollars in place the bill is not
effective until July first of
twenty twenty four which is
really important because it
allows all the summer and the
fall to work through the L. we
just see the public education
department to promulgate the
rules around the schools schools
would then be able to identify
before the session started so
that we know the students who
are already accounted for in the
SCG with the schools that are
currently doing the work and
then an estimate as new students
we may be able to bring in so we
think that this bill is a well
thought out way to create a
statewide framework to start
really focusing and re engaging
this population but it's still
going to give us the time that
we need to make sure that
everything is promulgated in the
rules as we're moving forward
with a really great
collaborative effort over the
next year and with that madam
chair and madam chair as a
former high school dropout.
This is a really important bills
for me because I know what it's
like to to not complete school
and and eventually eventually I
did but this is critical and I
was very.
Angry and disappointed that in
twenty nineteen when we changed
the rules to not allow drop you
know the supports for dropouts
at during that time and I think
that bringing this back and
really focusing the way misprint
has stated in including the
designated drop us I think that
we can change the course of the
lives of many students who have
rethought.
an incredible mistake that
they've made in their lives
thank you we stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative I'm
gonna go online first is there
anybody on the line who would
like to speak in favor of this
of Robert you have the floor.
Madam chair members of the
committee property representing
swept the south ridge
educational partners for
training director of Robert F.
Kennedy charter school I'm in
governance council member of
course but now charter school I
am in support of this
legislation our charter school
has a twenty three year history
of serving students they're
dropping into and complete their
high school education and
created pathway for career.
Working with swept which
provides PED yes our job
training to students of all ages
what the legislature pros to
stop funding for students over
twenty two the same seven
million dollars undermine the
evening a vocational program at
Robert F. Kennedy.
And the ability of Gordon but
don't charter school the service
agency.
Our school is and I cannot say
you would choose this new
designation at this point in
time in my humble opinion all
the needs to be done is to undo
the legislation that women at
limits funding based on eight
madam chair I am in support of
this legislation I appreciate
the sponsor have the house
education thank you for allowing
me to share thank you Robert of
our next person is.
The tiny tiny you have the
floor.
Chair and representative my name
is Connie yes I am the principal
and director at this are Chavis
community school at our school
has been working for the past
nineteen years on drop out
recovery and we two were very
discouraged by the twenty
nineteen age cap that undermines
much of the work that people are
doing to help change lives for
use in New Mexico every day and
for all ages in New Mexico
everyday needs this deployment
open doors and forward I'm on
their dreams and goals we
definitely support this
legislation and we thank the
sponsors who have taken the time
to work on this we would love to
work with people on some of the
questions in the districts in
terms of definitions and how how
the our.
Now the drop outs would be
defined and how some of the
funding would work moving
forward it.
We think this is a very
important.
Use of legislation and we hope
that it can get this for that it
needs to really honestly ten
slides for for our residents in
New Mexico thank you thank you.
A next a seraph Fisher of.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce this is
important legislation that were
properly align the incentives
and funding necessary to get
more schools involved in the
effort to re engage students who
dropped out and leave them to
graduation educating someone
who's returning to high school
is a different and challenging
endeavor for starters the school
needs to be ready to receive
that student right away and
begin educating them without
delay so it only makes sense to
ensure the schools compensated
right away as well education is
the key to overcoming
intergenerational poverty and a
high school diploma is critical
to the search for a well paying
job this bill proposes a
fantastic way to carry out an
important mission that will
improve lives our workforce and
our economy we are so committee
support thank you madam chair
thank you
Let's go to of the room anybody
on this side speaking in support
of the bill.
Okay we'll start at the back and
then move forward.
You can do it from there hi my
name is Justin trigger high
service the executive director
of the Salesian high school a
public charter school in
Albuquerque
yes they support this bill
because the good investment not
just in students and families in
our economy I'm sorry basic
statistics the two thousand
nineteen forty percent of New
Mexico residents age eighteen or
older did not earn a high school
diploma.
In twenty twenty twenty percent
forty seven thousand nine
hundred people between the ages
of sixteen and twenty four we're
not to school and not working.
According to statistics if you
don't have that you have about
five hundred thousand dollars
and less come over your lifetime
which comes to twenty three
point nine billion dollars of
Los economics for our state and
then I did find isn't statewide
by found national statistics
that statistics of like eighteen
to twenty year old twenty four
year olds not rolled and I
working is higher thirty one
percent for native Americans
twenty three percent from last
year with eighteen percent for
Hispanics.
The doctor meeting are Yazzie
Martinez population and
addressing equity in our state
so there are existing hired
programs GED programs that might
be one of the questions why we
need this I'll tell you is we
need to diversify and
differentiate the programs we
offer students one of the limits
of GT programs is a focus on
passing a test not necessarily
the applied academics the
workforce skills we need to
transition to be productive
members of our community at ace
we offer an in person project
based learning evening re
engagement program a majority of
our students dropped out because
of right issues being pushed out
for behavior issues being over
age and under twelve and
stopping to believe that they
could graduate becoming parents
and a lot of students left
because they are money for their
families to pay the rent
especially during the pandemic
so currently accept twenty one
year old students last year
three my students to get money
for.
Because it is the right thing to
do this year down to one but I
are enrolled in if they don't
graduate this year I will get
funding for them if they stay at
our school.
It's the right thing to do this
is a small thing and the cost of
changing this definition for
qualified students is a great
investment
for the state and also allow us
to expand our services
improvement critique thank you
so much by twenty two that's two
twenty five.
Thank you so much we're moving
up to a Matt and then Amanda.
Madam chairman of the Matt Paul
for public charter schools of
New Mexico we have a number of
charter schools that serve as
hubs for being teaching youth
dropped out and disengage with
their education the reason why
we feel that the need is because
there aren't enough schools
fulfilling that need Mr trader
just mentioned some of the
statistics how many kids don't
have this credential something
we want for every kid I'll give
you another one we feel good
about the direction of our
graduation rates our current
last the last comment that we
have a six year graduation rate
for is eighty two percent.
That means in addition to some
of the the statistics you just
heard every cohort of kids they
go through the system adds
another four thousand students
that did not get their diploma
at least because I I'm not
capturing the students that
dropped out there sophomore year
in middle school so every year
we add thousands of kids to
those that don't have a
deployment that disengage with
their education early we did the
age cap in New Mexico without
having a plan of how we were
going to serve these kids we
just didn't we provided an
alternate we provided a way to
serve the students for a couple
of years and then it just ran
out of runway we appreciate that
this bill gives us that
opportunity for those kids that
re engage with their education
to continue on and allow us to
do so without having any
additional burden on our
finances so we appreciate the
grandfathering that this bill
provides secondly providing a
framework to allow many
additional schools whether
charter schools or traditional
public schools to.
Begin to engage specifically
this student population is
critical for our state for our
economy and just for the well
being of our society we greatly
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee made out of the
New Mexico kids can't as you all
hear from me often we look at
policy and we really look at
policies that affect our most
vulnerable students and show
that we can make progress and
have plans for those students
for all the reasons that you've
heard from the testimony so far
we are not serving this group of
students is this in great group
of students who are ready to
enter our economy who are ready
to have meaningful careers and
lives in New Mexico we're not
serving and this bill does a
great job of providing a few
years system of support for
those students and the schools
that are serving a student so we
urge its passage thank you.
Details on the side okay let's
go to this site and support us
got.
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for graduation
alliance to stand in support of
the bill for all the reasons
mentioned we think that this
framework is something that we
can work on over the next
several years and really address
this population that needs a
week to get back in the school
so we very much support this
bill thank you thank you anybody
else on this site okay we'll go
to opposition is there anybody
online who is on in opposition
to this bill.
Okay nobody online will go to
our audience is there anybody on
this side is in opposition to
the bill ten.
Madam chair members of the
committee staff super friends
just thought I'd be clear for
realization of this.
We like the concept for this
bill is going.
However I can't stand for
legislation is Paul we have
debate about that earlier I want
to be clear this is something
that requires I believe careful
Center.
Eight is an important issue your
has history what how to fund
public education has had a
captive store please of the
eighteen.
The after the eighteenth
birthday from nineteen for.
Capstone.
When we changed some things back
with public was central service
we remove the cap.
You came back we talk to you
about that with the cat.
That being said you also removed
from the public schools and
handed it to higher education.
jobs as a body to about hello
impact this issue this is a
critical issue that needs to be
dealt with these are kids of the
server but I think we need our
policy right and our process
time final four this
administrative position
guaranteed he's put into the
system.
that down to more students
probably rightfully so but if
you look forward into your
funding you'll have to
contemplate that thank
thank you anybody else in the
audience in opposition.
Okay we'll go to questions from
the committee Representative
Ezzell.
Management all I'm sorry.
It's my turn.
Madam chair thank you for that
I'm just teasing you of that of
course.
Madam chair I think it's
important that we do help every
kid that we can get our get
their high school diploma
because showing that the anybody
that does have a high school
diploma there average weekly
earning is around seven hundred
ninety one dollars those without
it earned a hundred and sixty
two dollars Louis so I I can see
the economics right there
everybody else can to.
Problem I have is the age
factor.
And H. twenty five going back
into a public school is a no go.
Whenever some of our high
schools have.
Include the freshman classes
those kids are thirteen fourteen
years old and they're going to
gonna be going to school with I
don't think so I am definitely
of that.
The gentleman that talked
earlier from the cordon Burnell
charter school that was the main
focus of the questions that I do
have because I can remember I
think it was.
Two years ago one of us on this
committee for part time before I
got moved to appropriations.
Of we have young people live in
the metropolitan detention
center I do remember this and
then they're not accounted for.
So they have been put in a
detention center whether it's in
Albuquerque whether it's in.
Chavis county where the case may
be.
I those young people question
for you here.
I think counted as dropouts if
they are not receiving any
instruction in those detention
centers because I'm pretty sure
I already know what the answer
is but I think the crowd needs
to your amendment chair I think
my expert has a great response
madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Ezzell that's correct so those
students that aren't receiving
services would count as a drop
out and so if they exit and DC
And there on now this statewide
list right of individuals to
meet the definition of a drop
out any school that had raise
their hand to have a dropout
designation could proactively go
after those students so long as
they were under the age of
twenty two when they first
enrolled so the legislation is
really clear that we're still
keeping that twenty two H. cap
it's only if let's say the rules
when they were twenty one they
turned twenty to six months in
HSD to finish that's the people
that we would be allowing to
finish but yes those individuals
are incarcerated would would
appear on that list for
recruitment.
Okay some madam chair and
representative he of this
printer whenever we are.
I never I'm asking questions
about the show and people.
Of.
There's no way to track them
once they are released I mean if
they decide not to go back to
school they're just out there so
nobody can.
Get funding for the students
that should be going to the
schools even that they do not as
some of the other questions I
have regarding that.
The dropout recovery schools.
Give me a little more
explanation on that put it has
in regard to have might help
these young people that have
just left the detention center.
Madam chair members the
committee in Representative
Ezzell I'm any use Washington
state as an example so
Washington state is a state that
has a dropout recovery framework
that allows schools to raise
their hand and become a
designated school so every year
there is a list that is created
that would include any
individual who may have been
incarcerated and that listed
that is given to all of the
dropout recovery schools and
they say you need to try to go
find the students there's also
opportunities with in on the
juvenile justice system in
particular where the students
could be specifically tracts to
go into a dropout recovery
schools part of their probation
upon their release so that we're
making sure that once we have
this framework set up in the
schools that are volunteering to
specifically engage with this
population were than giving
those students to support and
we're giving the schools the
support that they need to be
able to enroll the students on a
year round basis and make sure
that there was saying your
funding for those students once
they enroll.
Okay I appreciate your response
here Mr speaker I do usually
don't do Madam speaker pardon me
I usually don't do this but I am
going to tell a story and then I
want your thoughts on what
should have happened in this
particular instance.
Fourteen years ago what I was
doing this.
Red cloud cross when my elder
constituents she had some
concerns she said I need help.
Her granddaughter.
It was fifteen at the time was
kidnapped by three young men.
Taking them to the country.
Sexually assaulted by all three
of them left out in the country
okay.
She ended up going to a local
farm house they're getting help
this is in the middle of the
night so you can imagine her
fear.
Charges were brought against
these three young men.
Two of them were over the age of
eight to eight.
One of the sixteen at the time
that this happened.
That particularly here when
their position girl went back
started up for high school
create the.
Following school year.
She walked into her home room
class and guess who was in
there.
This young man that had sexually
kidnapped and sexually abused.
And the grandmother was not real
happy the girl was hysterical
has left the class left to
school I'm never going back to
that screen.
Whenever I inquired.
To the principal what what was
going to happen the response was
he deserves an education to well
first off you need to have the
crap beaten out of the then my
opinion that the strictly my
opinion yes he does the probably
need to get his department so he
can be gainfully employed.
But I guess my concern is
whenever it to I don't know
seven of us legislators to.
Have that young man removed from
that particular school and
transferred elsewhere there was
a concern.
Because that students that was
assaulted.
And having.
I can imagine.
Any child having to sit in a
classroom with the person that
did that to them so what what do
you what would be your thoughts
whenever we are talking about
these specific schools that you
have just mentioned here.
And of.
Being able to help somebody
that's come out of the.
Penal system back into our
schools.
Where there might not be.
An additional threat to the
students that are there.
Madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Ezzell I I think that there's
probably two answers your
question okay the number one I
think that in a traditional
school setting if that were to
happen there are probably now
legal protection protections
around restraining orders
in different ways for students
who are in a traditional school
framework would not be allowed
to be in the same classroom
that's in the traditional school
framework of Jess I'm re
enrolling as a normal sophomore
in high school and the school I
think has the obligation and not
specific scenario to make sure
that based on the legal issues
that are happening those
students to be appropriately
separated this bill contemplates
something potentially very
different there is a traditional
high school in a community
Roswell high where students who
are not drop outs were students
who even though they may have
had challenges in their lives
are enrolling in school then it
Roswell high school could raise
its hand and have a specific
standalone program that focused
on drop out recovery work
potentially a child or young
adult who had exited from the
juvenile justice system could be
placed in a separate program for
them to be able to work on their
education as part of a drop out
of school so what this bill is
contemplating is saying will
have traditional high schools
that are doing all of their work
to engage students but then we
will have schools that will
raise their hand to specifically
focus on a drop out population
and may have a lot of different
reasons why they dropped out an
appropriate support there are
also schools that have been
created in our state that focus
specifically on re integrating
students who are leading
juvenile justice RFK's one of
them where they have separate
programming in order to make
sure that that transition is
also happening so you know I
think that there's.
Hi a lot of different options of
what could have happened
personally I don't think that
those students price should have
been together in class I think
that we're trying to contemplate
a world in which there can be
separate dropout recovery
programs from the traditional
school setting.
Madam chair I pre should that
explanation but sometimes
there's an economic factor
involved as well.
At this.
If there has been an incident
that happened against one of the
students at this particular
school at any particular school
and then the person that did
harm does show up for that does
the person that was harm have
the right to object to this
person be in in that school
madam chair members the
committee that's a legal
question I can't answer because
I'm not an attorney I don't know
Representative yeah I don't.
I don't have the skills to do
that that.
We're looking at Representative
right lane.
Okay Madam chair of
Representative I'm not against
this bill but it still has some
concerns for me.
Anything over the age of twenty
one just bordering on that to
twenty two.
That's going to be kind of
sketchy anything above that now.
Adamantly no.
Okay we have younger.
I'm not gonna say girls or boys
we have younger students that
are very impressionable and
Sometimes.
Things happen provided that that
madam chair thank you very much
thank you Representative Manuel
Mallia and if you could
introduce your high school
students before you question.
Excellent thank you madam chair
yes I do have some blend high
school staters of that are here
in the office I mean in our
committee so I would like for
all of the students end the two
staff members to stand up and
introduce yourself.
Let us know what major and also.
Except for you.
The wall thank you Mr teacher
for more than thirty years
and I am the Sanchez to.
Hello I am a senior at a lot of
things.
Many this kilograms lady LA
teacher at one high school.
Setting aside some of senior.
The where the land and the
junior act on high school and
president.
Hi and Isabel.
And thank you.
So during the pandemic senior.
Thank you I just have to say a
couple of these beautiful ladies
are also my officers because I'm
the junior class sponsor so
they're also my officers and
Miss anti did to was I think
state runner up for girls
wrestling this year so she
rocked it.
So
Really excited that you guys
could get to see the whole
process and Mr ball over as far
as he's he's not the dreaded
chemistry teacher right now he's
the only chemistry teacher since
I'm here and so I'm sure they
are totally loving the fact that
they have him because he's a
savior to a lot of the classes.
Thank you
so thank you madam chair and
representative I I really like
the idea of this bill I have a
couple of questions for
clarification but I really like
it because of my oldest son did
not finish high school it was
not for him we tried everything
we possibly could in order to
get him to to finish and and he
didn't so he's been working
since he was sixteen and he
several times wanted to get back
but I really like the permitting
them to enroll year round to so
many times he started that
process and it was like a few
months down the road that it was
going to start and by the time
that few months down on the road
came he was in another state
somewhere else I mean his
attention was yeah I'm I'm on to
the next thing because it didn't
happen now and unfortunately we
live in a society that wants
instant gratification as of so
but I do want to clarify some
stuff so this is madam chair and
representative this is
completely voluntary for schools
right this is not a requirement
right.
Of the and then is this is the
framework kind of a madam chair
and and Representative is it
Like is it going to be a
classroom setting or an online
setting a combination of both
what it what is what is the the
the hope for this it'll be madam
chair a combination of both
combination of both thank you
madam madam chair but my
question is who is considered to
be on that or or listed on that
drop out list is it mostly like
the adults over eighteen or is
it also those that have been
finished in their under eighteen
the at like who's going to be
considered on that list madam
chair members the committee and
representative maybe about Maria
there's Ortiz statutory
requirement that all of our high
schools submit a list of
individuals who have dropped out
those are individuals who could
be at any grade level right
freshman junior senior over
eighteen under the age cap on
and basically it's you have a
certain number of credits left
to complete and you don't have
enough years left in order to
complete those credits that
really starts to trigger you as
a student who's at risk for a
student who is voluntarily
remove themselves from school
for reasons of either they just
don't feel like they can finish
life things are happening and
those students are the students
who would appear on the list
that would be able to then be
recruited into these programs
that test would be voluntary
it's enabling legislation to
allow schools to raise their
hands and want to do this work
and get flexibility from the
state for doing the work
excellent of thank you madam
chair one this one and and I
share the concern that meant
Representative Ezzell had R. is
it is it is this going to be a
framework in which we have adult
students in school or in the
same classroom as underage
students madam chair members the
committee and representative no
we made a policy decision a
number of years ago that having
twenty nine year olds in the
same room as a thirteen year old
is.
Not something that our state
wants to do this bill does not
change that what it would allow
is we have decided is the state
that you have a constitutional
right to a free and appropriate
public education and till you
reach the age of twenty two so
we would say let's say that you
rules when you were twenty one
and you were you know maybe
three months in and you turned
twenty two right will we have a
funding cliff that happens at
that point where the funding
mechanism turns off so for those
students that enrolled before
they were twenty two and just
need to finish their work we
would allow them to finish their
work and we would allow the
schools to get funding for it
most often students who are over
the age of eighteen are in an
alternative program already
because they can't go to school
from eight in the morning to
three thirty in the evening
their parents they have jobs on
there is an alternative
framework already and so this is
to try to incentivize and create
that statewide framework for
that kind of drop out recovery
programming to work in a more
Mexico defied and sophisticated
way in our state the kind of the
shot gun approach that we have
right now.
Excellent thank you madam chair
I I I really I really do like
this I do like the fact that
especially if there's a school
that is wanting to do this and
wanting to take this on and has
and has the heart and calling to
to be able to help these
students that they should
receive those that kind of
funding if they can get their
you know like the gentleman
spoke in the back that you know
he's he's they're taking the
loss because they believe in the
process and they shouldn't have
to so so thank you thank you for
bringing this thank you.
Thank you and madam chair moved
to pass on house bill four four
eight.
Thank.
Okay before that I should have
some questions but we've had a
motion.
I have a question Representative
Lara thank you thank you madam
chair and I don't know if this
is with us was I was visiting my
bill in a committee but it.
It was said that there is an
online option for this correct
mentor Representative can be
online option madam chair Madam
chair representative so how do
we guarantee that some of those
students are online our actual
New Mexico residents.
Madam chair members of the
committee and represented a lot
at they in order to be a
qualified students in New Mexico
under our current funding lines
you have to be in New Mexico
resident so there would have to
be verification that the
students were in fact New Mexico
residents upon enrollment that
is a process that has to happen
right now with any kind of
online schooling that we have
currently and that process would
exist again for the schools and
that can be codified in the
rulemaking process at the public
at department does thank you for
that thank you Mr thank you and
before we go to the motion of
some questions on page eleven
and thank you that was my
question also page eleven
Representative a number six it
says allow dropout recovery
school to contract with the
nationally accredited
organizations for academic
programming can you describe
what that means madam chair
members of the committee and
Representative Garrett we
already under current law allows
schools to have contracts with
different like curriculum
providers right with learning
management systems with ways
that we can deliver content to
our students but we want to make
sure that any one of those
organizations that a school were
to contract with we're twelve
which means they have met the
national standard that cockney a
establishes that are high
schools have to need to make
sure that they are academically
rigorous that they really are
trying to make sure that the
credit is the appropriate credit
and that it is not just some
sort of factory right or busy
work right so it's it's a safety
mechanism to make sure that if
that were to happen with the
school the work is real work.
Thank you and my other question
is.
We've been really emphasizing in
this committee the importance
which certainly came up with the
special education bill of going
through the LESC process because
of some and in this case many
unanticipated consequences I
support in concept what this is
but did this go through the LFC
at all I don't recall it being
discussed over the the interim.
Madam chair members the
committee in Representative
Garrett we've been working very
closely with the L. E. S. C.
there was a presentation that
happened in November around
dropout recovery in what's been
happening with national models
around the country and this also
because it's not enacted until
next year allows another
conversation to be happening
through the rule promulgation
process with Ellie S. C. for how
this actually gets you know
fully implemented
Really spring boarded off of
chronic absenteeism making sure
that we're re engaging students
how we're dealing with job
recovery but that presentation
to happen in November.
Okay thank you very much we have
had a motion of four do pass
from Representative lane second
by of Representative Chatfield I
would like to just the rule
would be called.
Representative bapa.
Pass.
Representative Chatfield is.
Representative that yes
Representative Cora yes
Representative Canada yes
Representative les yes
Representative that yes Senator
it yes Representative I am where
yes.
Representative four I have a at
all yes Representative Christine
Trujillo yes ma'am.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
While.
Up to the okay you have a do
pass madam chair thank you very
much thank you very much of
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Okay our next bill is our
presenter here.
Yes you look very different
Senator Diamond.
Yeah.
Okay so we are during the
commute the committee sub.
We're doing the committee
substitute for school reporting
on use of.
Federal funds and welcome back
Representative Madrid were very
happy to see you here so please
start when you're ready thank
you madam chair good morning to
the committee so Senate bill
twenty four what it does that
help address
some of the reporting the the
the funds received by our public
school so as a committee knows
there is roughly one point five
billion federal funds are
received and we do have a range
of data that that on the receipt
of those funds and expenditure
of those funds what this bill
would do as of provide details
on those expenditures how those
expenditures will affect student
achievement and the number of
students served by the funding
and how the funding will help
the school district or charter
school progress towards those
set school goals can you stop
for a second just how we passed
out the committee so no that's
the name of the bill percentage
it's a Senate committee sub.
If the Senate Education
Committee for bill that's just
okay great thank you so I just
wanted to check no chair I I
thought the same thing initially
whenever I read the title so
don't worry so the letter the
legislation before the committee
provides a mechanism for us is
the appropriators as legislators
to capture and both learn from
what school districts are doing
what's been effective in various
parts of our state and the
outcomes of the this billion
dollar of confusion money to our
schools and you know there's
there's five things that are
that are being asked to report
on one is the amount of funding
received the projected impact of
the funding on student
achievement we're asking for
data outlining the progress
towards those program goals the
amount of funding that is
remaining and then lastly
analysis determine if invested
federal funds accomplish the
desired student outcomes with me
as my expert is amount added on
and with that will stand for
questions.
Okay thank you we'll go to the
online people if you are in
support of this bill US Senate
bill twenty four please raise
your hand.
Okay Sarah fitzgerald.
The morning again madam chair
members of the committee and
senator Charles senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chambers in full support of
this transparency measure as you
heard today our state has seen
more than a billion dollars in
extra federal funding go through
our schools over the course of
the pandemic that's an avalanche
and sticking our districts and
schools a long time to spend it
down this bill will make sure
that they're spending it first
of all so that it's being spent
and not just sitting in accounts
but secondly so that it's going
towards smart investments that
serve our students every New
Mexican and especially parents
of New Mexican students should
have access to the information
around this once in A.
generation fusion of federal
funding into our schools thank
you.
Thank you.
The next of please identify
yourself in greater detail and
M. O. S. T..
Yes hi at chair and members of
the committee this is my son
back and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico out
of school time network we stand
in support of this bill and we
I'm particularly interested in a
twenty percent set aside at the
district level for learning loss
after school and summer learning
and we believe that this will be
audited by the feds also so it
will be really critical to keep
a tab on how the schools are
allocating this particular set
aside so we really appreciate
this whole effort to track funds
and also the impact on our
students and the community thank
you so much thank you.
will now go to people in the
room if you are in support of
this bill please raise your
hand.
Okay I don't see anybody
supporting it will now go to
opposition if you are online and
you oppose this bill please
raise your hand.
Okay see nobody online if you're
in the room and you oppose this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay we'll go to this side first
so stand and then the looming.
Madam chair and as much as I.
Individuals the special
representative.
we are to do this.
It's already submitted through
our like tribes there are two
parts.
Included in this bill that may
not be totally collected yet to
comment about the twenty
percent.
That in fact in my views over
regulated by our state
department of education because
we were to have to go through
two or three iterations of the
planning and the implementation
submissions for budget approval.
So I guess someone check madam
chair at this point I believe
that statute should have
purposes that don't replicate or
duplicate for you already.
I'm not debating that we should
be reported.
Representative no need for this
bill thank.
Thank you lily may.
The morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Mexico for some ciation I would
be remiss if I didn't mention of
two of our.
From.
You've heard me speak to the
funded mandates and the other
proposition we have is we do see
paperwork and unnecessary of
work that are the ministers have
to do that takes away from the
classroom we opposes because of
those items and instead of the
purpose of the bill is an
unfunded mandate and it creates
more work for support for
superintendents are staff and
those are super association said
they believe much of this is
already collect thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you anybody on this side
wish to speak in opposition this
is your chance Bolin students
at.
How did those air purifiers you
know
okay with that we'll go to the
committee Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair but chair
I have a question that I just.
But hopefully it's not a rabbit
trail but I'm looking at this I
see but a billion dollars a left
on the table is just my
interpretation of it I know in
the in other areas we've done
what's called a revenue swap and
that's so revenue swap means if
you pay for things with the
federal funds that are that are
allocated for those things but
may have been paid for by with
state funding and then you're
able to take credit for the
money left on the table I hate
to see a billion dollars go back
to anywhere I like it stay in
New Mexico so is there anybody
in this room madam chair that
can speak to me about how we can
keep this one billion dollars
from reverting to Washington DC
thank you.
The manager at a tech initial
correct at that at least and
then in on whatever the chair
like to do after that but I
think that's part of the intent
behind the bill is to make sure
that we have reports better
tracking not only the spending
of the money but tying it to
student outcomes and I do agree
sort of with the public
testimony that were already
receiving that information but
we're not having it tied to
student outcomes so there is if
you look in the in the F. R.
shows us as well if you look in
the rate dashboard it does show
spending funds remaining across
our local districts.
But there's no connection
between that and student
outcomes and so that's a
difference of what this bill
would do is to make sure that
there is in fact reporting
around that connection to
student outcomes to make sure
that that money doesn't revert
to the feds.
Thank you and anybody from PED
wish to comment on it.
Identify yourself to.
Committee my name up on your T.
director of finance and
operations for the public
education department currently
from the components in this bill
already yes to have a dashboard
on the PED website it shows just
wanted to give you the
allocations the total allocation
classify district by charter
schools that they received and
their expenditures.
Ross getting the third one for
the market for.
On our website next sixty days
we are collecting expenditure
data on also on top of if
district and charter.
Why I did that for about twenty
four that have.
Make sure.
For the outcome from the thought
that that that that our state
school districts are for
spending their money on it's
going to be hard to measure
without a lot of it is with the
for our class in the.
Ms.
Thanks for the question.
Thank you very much was K..
Thank you Mr okay next we have
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr leader for bringing this bill
so I was gonna ask you know what
was the impetus behind this and
I got a hint of that but one of
the things is in my previous
role before I search to source
materials I work with I want in
a no met madam chair
representative of many of these
funds at all and flow through
the title one office through the
PED and so there are they're
already built in with our
reporting requirements within
that but
I have a question though Madam
chair representative so looking
at the at the different just for
funds I think it I am under the
impression that they were meant
for different things those
segment for get to purchase
technology somewhere open to the
for students for student
outcomes for out there was some
on there for a I think either of
the L. O. X. will available
expenditures we look for the air
purifiers and things of that
nature so.
What what what do with many of
the school districts did was the
the utilize these funds and the
flexibility of the ****
purchased the things that they
needed to invest in the things
that they needed to the me that
local decision to do that and up
my my question is is.
This bill are we just asking for
student outcomes only or are we
asking for other investments
were made in the schools in the
in in in the classroom are we
asking for technology as well
what what what are we looking
for specifically on this Madam
chair representative chair of
all financially incident and
handed to my experts so to be
clear this the report is only
asking for unspent monies we're
not asking for money that are
even spent and and this would
not change how the monies could
be spent this is just looking at
it from the eyes of being
appropriators the appropriating
body just will asking for a
report on the project of impact
of the unspent funding on
student outcomes
and how they are progressing
towards those project outcomes
and all that miss everyone
answers well.
Yes madam chair representative
so.
You are correct when they when
Congress passed this legislation
that enabled us to get the one
point five billion dollars in
funding there were buckets that
it was supposed to go into so
the total amount The New Mexico
received ten percent of that
went directly to the PED the
other ninety percent was to
distributed directly to
districts that is where the
districts that had to come up
with a plan to say what are we
going to do with these funds
those funds had to twenty
percent of it needed to be
directed towards addressing
learning loss the other eighty
percent could be used for a wide
variety of expenditures so the
initial reports that have been
done for that initial checkpoint
with districts how are you going
to use this money and for what
purpose what this is saying now
is almost like a progress report
like we would do for students at
the beginning of the school year
when parents come in for that
first teacher conferences here's
where student is here's what we
plan to do this year to get your
student on track but then you
have a check in at the middle of
the year and you have a check in
at the end of the year to say
did we accomplish what we set
out to accomplish if not what do
we need to change we think that
this is a tremendous opportunity
because as Representative
Chatfield said there is a one
million dollars remaining in our
S. R. funds and we have nineteen
months before the deadline to
spend it.
You all as appropriators note
that some of these programs are
doing tremendous things for
children and we want to know
what's working mainly so we can
come back in nineteen months and
say this was a really great
thing that our schools did and
we think it should be scaled
statewide and we need you to
back fill the federal funding
that we used to do it we think
that this is an excellent
opportunity for our districts
center charter schools to
highlight what has worked and
when they have realize Hey this
thing that we set out to do
maybe isn't yielding the results
that we plant that's fine this
is not a gotcha this is the time
to say let's stop let's redo our
plan and let's decide how we can
best invest one billion dollars
for New Mexico three hundred
twenty thousand public school
system students in the next
nineteen months so that in
nineteen months we can look back
and say that was a good use of
those funds.
Thank you for that madam chair
Representative out
expert so.
You're you're telling me right
now that there is one billion
dollars a has been on spent.
Chair Dr Madam chair
representative so of the three
distribution so that one point
five billion in total was
distributed in three sections so
S. R. one was ninety seven
million dollars ninety nine
percent of that has been spent
so we're pretty much closed out
of us or one you can see that on
PED's dashboard S. R. two was
another four hundred and one
million dollars and that was
that is sixty percent spent by
our districts S. R. three eight
hundred and eighty million
dollars and as of the FIR in
that information I'm sorry
Esther three isn't included in
the PED portal at this time that
is what
PED is and will be updated by
April I'm only three percent of
that has been spent so far and
so yes the both of these funds
one billion dollars is still
remaining to be spent and must
be obligated by September of
twenty twenty for a mentor in
that's correct do they can they
can cover those funds and use
some for later and and that's
that's your standard practice
without what what I'm concerned
with madam chair representative
is that you know not to not to
echo what was said earlier with
the with the with the experts
but one of the things is is you
know where there's already
systems in place are doing this
and if you're if we're focusing
of this bill is focusing on
student outcomes and not
necessarily all the other
expenditures I I Madam chair
representative I believe that
some of those federal funds were
also used to pay salaries for
certain people and so you for
certain positions so that's not
included in the student outcomes
of technology is not included in
the in the student outcomes the
purchase air purifiers and
infrastructure improvements are
made are not included in the
student outcomes so there's a
big chunk of money that was used
for other purposes to to to.
Get the schools running at to
make sure that they deliver the
the instruction to the students
that wasn't particularly
attached to student outcomes so
I I I believe better chair and
and Representative that kind of
excuse it a little bit there and
one of the things that I would
like to ask chair if it's okay.
A deputy secretary of Cassilis
of if it's okay chair is there a
portal reserve some of the work
the public can see how that
money is being spent.
Madam chair representative.
yes as I I and.
Director
there is a point that shows.
The balances for each district
already that is that information
is already submitted
Representative well
there's various ways that
districts are asked to report.
Funding which all of the time
passer.
Recovery money as well that and
there are different mechanisms
for how schools are being
accountable for student
achievement for example every
school has a ninety day.
These plans that they work on to
track how they're moving through
the school year the district has
the EDD plans that is required
statutorily where they're
reporting on various indicators
in terms of their plans there
how they intend to spend their
money how they spend their money
how is that related to student
achievement hi we do that we a
report through the finance.
Every single expenditure right
gets recorded and there's an art
if you know request for
reimbursement process and that
whole piece so I'd say there are
multiple levels of reporting
that are already occurring where
this information is transparent
available and in terms of of
what's left in as our three
there is nineteen more months
left so I want to put that on
the table it was a lot of money
as we all know I'm sorry
Representative Robert half way
always there and there was a
load of money but the the
general practice is our money in
our money out right and so
districts have been expanding
faster yes or one is done it has
already been spent at the pastor
to where the we have thirty six
percent left to spend so I would
expect with nineteen months left
on SR three that there would be
high balances there we it we've
all in college how much money
came through and they are
spending first in first out of
and reporting integrate internal
right ways both the financial
system and programmatic Lee and
that plan and at the school
level more ninety day.
Madam chair I think my it I want
to.
Address one thing and I think
expert has some comments as well
as I I guess when we talk about
student achievement student
outcomes I do look at spending
on FTEs as as part of that
frankly whether that's in the a
in the classroom whether that's
technology I think those can be
part of the goals towards moving
towards student achievement so I
don't see those two things is
just contradictory
but then I miss are gonna think
you have something that as well
Madam chair representative so I
really appreciate your
description of all the ways that
the federal funds have been
spent and when we see student
outcomes in this piece of
legislation we're not.
Specifically and only talking
about math reading and science
scores we're talking about if if
you have more staff on site if
you have used your answer funds
to hire and more social workers
is have you seen an impact for
that do you have more students
coming to school do you have
more student engagement if
you've hired parent staff to
engage with parents are using
more people come to parent
teacher conferences we we
specifically wrote this
legislation to not only state
math reading and science scores
but what are all the things
you're looking at to determine
whether or not years your
district is making progress and
show us those things that are
working and to your point about
hiring personnel and into
representative eight point this
is actually at the crux of what
we believe the purpose of this
legislation is which is.
Even though the federal guidance
was do not use this money to
hire long term staff because it
is one time money.
We know that a lot of X. out of
need have hired staff and we
want the information so that we
can join together candidly with
the superintendents of
association and others in
nineteen months to say Hey these
things worked having more social
workers worked having more
counselors worked having NBA in
every classroom work and here's
how we know it worked here's the
districts that did it here are
the results that they've shown
so that we can advocate and
encourage the community to
advocate to back fill these
funds when they go away where we
order process and that's really
the issue that we are most
concerned about is yes we
understand that districts have a
tremendous amount of reports
however when you ask families
and candidly teachers across the
state of New Mexico do you know
how your district is spending
their S. or funds do you know
what the plan is the answer is a
resounding no and the reality is
these funds equal four thousand
dollars per student in New
Mexico if you ask parents what
would you have done with four
thousand dollars for your kid
over the last year and a half
they have like I would have
gotten a tutor I would've put
them in a summer program so they
want to partner with districts
to advocate for continued
funding for these programs they
just need access to information
about where when how it worked
so that collectively we can
support it and if that
information already exists I
would argue it is in a place
that is very hard to find
outside of in it for us and
outside of someone pulling that
information together to share it
with parents and communities and
teachers.
Thank you for that
representative and an expert in
madam chair so
Hiring social workers of
implementing certain programs
how we measure its house and Mr.
Intro New Mexico the to the.
I Madam chair representative how
is it measured in terms of
student success madam chair.
I'm madam chair representative I
think we are interested in
hearing from districts like what
when you made a decision to
invest these funds in that way
what outcomes you expect and are
you on track that's really in
section.
I we're not saying these are the
outcomes we expected for you
tell us how you did that we're
saying what outcomes did you
expect with the investment of
these funds as a district
knowing your local community
better than anyone and are you
on track are those outcomes on
track if not again.
We're not saying gotcha you're
in trouble we're saying let's
pause reset you have a million
dollars left would you want to
do with it to make the most
impact so.
That is up to the districts to
tell.
Us through these reports what
they expected and whether or not
those outcomes are being met
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that answer
so then it's merely based on
antidote anecdotal evidence of.
Madam chair representative
I would hope that it would be
anecdotal that the district
would have some sort of
mechanism to say.
Again these are that the the
plan was to put a social and
actually so cial worker in every
school so that we can re engage
students that we haven't heard
from throughout the thirteen
months that kids were in school
buildings we now know that of
those students that we lost
track of during that time eighty
percent of them are back in
school and on track.
That wouldn't be anecdotal in my
opinion but that would be an
example of a district said we
had a plan to do this.
This is where that plan is where
that plan stands today and
here's the indicators that show
us that that plan is working as
intended thank you madam chair
can we have please secretary
Seles W. secretary just because
chair representative so in
addition to the web site do that
I just described that shows the
expenses and the drawdown each
district is required to have
their S. R. plan posted on their
website as well and that is
already occurring so that plants
said here's what we expect from
that and in terms of whether or
not districts are stopping to
take stock of if the
interventions of the chosen
whether they're direct services
to students through FTE whether
they're materials whether
they're safety equipment he off
everything that H. fax systems
districts to do that annually to
prepare their and plans so they
look at all of the planning that
they need to do how does how
that worked out what are the
achievements what are the I
would say the KPIs that key
performance indicators that we
were hoping to find of the
district and they use that to
develop their at plans which
they said meant with their up
prior to getting budget approval
every single year as required by
statute by this legislature at
the district at the school level
they do that as well with ninety
day academic planning so they're
looking to see what was are
people affirmative indicator of
what were we trying to
accomplish in this ninety days
how did all of our resources are
Assur our regular title one our
operational dollars any requests
that they've gotten and they
they do that analysis of the
school level so I I would not
assume that they're not doing
that and most of them do that.
Make those decisions and include
parent involvement and
engagement so I'm not saying
that transparency arching the
path is not saying transparency
is not needed and expected but I
think that and I was in that I
keep the spirit of this
legislation is really important
I do want to say that but I
think we have mechanisms in
place already that would create
additional burdens so what
districts are already doing.
Thank you.
Thank you W. secretary madam
chair and so it was mentioned
earlier if that the parents and
the public don't know what the
school districts are doing with
their response so I council
website of my school district
scroll down and there is just
for funds click on it and it
tells you how they're spending
the money what the plan is so it
seems to me that were that were
duplicative with us I understand
the intent I understand the the
need for accountability but the
the systems already in place
it's a matter of of utilizing
the system these systems
correctly and if we do have a
question you know just if I have
a question locally I'll contact
my local school district and ask
you how are you spending the
money not necessarily having to
to to join EPRA or to go to that
extent but the information is
available and I I like like I
said I understand the intent I
I'm all for accountability I am.
But you know the the systems
already in place and
yeah I I I I don't know I I
don't know how we feel about
this bill but that you know I
just want to become point madam
chair that the systems are in
place we need to utilize what we
have.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you a Representative role.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative most of the
questions a different a lot
already and throw them
because of my first background I
love that reporter competing
data and making sure that we
take the C. shape with that I
just in my classroom all the
time
My concern is just say it but it
is not I got to slide talks to
really hit about how is it going
to affect the status was
achievement and that if in the
first period of the second one
is we're talking with with kids
and situations in life that
changes so much money we want to
put anyone backs and majority of
them in the same way we're gonna
have the final results and if
it's not a spell out here how we
want to make sure that this was
achievement could you talk about
that outcomes.
Social workers how they are we
see the kids and that's good
best with the shipments of the
apartment topic and I'm afraid
this is not a spill out how
would I use that and why we have
gone in the past through where
we teachers waiting that we got
to and we're gonna make sure
that you are responsible for
whatever achievement we put at
and so I'm afraid that he
couldn't goal to to worse that
side of making myself clear
about that I gave them that
language here it could be
concerns me that it cooled
change that portable so when
you're talking to here it
doesn't show what you're saying
specifically.
I don't know you have twenty two
out here Representative the yes
please the madam chair Madam
chair representative corolla.
Specifically for the reasons
that you're concerned about we
did not want to be too
prescriptive in defining student
achievement or student outcomes
for the purposes of.
Because we do like the PED agree
that our districts have a plan
that they put in place when
these funds started
in I want to say may of twenty
twenty.
To do override any of things
increase attendance get students
back online get students
computers get them connected to
the internet a bunch of things
that we certainly hope yields
results in things like math and
reading scores but we understand
that there was a need that might
be outside of in direct
correlation to math and reading
growth or science growth and so
we did not want to put that in
here and that's part of the
reason that we leave that open
ended for the districts to say
here's what we set out to do we
set out to improve H. back of
our buildings because we
recognize that we have that air
quality in our buildings we are
we've seen this the air quality
of our buildings has improved
because we invested X. amount of
dollars in more for thirteen
filters or whatever it might be
so we the intent is to be very
inclusive of whatever goals that
districts that and for this
legislation to not tell
districts we expect to see
Excellency the other point that
I would make is we do think the
outcome information is important
partly because we still have
that billion dollars to spend
but I just want to remind
everyone why the federal
government gave us these dollars
to begin with it was because
there was an acknowledgement
across the country that comment
had a major impact on our
students students who I need not
remind anyone in this committee
we're already far behind our
peers nationally when you look
at national benchmarks and so if
the purpose of these funds was
to help our students recover
from the impacts of the COVID
nineteen pandemic our question
is do we as a population do we
as the general public and do you
as legislators have access to
clear concise information about
how that money was spent with
the impact of that funds what.
As so that in nineteen months
you can make decisions about
what program should be funded
through state funding when the
federal money goes away and that
is the part that we believe is
currently lacking yes you can
find district plans on all of
their website and kudos to PED
who is aggregated all of those
district pans on their website
so you just have to go to the
PED site and then you can find
every district plans but those
plans were put together almost
two years ago all this does is
says let's stop let's pause
let's check in on those plans
and see if they're doing what we
intended them to do.
Thank you thank you madam this
Madam Mr chair representative it
sounds good but I'm afraid that
after you move from here that's
an issue maybe because he was
not and it doesn't have to be
specific pretty quickly like I
don't know according to the
school district goals something
are pretty we leave it's such an
open ended we could be it we
have many different the
provision in the future and
that's my concern because we
have gone through that was not
that great experience as a
teacher and I think anyone in
the call from you how stressful
the how damaging for the kids
Wessel just that much of the
COVID what do you say is great I
like it I like to be able to
compare what works in the
programs.
Just feels likes to vote for
anybody in the future to to give
thank to petition that they want
and make it through the rough
for us we we when I know what
for the teachers who know what's
needed in the classroom thank
you thank you madam chair and
president.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair I have a
quick question for the W.
secretary.
is is the executive orders still
in place that the governor
Signed in I think it was last
year sometime to remove the
The it to remove the burden of
the of of paperwork and
reporting and all of that is
that still in place.
Coming out of that executive
order is still a place to.
administrative burdens
administer educational system at
all levels thank you madam chair
and thank you madam secretary
just wanted to make sure that
everyone was aware that that is
in place and I agree with
everyone Representative Lara
asked all the questions
I I do think it's a duplication
of of systems and we have things
in place to measure student
success by far thank you Mr
Representative Ezzell for second
time.
Sorry.
Representative Alcon top twenty.
The HSD wasting calling for the
first time.
And if we don't ask the
questions here will discuss the
mom floor let go longer.
Madam chair thank you very much.
That we have a lot of money that
can be used on our kids I
understand what I'm being told
what I'm reading here and also
reports that I've just centered
read and read last night that we
still have a lot of money in
this all has to be dispersed
before September thirtieth
twenty twenty four is that
correct Madam chair
representative in needs to be
obligated obligated okay just
obligating there's a big
difference there isn't there.
So madam chair I also read in
the legislative education study
committee bill analysis that
this is implemented two years
ago secrete that created a
standardized form that is
gripping is about the school
districts is that correct and
that parents if they want to
they can pull that up see with
this money is being spent and my
correct there Mr chair
representative yes the plans
that were originally down are
available okay but are they
still going to be using madam
chair and representative
will they still be using the
standardize forms for the future
whenever this other money is
being distributed being spent by
the local districts Mr chair
representative that is our
concern okay at when the plans
were originally submitted that
that was at the beginning and
there is no mechanism.
Aside from the normal reporting
for all SCG funds and all school
spending that require that
districts say hate yes we're
still using the funds for that
or no we've pivoted for these
reasons okay.
All right thank you chair and
Let's see here we are.
Another thing is written on the
house committee analysis was and
I do like reading these because
they do there are able to
research a little bit deeper
than I am just going through
this stuff.
Of.
The disruption.
Of learning of our students that
was paramount as far as the
first part of money can begin is
that correct.
Mr chair representative it was
paramount for all three hundred
to funding just okay and to me
we have to get our kids back on
track we do yeah I mean that's
just all there is to it
crawl quality control the thank
all of you know remember me
talking about the problem we
were having down there dexter
which is totally unacceptable
those kids still are not back in
that screen yet and I'm still
upset about it and I hope
whoever's up there listing gets
off their fan base and does
something about it right now.
but this also.
Representative Lara brought up
part about how is this going to
directly affect our students
this can be Steinborn.
Summer programs extended
learning programs tutoring can
to during fall into that realm
of it
It also helps the kids with that
of that have disabilities is
that correct madam chair and
representative Mr chair
representative what we have seen
through our landscape analysis
across the country is that many
states and districts have use
this funding for variety of
purposes and a variety of
intended purposes so some
districts have decided you know
what we are special education
students really suffered by not
being able to be in school so
we'll give will grant this money
directly to families so that
they can use it or we will
find a summer learning
experiences you know we know so
many families here in New Mexico
who send their students to
summer school at the academy or
at Sandia prep or at their local
science museum those things cost
money some districts in some
states across the country have
use their federal just for fun
to say we're gonna make that
available to all students at no
cost so yes tutoring yes summer
programming yes extended
learning time the options are
truly endless okay so madam of.
Which madam chair Mister chair.
Okay you're still it.
Madam it of.
So I am seeing that all these
funds that are remaining here
can be helpful in enhancing our
students learning processing
capability.
And madam chair what more could
we just for if the if this is
going to.
District our kids through many
of these learning processes that
would just build out right here.
Hackley state noted that thank
you very much.
From anybody else then mandate.
The.
Representative Romero mentioning
to table okay Sir second second
from Rebecca video
Representative for both.
K. we have a motion to table of.
Madam secretary can you take the
role yes.
Representative Brian no to
table.
Representative Chatfield the.
Representative Ezzell no to
table.
Representative corona yes.
Representative yes.
Representative Lane no no to
table.
Representative Lara.
Yes the table.
Representative Madrid.
Representative my lan Moya.
She representative for both
covered at all yes to table.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes to pay.
Chairman Romero yesterday.
Madam chair yes to table.
Seventy five if we can we have
we have Representative over
Representative or fall.
my lan lan.
Yes to table no no to table
okay.
we have seven two six.
K. so Representative has been
tabled thank you thank you for
present and take.
And with that that concludes our
three bills and I do believe
we've been.
Call center of if I may right
away we do have a birthday are
awesome Committee assistant
Linda it's her birthday today.
Thing I think the phone more
times happy birthday to you
Happy Birthday to.
Happy.
Hi you for that.
