Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser your.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Dow.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chairwoman Garrett.
Chairman Romero.
Here eight two zero.
R. as in the sorry all right all
right so we have a quorum good
morning everybody I hope you all
are doing well so we're gonna go
ahead and get started with house
bill two seventy one so
Senator Hemphill the what I
don't know if you had a a a an
expert witness.
I'm actually the main sponsor is
Senator Herald pope and he's
popping over but I can and he
was in Senate education right
now but I let him know that
they're ready at your ready for
us so he's coming over but I can
Mr chairman sorry thank I'm a
little out of sorts as.
But Mr chairman I can start if
that would be okay with you yeah
yeah you it would be great we're
just struggling for Sanchez or
hope to respect everybody's time
and I see Senator hope.
In over and I'm gonna promote
you to panelists as well okay
thank you Mr chairman.
Yes good morning Senator pro
we're gonna start off with.
Your house bill.
All right are Senate bill Senate
bill two seventy one so please
when you already.
Thank you Mr chair I'll go ahead
and get started are about that
so I'm here this morning to
present Senate bill two seventy
one purple stars start school
program I also have my co
sponsor senator crea Hemphill
here's well this is a state
sponsored recognition program
designed to emphasize the
importance of assisting military
children with school transition
and developing programs that
recognize the value of military
service and Senate
responsibility the average
military connected child will
experience six to nine different
schools during their K. through
twelve education experience with
more than one point one million
such students attending schools
issues surrounding and school
transition have become a top
priority for families and some
schools New Mexico has the
opportunity to make things
easier for military families
frequently on the move by
establishing the purple star
school program that addresses
such issues as gaps and overlaps
and courses being taught
deferring graduation
requirements and social and
emotional challenges.
Purple star programs primarily
because it makes schools as
military family once they
demonstrate a major commitment
to students and families
connected to our nation's
military states such as Ohio
Texas Virginia already recognize
schools meeting there this
criteria and they do this by
designating a school school
staffs as a point of contact for
military students and families.
They require some professional
development of staff assigned as
a PLC for the military they
designate a page on their
website featuring resources and
information for military
families.
At least one supplement mental
activity such as professional
development or school board
passing a resolution in support
of military children.
One additional way that a school
could be recognized as a purple
star program
if they do not have military
families in their school system
is to emphasize military service
and recognizing veterans and
active duty members of the
National Guard and reserves and
their community so they can get
this recognition as well by
recognizing the accomplishments
of veterans and active duty
members sponsoring special
events recognizing military
service or celebrating class
members are graduates that are
committing to military service
with that being said I like to
give an opportunity for my
co sponsor senator Cree have
focus if you worked.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
honored to sponsor co sponsor
this bill with Senator pope I'm
proud that New Mexico has one of
the highest rates of military
volunteerism are veterans or
those serving in the mail and
those serving in the military
and maybe just such incredible
sacrifices and serve our country
and defend our freedom and one
of our greatest responsibilities
is just honoring their service
and this is something that we
can do to help provide some
support for their children when
they transition to new schools
I'm a school psychologist and I
work with children who
experience social and emotional
challenges and research shows
that transitioning between
schools transitioning between
classrooms and changing teachers
is one of the highest stressors
in a child's life and so
whatever supports we can
implement and schools can help
to address those challenges and
so the purpose starts school
program just helps children feel
more connected and paves the way
for them to have successful
lives and ultimately will
benefit Deltic be able to
benefit from just growing into
strong and skilled people who
can contribute to our work force
if we can help to promote that
connection within the schools
when they transition so thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Mr chair and committee members
the primary goal of this
legislation is to help our
military kids that relocate to
our military budget bases
throughout the state but also
our guard and reserve forces but
I also add that the secondary
effect of this legislation just
like to be advanced enroll
enrollment legislation that I
brought forward as well is it
helps us with the department of
defense we're competing for
missions that are coming into
our state the DOD always looks
at you know statistics like
housing education you know job
opportunities what's going on
with crime but also how are we
taking care of our military
family so this is just something
that we can do not only is the
right thing to do for families
but it makes us more competitive
at a national level with that
being said Mr chair committee
members right we're ready for
questions or any public comment.
Right thank you senator so we'll
go to the attendees list is
there anybody in support of
Senate bill two seventy one.
Wishes to speak sports.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is there opposition
Senate Bill.
Everybody is neutral so come to
committee.
Committee members comments
questions.
Representative Lara please.
Presented of you're on mute.
there you go that's better.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senators reading this I I think
this is a really good idea I
really like it I just have one
question I live in southern Dona
Ana County and my house district
borders the apostle Texas area
so with this also apply to
families who are stationed at
Fort Bliss that attend our
schools.
Mr chair were Representative are
it would even though that's an
issue of the borders the reality
is we're just worried about the
kids that are attending schools
here in the state and and and
it's a recognition so you're
gonna have students at white
Sander gonna have students that
you said it for bless that are
living in the area and and yes
it would be supported of those
military kids okay thank you Mr
chair thank you senators thank
you.
Thank you Representative are
representative Lente that
please.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning our presenters would
appropriate like a do pass
motion on this bill.
Great thank you Representative
all hold on to that
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
presenters it is a a wonderful
bill and a good companion to
your other bills which we passed
out of your unanimously but my
only question was in the FY R. I
noticed that they had suggested
and on the NBC five that that
wording be changed from military
students to students of military
families to be consistent to the
whole bill it doesn't look like
that's been changed everywhere
have you discussed that as you
move this bill along or just
curious as to why that change
wasn't implemented.
Mr chair representative Sweetser
that is something that we will
do we now consider that and and
we'll make sure that happens
before on the floor four four.
Okay perfect that seem to be the
only inconsistency in the bill
and as I said it the past year
companion bill out of your
unanimously so so nice job on
aligning schools with military
emphasis so thank you for that
Senator thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you Representative
in in your pointing out
something that I spoke to
Senator pope yesterday about it
so we got an amendment however
we have some some issues with
our legislative assistance so
that is something that they've
committed to putting on the
floor as it straightening that
issue up that's identified in
the FIR Representative Figueroa
please.
Thank you Mr chair when
appropriate I just want to
second the motion.
All right so all I'll ask one
last time if there is anybody
else that wishes to speak before
I take that motion.
All right seeing none.
I will accept that motion is
there any opposition to the do
passed motion.
Okay.
You have a do pass on Senate
bill two seventy one thank you
senators for being here thank
you thank you Mr chair committee
members.
Right all right.
No lowered Annelies handrail
Representative Figueroa.
Okay you.
I want to move to.
Senator.
All.
Good morning senator.
All right so we are all right I
think in the committee good
morning as a committee we're
familiar with this we've heard
it once before here in this
committee and then we've heard
on the house floor so is
wondering if you could give us
just a very brief overview and
and potentially if there are any
changes with the compare and are
the the more bill that started
off in in.
The house.
Yes Mr chairman and good morning
what is the asset to everyone
and I know my my as the
settlement co sponsor of course
is here with us Representative
got a yellow but Mr chairman and
Senate bill two ten it is very
similar to the bill that I was
here with I co sponsor and we're
finding you're committee with
the ethics studies
legislation
that one change that I did make
to this bill that's in front of
your committee Mr chairman and
members is there was a comment
that was made I think by
Representative Figueroa about
the consistency of dates.
and I think we have and that was
inadvertently left off so that
the amendment to send the bill
does mention for those students
who are K. through three that it
does starting the school year
twenty twenty three through
twenty four and also the same
for the grades four through
eight because the high school of
course was already listed
starting in that particular
school year so this is the
consistency that will run K.
through twelve Mr chairman
members of the committee and
then there was one other
amendment that senator schools
had made.
And it was in the the language
of where the secretary was to
make appointments of for the
council and instead of may
Senator souls wanted to make
sure that is that shell that way
we would make sure that the
person who are on the list would
be appointed plus anyone else
that the secretary was deem is
appropriate and those are the
changes Mr chairman members of
the committee.
All right thank you senator for
that so if it's okay we'll go to
the attendees list and see if
they are in support for Senate
bill two ten feud indicate where
is your hand if you wish to
speak.
Enrollment.
All right so you have up to two
minutes.
Chair and please good morning.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman committee members my
name is Sharon Berman and I'm a
strategic civic engagement a
policy manager and registered
lobbyist for New Mexico First.
Over five hundred participants
at the health town hall we
convened last year strongly
impressed upon us the need for
cultural competency in education
as well as other areas the
temporary provision in the act
to create a diverse an expert
counsel to advise the PED on
ethnic studies curricula is a
solid step toward cultural
competency in our schools which
will directly improve what the
well being of New Mexico
students and communities we
applaud Senator Lopez for
bringing this bill forward and
we respectfully request that you
support Senate bill two ten
thank you.
Right thank you.
Okay good morning Derek give up
two minutes please morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Andrew and I'm
representing Mexico voice for
children we would like to thank
sponsors for bring boards
important bill invoice our
strong support ethnic studies
provide children with valuable
education on their own this
these as well as other diversity
this is that comprise our
communities in New Mexico not
only is this important for
accurately telling the rich
multi ethnic history of United
States and excise Education has
been shown to help build
connectivity among diverse
communities Representative with
the understanding and
compassion.
Right now our public education
great and small short providing
culturally competent structure
for our old for for our multi
ethnic classrooms this bill will
help correct that shortcoming we
urge you your support thank you.
Thank thank you.
All right so we'll go to Sen.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
A good morning members of the
committee and Mr chairman my
name is Dr solicitor and I had
asked an assistant professor to
control states that U. N. M. I'd
like to thank the sponsors of
the bill for bringing it forward
and I hope that the committee
here a supports the bill as a
data Representative I'll go
about calling it was built and I
speak in support of it given my
own experience teaching ethnic
studies too high school students
in the past and how that
heavily improves their desire to
continue on to higher education
and the ability to relate to the
education given to them I think
this is incredibly important
bill for the state of New Mexico
which is always been incredibly
diverse so thank you for your
time and I hope hope you support
this bill.
Thank you.
Steve good morning Steve you
have two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
see this any a New Mexico
government relations director on
behalf of our members we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward.
Senator national studies
demonstrate convincingly that
multicultural education programs
are very beneficial to students.
Actually the group of students
demanding as the Martinez or
seventy percent of our New
Mexico students this bill does a
great job at closing the
achievement gap and as a
research demonstrates we need to
incorporate education programs
that balcony students culture
and ethnicity for these reasons
we support.
Just be to ten we echo the
sentiment in support of public
comment and we ask that you vote
in favor of SB ten thank you.
Thank you.
All right so go to Charlotte.
Good morning Charlotte you have
up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is are
that much I know I work with
Juliana who I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico coalition
first of sexual assault programs
and we ask you to stand with us
in support of Senate bill to ten
today thank you.
Thank you.
All right so go to Robert.
Morning Robert two minutes
welcome good morning Mr chair
members of the committee Robert
Prosto I teach Mexican American
studies at highland high school
in Albuquerque this morning my
class was studying of learning
about the walkouts in nineteen
sixty eight in Los Angeles those
what codes were part of the
they're they're initiative their
demands was for ethnic studies
classes in their schools it has
been fifty years it is time for
the their demands to be met and
so are you as for your support
on the bill thank you.
Great thank you.
All right.
Good morning you have a two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I like to think
the Sanchez bringing this bill
forward and I would also echo
with everybody else that that
studies is needed here in New
Mexico I strongly support this
bill and ethnic studies there is
a way to help.
HM representation into the
curriculum that students are
learning and I urge you all to
support this bill thank you.
Right thank you.
That we're speaking.
Or it will go to options so.
The last one the thirty four
looks like.
APS account.
Good morning if you could please
identify yourself.
You have a two minutes.
Yes my name is Veronica Medina I
am a.
The Mexican American studies
teacher at Albuquerque high and
also just thank you good morning
Mr chairman and committee I also
hope that you
of.
Please pass this along.
For us it's so important to our
students at Albuquerque high
they've been teaching at here of
the Mexican American studies of.
For four of fifty years and it's
just to have
To have it be.
More important.
Please pass this thank you.
Thank you.
All right actually.
Good morning you have a two
minute.
Thank you so much.
Instructor and the student I
would just like to say that.
I urge you to strongly support
the spell more than half of the
fifty million Cape the twelve
students enrolled in the US
public schools are students of
color.
And we know that that number is
even larger here in New Mexico.
Students are often leading
demands for racial justice and
education we have seen that I'm
again and again and we know that
they want to curriculum that
includes the voices and
perspectives of communities of
color on that the desire has
increased the demand for ethnic
studies on a wide range of
community.
They start all local.
It will only be benefited more
as they strive for higher
education and higher
understanding of themselves and
they are.
Thank you so much.
Great thank you all right.
So we'll go to opposition is
their opposition to Senate Bill.
All right if not we'll come to
committee committee members
comments questions concerns.
Mr chair moody **** second chair
great so we have a due pass
motion by Representative Lara
second buyer Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Madam secretary if you call the
roll on a deep pass motion
please.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield so.
Representative Dow.
Representative figura.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lenti.
Yes.
Representative Madrid or not
just.
Yes.
If
I could go back on
Representative Madrid was that a
yes.
Yes.
First row what we are.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Dow.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Trujillo vice
chairwoman Garrett and chairman
Romero.
Yes I have seven two three.
All right bye voted seven to
three you have a do pass on
Senate bill eight to ten thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you bye.
Great thank you all all right so
that concludes our agenda today
quick and easy and obviously
things are in flux as we get
things passed over from the
Senate so please be on the
lookout in on the listen out I'm
on the floor and they make the
announcements but will be
putting together on the agenda
as it comes but it does not look
like we will have a Saturday so
look for Monday's agenda coming
out okay I can't guarantee about
the floor I have no say over
that
but with that we will recess
until further notice hi
everybody.
Thank you all very Rachel and
Taylor can we meet.
Okay I'll send the invite gonna
drag you into that meeting
table.
