Representative oral.
Representative Marrial Moya.
Representative for Val
Caballero.
Representative Collin.
Representative Torres Valesca.
Representative Vincent Madden
vice chair Garrett here.
Truman.
We do have a corn.
All right. Good morning, folks.
Um,
Representative Chavez, House
Bill 64.
We'll let you go ahead and get
started. I know you're waiting
on your expert, but is your
expert comes in, we can give her
some time to speak as well.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. um, yes, I do have um.
Some comments that I want to
read about how spill 264, which
is an act expanding the spoke,
the scope of non discrimination
and eligibility for education
benefits.
Uh, in-state tuition and
financial aid for adult
immigrant workers.
HB 64 would have would amend
NMSA 21-1-4.6, the state's
non-discrimination and tuition
equity law passed in 2005 to
allow adult immigrant workers
and taxpayers' access to
end-state tuition and financial
aid credit for.
Financial aid for credit and
non-credit training programs at
community college.
colleges.
It would extend eligibility to
those who have attended adult
education programs in New Mexico
for at least a year, worked in
filed, New Mexico income tax
returns or New Mexicans who are
applying for special immigrant
juvenile status.
New Mexico has a big workforce
problem. There are only 55
available workers for every 100
open jobs. There are currently
65,000 available jobs in New
Mexico and not enough residents
of working age to fill them.
Some of the most acute a job
shortages are in childcare.
Home-based healthcare,
construction and trades and
broadband installation.
12 % of New Mexico workers are
immigrants in key industries and
a significant percentages of
working age.
According to data from the
migration Policy Institute,
approximately 61.6% of foreign.
Foreign born individuals aged 16
and older are part of the
civilian labor force.
New Mexicans with a high school
diploma or equivalency earn
6000.
$465 more per year.
Knowing they could enter skill
skill building job training
programs at community colleges,
this bill would encourage
immigrant workers to obtain
their high school equivalency.
Despite working in critical
industries and paying taxes,
immigrant workers are often
excluded from crucial.
Training programs, government
subsidized apprenticeships,
support services, and tuition
assistance were credit and
non-credit certification
programs at community colleges,
limiting their economic mobility
and contribution to critical
industries.
As our population ages, new
immigrants help keep our economy
growing at a sustainable rate.
Immi immigrants helped me
growing needs for health care,
home care, and supportive
services that are key for older
New Mexicans to have a a
dignified retirement.
Immigrant workers were most
numerous in the following
industries, construction,
accommodation and food services,
healthcare, and healthcare
support such as home health care
aides, re retail, and early
childhood education and
childcare and oil and gas.
Without these amendments, many
immigrant workers cannot afford
to participate in training
programs in high demand
industries, such as childcare,
home-based healthcare,
construction and trades or
broadband installation.
Mr. Chair, uh, and with that I
would like for my expert
witnesses to introduce
themselves and provide any
additional comments. Please
welcome, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Marcela Diaz, statewide.
economic justice, workforce
development and immigrants'
rights organization.
morning chair, members of the
committee. My name is Gabriela
Ivania Guzman. I'm the staff
attorney at Somos Pueblo. Thank
you.
I only wanted oh Mr. Chair,
members of the committee just to
add a little bit of context, uh,
we were here.
Uh, 20 years ago in 2005 uh to
pass.
Uh, or to work on a bill that
would make young people who went
to middle school and high school
in the state of New Mexico
eligible for in-state tuition
and financial aid. They were not
eligible at that time. Um, we
were one of very few states to
provide that to educate
post-secondary education benefit
and uh and now many, many
states, over half of the states
in the country have followed
suit, and many have actually
followed uh some of the ways
that we have implemented that
here in New Mexico and so we are
very proud.
out of that since thousands of
immigrant students have been
able to
Have more education
opportunities and work
opportunities. Many have since
adjusted status, immigration
status, and are now open
businesses and are working in
key industries throughout our
state in rural communities, in
urban areas, um, in healthcare,
education, trades, I really have
really developed lots of
different skills and
opportunities to do that work.
The folks that are excluded from
these educational and work
opportunities, uh, are the
parents, workers who are New
Mexican in our state and who are
also working in key industries
who also would like to have an
opportunity to expand their
educational and work
opportunities uh in some of
these key industries. Our
members, um, and there are
thousands of Somos members uh in
the state who work in oil and
gas in um education in home
health care and retail.
in agriculture, there are a lot
of certificate programs, CTE
programs, certificate programs,
as well, uh, as vocational
programs and trade programs that
are both credit and non-credit,
mostly through the community
colleges that they would like to
have access to by paying
in-state tuition, uh instead of
out of state tuition and also by
having access to um
tuition support through the
growth fund, uh, tuition
support, for instance, or other
forms of financial aid that may
be available to folks in those
non-credit and credit programs.
Currently, most of these folks
are not eligible. Some of them
are, uh, but we would like to
expand that so that our
community can continue to work
in these very key industries.
Be able to be a little more
economically mobile, but also
while entering with more
certificates and credentials
into the key industries that are
absolutely essential to the
workforce of our state. So that
was just the context that I
wanted to provide. Thank you
very much.
And with that, Mr. Cher we sent
for questions.
All right. Thank you all so
much. So we'll go to public
comment. So those that are
online and those that are in the
audience, if you're in favor of
House Bill 64, please raise your
hand.sta aquis is in cuatroo
OK.
Um, we'll start on this side.
Up front with the microphone,
you want to speak?
He's in the front.
To
Yeah
no.
Gracious,
what does the seor presidents so
integrated the somosum pueblo
Unida.
Farmington there are 70 annuals
Farmington there are 70
annualstravalamo
ala cafeteria so mamadosijosos.
And as the momentos to the endo
and urso de idioma.
The mastomono de mathematics the
universitariota is resarios
deanoudiari converter maestra de
espanol.
seria denadasipo de continuos so
studios check momentos no
salemoel triple de loss personas
abibido aquino Mexico.
gracias.
Gracias.
Senora Porfa.
And Buenos dias nombresca
santanaducadora Madrimigrante
deuatroninas miro del centro
deadi derechos.
Yesmoso guosos de las
contribution
chemoslogradounidado de sales
classes in algunas
organizationesitariosmolesias
bio cuando.
classes in CNM Jack Jack Costo
de latricula
local obstaculi diploma trabajo
remunerrado
er Mexico Medije querele detrio
Nuevo Mexico solicitar
financieraa travajadora que
puestos las travajadores untrajo
devida una barrera contiarroyo
de la
and industrial infant
construction ios of a lapoara
cheese cuatro estarandola mala
and industrial infant
construction ios of a lapoara
cheese cuatro estarandola
malagra tengamo juda financierre
and industrial infant
construction ios of a lapoara
cheese cuatro estarandola
malagra tengamo juda
financierretal participar de
la
bona favor
Quattro.
Please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Committee members. My name is
Vanessa Hawker. I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, and we provide many
high skills training programs
throughout the state,
predominantly we serve
non-traditional students. House
Bill 64 would give us the
ability to charge in-state
tuition to those uh
non-traditional students who
have been paying taxes in our
state and treat all equally.
Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, committee members. My
name is Becky Rowley. I'm
president of Santa Fe Community
College, and I'd like to echo
what my colleagues said, but to
um let you all know that there
is a strong immigrant population
in, in Santa Fe that is a
critical part of our workforce.
Santa Fe Community College
offers many programs that would
now be covered under the
Opportunity scholarship, um, a
lot of non-credit workforce
training programs that currently
um
Or, or could be quite expensive
to folks who don't fall under
the opportunity scholarship. So
we see this as a very important
piece of legislation. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Savor.
Ola one of the feno Mexico.
but also.
Pagomi instos.
The country and Santa Fe
osmos.
Do.
For immigrante.
The courasso.
gain.
Bean Sierra
Epagos de couras
no puedo conti porque micro.
studios.
Gracious.
Uh, good morning, if it's OK if
I can interpret for him. Sure.
Hello, good morning. I am
Gilgoberto Hidalgo. I am a
member of Somoso Pueblo Nido. I
have lived in Santa Fe, New
Mexico for 24 years. I've worked
as a chef in several hotels and
restaurants as a worker, I
contribute to the 11% of the
state's workforce. I pay my
taxes, contributing to the
economy of Santa Fe. I studied
English as a second language for
3 years, and I was specializing
in gastronomy for 2 years and
working at the same time, paying
double the tuition for being an
immigrant, plus the material we
use to practice, which is very
expensive because
I still have to pay my rent, my
bills, my gas. There is no state
financial aid for me for tuition
payments, and I cannot continue
with my specialty because it is
very expensive. That is why I
ask you to approve this proposed
law HB 64, which would help us a
lot to continue with my studies.
Thank you. Thank you.
In Europea.
Gracias
Um, good morning. My name is
Theresa Hernandez, and
Thank you, Mr. President and
members of the committee.
I'm here to give testimony of
Ernesto Martinez.
I am an immigrant from Jalisco,
Mexico, and I have been living
in Albuquerque since 2007. I am
part of the organization's El
Centro in in Cuentro, where I
help promote education for
Latinos. El Centro is an
immigrant's rights, civil
rights, and worker justice
organizations.
With more than 5500 members.
We are very proud of the
contributions we have made to
our community.
I am here to present a
significant issue I faced.
When I was trying to enroll in
classes to improve my education
and access better job
opportunities at CNM immigrants
do not receive the same tuition
rates.
As a state's residences, despite
having lived in New Mexico for
more than 2 years, we are
charged higher tuitions simply
because we did not graduate from
a high school in this state,
which is.
Based on our
Immigration status.
Today
I ask you
About in support of HB 64, so
that we can be recognized as
state residents and continue our
education and certification.
Everyone deserves the
opportunity to succeed.
Thank you very much.
Right, thank you for coming.
Please.
Morning, Mr. Chair,
Representatives, uh, first, we
want to thank the sponsors of
this bill. My name is Michael
Leon Guerrero. I'm with the
Center for Civic Policy. We
provide support to grassroots
New Mexico-based organizations
to amplify community and worker
voices and policy decisions that
affect their lives. This bill
would support many working
people in New Mexico that are
taking the initiative to further
their education for careers in
high demand industries. They're
paying taxes and should be
eligible for.
programs as are all other
taxpayers. They have earned this
through their labor and their
dollars. New Mexico is
experiencing a shortage of
workers, particularly in high
demand industries like
childcare, home-based
healthcare, construction and
trades, and broadband
installation. This support would
be essential for these workers
to gain the education and
training they need to feel these
essential jobs. Thank you, and
we urge your support. Thank you.
Please
Morning.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Shos registered
lobbyist for CNM Community
College, and we stand in support
of this legislation, but the
reasons stated by Miss Hawker
and Miss Riley, uh, and also uh
for everybody that has stood in
support, we believe this
expansion is going to be a great
benefit to the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you.
I see yes.
Buenos Dias, um, senior
President Amy Ambrose descent.
Um, a key in Santa Fe Travajo
de Santa Fe
but a complimentary remis
Tores Taal
Mexico loss.
Consomore
um Lily
and muchas gracias.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Gretel Barrita. I'm a
member of Somos Pueblo Nido's
Workers Center here in Santa Fe.
I've worked in the restaurant
industry for 18 years. I am
currently studying for my GED
and want to take courses at the
Chef College to complement my
career with the experience I
have. Unfortunately, the courses
are very expensive and it will
be very difficult for me to
continue if this proposal does
not pass, since I do not qualify
for in-state tuition or
scholarships. I am part of the
11% of workers who drive
the economy of New Mexico.
Immigrants who contribute to our
state deserve opportunities to
progress and continue
contributing more to our
community. For this reason, I
ask you to support HB 64. Thank
you.
Yes yes.
Is the hospital uattro.
No? OK.
Especius online.
Well, uh, Jessica.
Good morning, Jessica.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is uh Jessica Ynez
Martinez, and I'm the director
of policy and coalition building
and an and an immigration
attorney at New Mexico Immigrant
Law Center. As one of New
Mexico's only organizations
providing direct legal services
to immigrant communities, we
stand in support of HB 64. At
New Mexico Immigrant Law Center,
our work is grounded in the
belief that all individuals,
regardless of immigration
status, deserve the opportunity
to contribute to our communities
and our
our economy. I want to thank all
of you for passing the special
immigrant juvenile
Classification Act in 2023,
which expanded access to
immigrant youth who have been
abused, abandoned, and neglected
to qualify for humanitarian
protection in New Mexico. It has
created generational change and
has improved the overall
well-being of immigrant youth in
our state. This bill, HB 64
would further help qualifying
youth that are applying for
special immigrant jubilant
status, which is a humanitarian
pathway towards permanent legal
status and citizenship.
To be able to expand their
educational and work
opportunities. We know that
immigrants enhance our state
economically, culturally and
linguistically, especially when
we are allowed to fully
participate. New Mexico faces a
significant opportunity to
better utilize the contributions
of skilled newcomers and
immigrants who have been
integral to our state for
generations. Despite leading the
nation and removing license
barriers for immigrants, gaps
remain. Credential recognition
issues, language barriers, and
discrimination prevention.
Many skilled immigrants for
contributing fully to the
workforce, worsening labor
shortages and economic
disparities. By supporting this
bill, New Mexico can unlock the
potential of its immigrant
population, addressing workforce
shortages in critical fields
like early childcare,
healthcare, and other important
traits, boosting our economic
growth and enhancing our overall
well-being in this state. Thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Go to
Brianna
Good morning, Brianna. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Thank you. Good morning. Good
morning, chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Brianna Revere. I'm here on
behalf of Earthcare, a
community-based organization on
the south side of Santa Fe with
thousands of members and
supporters dedicated to
environmental justice,
education, and community
well-being. Earthcare strongly
supports HB 64 as it ensures
states state colleges and
universities are accessible to
everyone, despite one's
immigration status. Throughout
our work with families across
Santa Fe, we know how critical
access.
to education is for the
undocumented community members
and mixed status families. HB 64
presents an opportunity to
develop and ensure everyone has
access to necessary resources to
attend post-secondary
institution or pursue academic
opportunities. HB 64 seeks to
create an inclusive educational
system that reflects the diverse
workforce needs of New Mexico by
extending access to in-state
tuition and financial aid for
immigration, immigrant workers.
This
still not only supports
individual aspirations, but also
strengthens the state's economy.
Immigrants play a crucial role
in New Mexico's workforce,
particularly in essential
sectors that drive the state's
economic growth, providing
access to affordable education
and workforce training ensures
these workers can further
develop their skills, contribute
more effectively to the economy
and improve their livelihoods.
The expanded eligibility for
reduced tuition rates and
financial aid will help break
down barriers that have
traditionally hindered many
immigrant workers from pursuing
higher education. These workers
often face financial hardships
and lack access to training
programs, even though they
contribute significantly to the
state tax base. By opening the
doors of New Mexico's community
colleges and training programs
to immigrant workers. The state
not only offers a path for
personal development, but also
cultivates a more skilled and.
capable labor force in critical
industries. These industries are
vital to New Mexico's
infrastructure and communities'
well-being, making the
investment in education and
investment in the state's
future. Furthermore, the
inclusion of those applying for
special immigrant juvenile
status, SIGS is a key step
toward ensuring that young
immigrants who have been through
difficult circumstances,
received the, thank you so much.
Andresitocao.
Uh
I
Hello members and
hello the committee. My name is
Andresquiel. I work as a
campaigns manager for the New
Mexico Dream Team. Um, the New
Mexico Dream Team is a statewide
network committed to create
power for multi-generational
undocumented LGBTQ and milk and
mixed status families towards
liberation. We have countless we
have countless amount of members
who have gone through, have gone
through the education system in
all different in all different
matters.
And um and um what I wanna talk
to you today about our support
with this bill is the story of
my parents when we came here to
the US, my dad tried to take um
classes English classes at what
was then called TBI what is now
CNN.
And he had to stop because of
the high cost that he would like
that he received at the time.
Fast forward to today. My mom is
trying to do a similar thing,
but the barrier of uh of the of
out of state tuition costs has
been keeping her from being able
to continue through this. I also
want to highlight, as folks have
mentioned, the SIJS status.
New Mexico Dream Team has a lot
of members who have gone through
traumatic situations and are and
have been eligible for SIJS
status and have gone through the
whole process, yet remain paying
out of state tuition. Uh, we
must support HB 64 to to better,
uh, it's better increase access
for all communities to hire, to
hire a thank you guys so much.
Thank you.
All right, so we'll go to
opposition for House Bill 64.
The opposition
in contra, the houses in leo.
Books online.
OK.
Questions from committee.
All right, everybody shy.
Representative Baca, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
You know, uh, often I don't.
Have a meal that actually kind
of shakes me up like this those
kind of shake me up because I
guess I really need to
understand the purpose of this
bill. So I, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Chavis.
What does this bill
Attempt to do.
Um
For this, for the education and
for the
The the folks referenced, I want
to ask my, uh, one of my expert
witnesses to respond to the
question.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, so, uh, what we
are trying to do is in part to
also address the terrible worker
shortage that we have here in
New Mexico is to provide the
opportunity to continue the
education of, of the folks that
you heard from today. Um,
Federal law we have to
affirmatively make.
Um, people eligible.
For these educational benefits.
So we are doing as required by
federal law to make folks
affirmatively eligible for these
educational benefits, and it is
a continuation of what we did in
2005. Back then, it was about
addressing the needs to make.
Uh, young immigrant New Mexicans
eligible for lottery scholarship
because that's all we had in
2005 and now we're coming back.
In providing opportunities for
folks who um either came here
and never engaged with the
public education system. They
came.
Older, whether it was 1819 and
and older and never interacted
with high school and never
graduated perhaps from high
school here in New Mexico to
make them eligible to take um
ESL classes and not have to pay
a certificate programs, CTE
certification programs and be
able to benefit from in state
tuition and the other assistants
that's, that is eligible
available to other New Mexicans.
Including the Growth Fund.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your answers, uh,
Mr. Chairman, my question is,
Just for context.
We, what, what types of
Educational programs does this
bill intend to address.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Baca
of the committee.
This is meant, it's intended
primarily to address programs
that undocumented immigrant
workers who are adults who
didn't go to middle school and
high school in the state of New
Mexico, I would like to attend.
Mostly at community colleges,
both credit and noncredit career
technical education, vocational
programs, certificate programs,
uh, credentialing programs that
could lead to a uh them opening
up a business, uh, becoming
independent contractors, uh,
improving their economic
circumstances because of this
training and entering into
staying in their field with
additional certifications or
entering into a new field as a
result of those.
uh certifications. So examples
are programs in uh broadband
installation, energy auditing.
solar panel installation.
Welding, or just a host of
programs, home health care aid
programs that, uh, that are
offered at some of these
community colleges. And so that
is the target.
Audience and the target
participants and the target
programs that we're really
trying to focus on with this
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your answer.
My next question is, um,
Under this program and by the
legislation here.
Would these students be eligible
for opportunity or or lottery
scholarship that has already
seen a huge impact and uh on
resources for the state.
Mr. Chair, we have someone from
um HED here and I would like to
ask to invite them up here to
answer that question.
All right, if you would.
Make your way up, please make
sure you speak in the microphone
and identify yourself, please.
Thank you. Good morning members
of the, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Patricia Trujillo and I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
higher ed department, uh,
Representative Baca to answer
your question, our financial aid
department has scored this and
estimates that it would have an
additional $1 million impact on
the opportunity scholarships
specifically. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Now,
My, my understanding is.
How, in order for.
That to have that impact. Are we
talking statewide? Are we
talking a certain institute?
What criteria must be met for a
student?
To be eligible for the
opportunity.
Or lottery.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it would be a
statewide impact and to be
eligible for the opportunity
scholarship. Currently you have
to either be a graduate of the
New Mexico high school or to be
able to uh prove residency in
the state of New Mexico, and we
use the residency rules, um,
that are required by the
Department of Motor Vehicle.
So it's 12 months of established
re residency.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
What, what kind of numbers do we
estimate?
Uh, of individuals may be
impacted. Are we talking 1000
people maybe in this fit into
this category we're talking in
2000 or do we have any sense of
how many
People would benefit from this
program if it passes.
Um, Mr. Chairs, members of the
committee, that is something I
would have to get um with our
financial aid department to get
you those specific numbers, but
we could get the, I'll get those
for you immediately and make
them available to the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I,
I, I have a question regarding
one of the analysis, uh,
talked about
The
Along with the impact of the
opportunity, the, the need for
additional staff.
At our universities, is that, is
that correct? Did I see that
correct, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Or anyone else may speak to that
as well. What there was there, I
know you're looking at me like I
asked a question, I wasn't
clear. I, I, there is an impact
that is in one of the analysis
that there could be an impact.
And or in need of additional
staff to handle the increased.
volume of students,
members of the committee, um, as
a state we're enjoying an
enrollment to increase in
general at all of our higher
education institutions and so um
that will have impact on staff
and faculty, uh, so across the
board, uh, we are, are
celebrating that opportunity to
bring more people into, um,
higher ed as a workforce in and
of itself.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. My, my next question
is,
Uh, and I did see we have some
colleagues here from uh CNM
correct? Uh, so, Mr. Chairman
and committee, I'd like to, I, I
have no idea. I haven't quite
honestly, I haven't taken a
college class in like 20 years,
so, um, but I did graduate, so
just so you know,
what, what is the difference in
in-state versus out of state
tuition.
And secondly, what is the length
of time that a, a person, let's
say I was moving from Arizona.
How long would it take me to
establish residency?
In New Mexico and thus be
eligible for in-state tuition,
so I know that Vanessa was back
there. I know, I don't know if
our folks from CNM. Do we have
any idea about what that
difference is.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I can answer at least
one part of that, which is
somebody moved from Arizona to
New Mexico. It would take them
12 months to establish residency
in New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca, I
can speak for Santa Fe Community
College about the difference
between in-state and outstate
tuition or out of state tuition
is significantly higher, um,
the, the real benefit to this
bill is that uh if it passed,
then students who met the new
criteria for residency that this
bill proposes would be eligible
for the opportunity scholarship
most likely. So that would bring
the cost of the tuition down to
nothing.
Um, and that's what, you know,
most of our students are, are
receiving that, that level of
tuition. So that, that would be
the real difference.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your answer. I, I
guess, and maybe we don't have
to. I, I, I, I would like some
kind of hard numbers, so I, I
understand. I mean, if we're
talking
$200 credit hours or $200 per
credit? Are we talking what, you
know, what, what is that number
look like?
Because the other thing that it
was earlier, Mr. Chairman in the
testimony is that
For many of our students, it
would not, they would not be
eligible under the criteria
that's listed on the back page
there.
For the opportunity scholarship.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Baca, so the new, the new rules,
if the rules, so, so currently
you're, you're absolutely
correct. Currently, immigrant
students are not eligible under
the, the requirements for the
opportunity scholarship, the
eligibility rules, but what,
what this, uh, what this bill is
seeking to do is to expand the
eligibility requirements so that
now um someone who has paid
state income taxes in New Mexico
for
2 years or has participated in
adult education program, uh, and
those are free classes that um
most of our colleges, mostly
community colleges offered that
teach ESL and then also some
basic job skills, but if they've
been in a program like that for
a year, then that would create a
new eligibility category beyond
what the opportunity now
requires.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your answer. The
other question that I have.
Disregarding it on the first
line here.
When we talk about uh line 24.
What other types of state
financial.
Aid may this also make students
eligible for
Representative Baca, members of
the committee.
To get to that answer, I'd like
to clarify that this is opening
up in state tuition, reduced
tuition rates.
And other forms of financial aid
to folks who did not go to
middle school or high school,
uh, folks who did go to middle
school and high school in the
state of New Mexico, already
qualify.
So they're already in the
system, they already qualify for
in-state tuition and financial
aid, including the opportunity
scholarship, including the
lottery scholarship or other
forms of financial aid.
The main
Uh
Form of tuition support that we
anticipate these folks would
have.
Isn't actually the opportunity
scholarship because they don't
qualify for the opportunity
scholarship because they can't
be considered residents as
undocumented immigrants and
because there's another because
they haven't graduated from a
high school here or gotten
there, uh, high school
equivalency here. So the folks
that we're talking about would
mostly have access to other
forms of tuition support. And
the other form of tuition
support in this case would most
likely be um the.
Grow fund
The $60 million appropriation
over the course of 3 years, uh,
2 HED uh then redistributed,
which could also be used at many
of these community colleges for
tuition support for
Career technical education
programs, specifically for
non-credit programs.
That would lead to a certificate
or a credential in one of these
high demand industries. I'm
paraphrasing the line item. I
don't have it right in front of
me from the Girly.
But that's the main um
opportunity that people would
have to get tuition support. The
reason why they can't get
tuition support right now is
because they are not eligible
under this current law, which is
why we are trying to amend it to
expand it so that folks who have
gone, who've lived here.
Not who've lived here. I don't
want to base it on residency
because it's not based on
resident. People who have
attended one year of adult ed in
the state of New Mexico.
earned income and paid or earned
income and paid their taxes, uh,
and filed their tax returns for
at least 2 years before
receiving the benefit. Those are
the folks that would be eligible
and primarily they would be the
benefit would be for credit
programs, receiving reduced
tuition or in-state tuition
rates.
And being able to obtain.
Other forms of tuition support
like the growth funding for
non-credit programs, which can
be very expensive. I've learned
from all these incredible women
behind me, um, uh, can be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your answer. And
just to be clear, like the, I'm
reading the criteria on page 2.
I have no issue with somebody
who's graduated or earned a high
school equivalency. I do believe
that they should have that
opportunity or the
You know, eligible for the
opportunity scholarship, uh, Mr.
Chairman, my last question, and
uh
It's really just for my
understanding and clarification
is just because I'm not familiar
with this. I'm not familiar.
Um, I starting lines, uh, 17.
Could you briefly describe for
me
The special immigrant to
juvenile Classification Act and
uh what, what that means.
And how it relates to this bill.
Mr. Chair, representative Bacca,
uh, building on the introduction
that um uh Miss Jessica Martinez
gave from the New Mexico
immigrant Law Center, SIJS is a
form of a humanitarian visa that
is available to minors and in
2023, New Mexico, um, enacted a
law that established that New
Mexicans up to the age of 21,
could apply
SIJS because it's really geared
towards uh young people.
And um, it puts them on a path
to LPR status, uh, lawful
permanent residency and then on
to US citizen status, it can be
a timely process and so the goal
of including those young people
into um this bill is to get
them.
Um, on track.
To continue with their
educational goals and their
employment goals as they course
through uh our educational
system. Some of the SIJS
applicants will qualify, uh,
because they will graduate from
a New Mexico high school, they
will already qualify for in
state tuition and financial aid
because they graduated from a
high school, but there are some
who uh have perhaps just
submitted their application.
And we want to engage with them
so they can continue with their
educational, uh, career goals.
Thank you. It's pretty detailed,
actually. I understood that. Um.
My
My, my other, my last question
is very simple, and this is a
very simple one. Under criteria
one, attended state recognized
adult education courses for 2
semesters are those consecutive
or those over a period of time.
Cause we're talking if I took a
class.
Four years ago
And then I want to take one now.
Is it consecutive or?
Is it within a time frame that
would then also
Make them eligible.
Under this program.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
members of the committee, um,
the way that it is currently
written in the bill, it would
obviously, you have it in front
of you with um.
Would require.
provided by rule, so this could
go through a rulemaking process
where it would be established
how to prove this, um, a period
equivalent to 2 semesters.
of adult education programs. It
can be a little tricky to
understand cuz they're different
sort of time frames for adult
education. And so it's OK. We
would love to have, uh, the
director of Adult Education
Division, explain how the
semesters work at adult
education.
Please director.
Yes.
Hi, my name is Amber Gallop. I'm
the adult education director at
the New Mexico Higher Education
Department, um, in adult
education, uh, Mr. Chair members
of the committee in adult
education, um, there are
different programs are spread
about spread around, um, among a
number of different types of
schools. There are schools that
go on a semester basis. There
are those who go on quarters or
even shorter amounts of time,
uh, there are those who go all
year round and those who only
followed the spring and fall
semesters. It really depends on
the type of institution, type of
organization where the adult
education program is held, so,
um, one thing we have noted, so,
uh, a short answer to your
question is that it's very
likely that it could be 2
semesters, um, you know, of an
adult education program
consecutive, but, uh, what we
have found in our adult
education population is that
people often come in and out of
adult ed as they are able to.
So, um, you know, they may come
in for a semester and then maybe
leave for a year because.
they have to take care of their
children or they have to work,
and then they'll come back and
finish or or continue to improve
their English language
proficiency or, uh, continue
into uh finishing their high
school equivalency uh
credential. So it really varies,
um, but it is possible to do it
both consecutively, um, you
know, uh, the two semesters, or
it's possible to do it over a
period of years.
Thank you and uh you guys, I
mean.
Mr. Chairman and committee, so
In that, saying it could be over
years. If we have a break as far
as continuous, doesn't it makes
some students ineligible for the
opportunity or the legislative
lottery scholarship, if we have
a, if a student attends and then
sits out for a semester, then
that opportunity for that
scholarship is lost. Is that
correct?
Oh, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
that is correct. So if you, uh,
disenroll or have a situation
and you're out that semester,
you would lose the scholarship
unless you fill out a mitigating
circumstances waiver with the
school.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. That's
all my questions.
didn't have a last, last, last
question. Oh, OK. Oh, OK. No,
no, no, thank you. Um,
Representative Gonzalez.
OK.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
question is actually just fairly
simple, my my my last last
question, but um, I a lot of
attention has been made on um
community college and CTE and
certificates, um, does this,
does this law also allow for a 4
year degrees or degrees at other
educational institutions.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Gonzalez, members of the
committee.
If an individual were to fulfill
the requirements of this law,
uh, they would potentially or if
it it becomes a law, they would
potentially in the future also
have an opportunity to continue
their education.
According to and there, and they
would also have to fulfill the
rules of any scholarship just
like anyone else, uh, and they
would have to go through the
process like anyone else, but
yes, potentially, um, they could
pursue a traditional academic.
Program. Mr. Chair, thank you
for that answer.
Thank you, Representative Coola.
Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I'm very honored to be part
a co-sponsor of this bill, um,
when I went to college here the
first time I was uh.
I qualify for out of state and I
couldn't afford it right now,
couldn't funny then. So private
school or uh um a state college
was the same for me. So it, it
was really expensive, um, so I,
I have, Mr. Chair, I have a a
question just to to reinforce
some things that I heard.
So we heard a testimony of
people who have been here for 24
years paying taxes. These are
these taxes used to to fund
opportunities scholarships and,
and a lot of scholarships, how,
how the scholarships are funded.
sure.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, yes, taxes, state
taxes are used to fund multiple
things in the state of New
Mexico to give us our $10
billion budget.
So yes. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So basically people
is contributing to the
scholarships and not what they
where we are looking for is they
can access to the same
scholarship that they are
contributing to. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair and.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
would say yes, they do
contribute to taxes, which
contribute to our overall budget
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, thank you. That was
something I wanted to clarify
that, um, I think, um, um,
having a problem adding staff to
the universities because the
schools, Mr. Chair, wanted to go
because the students want to go
to the universities and study as
a teacher that's a good product
to have in my view. I want my
students to to go there um as a
teacher, Mr. Cha, um many of,
uh, the parties of my students
and I have some of them here
Igus papa
Thank you, thank you. That was
something I wanted to clarify
that, um, I think, um, um,
having a problem adding staff to
the universities because the
schools, Mr. Chair, wanted to go
because the students want to go
to the universities and study as
a teacher that's a good product
to have in my view. I want my
students to to go there um as a
teacher, Mr. Cha, um many of,
uh, the parties of my students
and I have some of them here. Is
uh who are teachers who are
nurses.
in in have that degree and they
cannot actually be teachers or
nurses or other professions that
we strongly need because they
cannot get the certification
here. So I see this as an
opportunity, Mr. Chair, uh,
panel here as an opportunity for
them to continue contributing to
to the work forces that we need
in in in this area. Um, I also
see Mr. Cher and, and, and
representative uh an opportunity
to help our students. Uh, my
students
Um
are living in poverty.
If parents are able to
Provide for the students in a
better way.
It will help, um, Mr. Chair, um,
and you can help me maybe uh we
have any information.
I believe it takes generations
to overcome poverty.
So our students who are living
in these situations is gonna
take them a while to come out.
Is this something that you know
about it, correct?
Well, you know, I had to answer
and maybe just anecdotal
experience on my part. So, um,
so that, that will improve the
students' living conditions.
Uh, and, and it will definitely
affect uh our students not just
our adult population but our,
our, our young population.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
absolutely agree that um
education is the path to success
and to building um higher wages
and therefore providing for our
families and kids to let them
out of poverty.
Thank you. And just my last
comment, so um we have a state
residents who have been paying
taxes for years for 24 years,
for many, many years
contributing to our community.
What we are asking here is that
they are recognized as state
residents.
in that, in that area.
So a state residents to be able
to attend college.
To attend and to continue
contributing in a better way.
That's what we are asking, is
this correct?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Gurola, members of the
committee.
Technically, we are not
considering them residents.
We're creating other criteria
that would closely mirror.
The current one-year residency
requirement and so, uh, and, and
that is so that we are close,
that we are strictly adhering to
federal requirements, and so,
uh, yes, that's generally what
we're trying to do, but we're
creating criteria or what you
would be doing would be creating
criteria that would mirror, uh,
the criteria that's in the
current law, either one year
residence or attendance at
middle school or high school for
one year. That's what we're
trying to mirror. And so the two
We've chosen are uh one year of
adult education or 2 years of
Smiling, pit filing and having
earned income.
The reason why we chose 2 years
is uh because you could
potentially move to New Mexico
and file your taxes without
having lived here for a full
year, but if you file twice in
the preceding 2 years.
Probably we're living here the
whole entire year. So we're
creating criteria that closely
mirror the current residency
requirements. Thank you for the
clarification. I think I.
was asking about that, no.
The other area.
Thank you. So, um, thank you so
much for bringing I know. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh.
I know, thank you so much for
bringing the bill for helping me
be there to, um, it's an honor
for me to this this as an
immigrant myself, um, I see the
struggle, I see my students
benefit from this too, so thank
you so much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list. I represent.
I, I did have questions I was
going through a lot of the
analysis and um
One of the
Items in it and
Representative Baca.
As a lot of the questions that I
have, but this one was at the
provisions may likely benefit
individuals who do not intend to
establish residency in the
university of New Mexico.
Um
So
My consumer I read this and
obviously my daughters both
benefited from the lottery and
opportunity scholarship.
And we were very fortunate. I've
seen.
Over the time
You know, we've had issues with
the lottery and help save the
lottery scholarship, so when I
look at other.
eligibilities with this I'm
looking at and this is one of
the concerns I had noted within
the analysis. I is that a
concern?
of
Can you restate your question
please? Sorry. So one of the
questions is so within the
provisions are likely to benefit
individuals who do not intend to
establish residency in New
Mexico, so we're giving a
benefit.
Possibly to
Um,
To them that may not.
Established residency in Mexico.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I think what that's
referring to is not a resident
by state law. So not a New
Mexico resident by state law.
However, this would allow them
to be eligible for how we define
New Mexico resident at higher
education institutions.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Um
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee
on primer.
Um, I wanted to thank the
individuals that gave us some
very eloquent testimonies.
Testimonials, um, also wanted to
ask a question about something I
heard in the introduction of the
bill, um.
I, I, you know, I'm, I totally
understand the higher income,
um, that will be coming from
higher education levels, that's
something that we've been
looking at data out in New
Mexico for a long time. And so
with more courses and more
education, there's the capacity
to earn more, which will bring
in higher taxes uh for our
community and our immigrants do
pay taxes, um, and, and.
Um
And immigrants will be um
residents will be um or let me
take that back, immigrants who
go through this program and
benefit will be better able to
take care of their families with
higher income. You had mentioned
something about um our aging New
Mexico population and the
introduction. And I wondered if
you were referring to the fact
that um as we age, we're gonna
be depending on the people that
are younger than us that create
the income that
supply our Social Security
benefits and our other benefits
as older citizens, um.
So, so that our New Mexico
population will be better able
to take care of us as we age as
seniors. Is that what you were
referring to? I'm wondering.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's correct.
Thank you for that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for presenting this spill,
the hope of growing our under 65
year old population in our state
is immigration clearly, so thank
you for all the immigrants.
I want to thank you for pointing
out to grow.
Money,
because Representative Catherine
Brown.
But like crazy to make sure that
money could go to non-credit
classes.
And what I heard from the
testimonies today and the
analysis is that money is for so
many of our high performing.
Emerging technical career
opportunities that our state
desperately needs. So I think
this is great that we can um
expand financial support.
For these important career and
technical education classes.
before people couldn't get
financial aid for because they
didn't have credit. So thank you
for pointing out that important
point and, and just the
importance of access to these
vital career fields that we need
in our state. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list. I'll entertain
emotion.
Yeah, I do, uh, I do, I move I
do pass on House Bill 64.
Right? So we have a do pass
motion on House Bill 64.
seconded by Representative Lara,
Madam Secretary, if you call the
role on a do pass motion for
house.
No
Yes.
Hey
Yes.
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes.
by a vote of 6 to 3. You have a
due pass on House Bill 64.
Thank you. All right, thank you.
All right, so we'll move on.
We're going to have our vice
chair.
Oh, so House Bill 90 at the
request of the sponsor, we're
going to roll over, so we'll go
to House Bill.
167.
What's that?
Oh
And.
I
Exactly.
Now
All right. Representative
Garrett, our vice chair. House
Bill 167.
Please.
Good morning again, Mr. Chair
and my fellow members of House
Education. I have already heard
from her, Doctor Amber Gallop.
Um, I don't know if they founded
the city of Dallas.
Doctor.
Doctor Amber Callum is the uh
director of the division of
Adult Education.
in the higher education
department.
The house bill 167 is higher
education.
For certain tests.
Uh, it says in relationship to
high school equivalency
credential tests, they will be
free for New Mexico residents,
and I'm gonna just read it's,
it's right there on page 1 and 2
of the bill, the higher
education department.
Shall provide free high school
equivalency, prudential tests in
New Mexican residents who.
and there's 4 points. They're at
least 16 years old.
They're not currently enrolled
in secondary school.
They have not graduated from an
accredited high school or
received a high school
equivalency certificate or
diploma and finally they have
passed an official practice
tests indicating with their
scores that they will actually
pass the high school equivalency
test, so it's not something that
you keep doing.
Um, the appropriation is $2
million in appropriate, uh,
would be appropriated from the
general front to the higher
education department.
And as many of you are on
appropriations, we are still
working out, uh, some of the
details of that this budget item
is in the governor's executive
budget.
And we will be working over the
next 77 days to fine tune um the
actual amount.
And with that I'll have some
yellow.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, the good news, I
think in adult education and
adult literacy in the state is
that we've really been growing,
uh, in the last 3 to 4 years,
our outcomes are the highest,
uh, we have had in New Mexico
ever, um, all of our federal
performance indicators, we've
been going up, uh, we have also
been improving in adult
literacy, our enrollment is
soaring past even uh
pre-pandemic levels. At the same
time, our high school equivalent
system is stuck at about uh
forty-seventh in the nation,
meaning that um we are
forty-seventh in the nation for
the number of adults with a high
school diploma or a high school
equivalency.
You're not seeing the growth in
that system that we're seeing in
our other adult education and
adult literacy systems.
We believe that the reason for
this are a number of systemic
barriers that exist over the
last few years, uh, we in the
adult education division of the
New Mexico Higher Education
Department have been building
the foundation to improve our
outcomes here.
But we see that the barriers,
uh, there are several barriers
here, but two in particular, we
think are are uh consequential.
First, um, the cost of the test
is a huge barrier to people in
New Mexico, uh, particularly
rural residents who do not
already have a diploma, uh, the
entire battery of tests, uh,
plus the fee in any practice
tests, uh, cost at least $145
and sometimes more.
Uh, that is simply not possible
for a lot of our uh residents
that want to take the test
otherwise. Another barrier is
the lack of uh testing centers
in the state, particularly
mobile testing centers. In the
last year, we've added 8 testing
centers in the state and still
we're having difficulties. So,
um, we uh have looked at other
states in the nation that have
provided free high school
equivalency tests, and what
we've seen is that they
immediately after doing so, see
a big.
increase in the number of people
who are able to take and then
pass and earn their credential.
So we'd like to do the same in
New Mexico and I don't, I don't
think we're gonna be able to dig
out of this number 47 until we
invest in um in the high school
equivalency system in this way.
That Mr. Chair, we stand for
questions. All right, so we'll
go to support in the room and
the folks online if you would
indicate by raising your hand if
you wish to speak in support of
health bill 167.
OK, we mostly have this side of
the room, so ma'am, up in the
front row.
Please, you'll have up to 2
minutes.
Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Mone Silva, and I'm the
executive director of the
Coalition in Homelessness, and
we stand in support of House
Bill 167.
In 2024, there were close to
10,000 youth in our state that
experienced homelessness, and
this number increased by 1000
since 2023.
For youth experiencing
homelessness, getting their high
school high school equivalency
can have a significant positive
impact by providing a pathway to
stability, increasing employment
opportunities and improved
quality of life and reduced
likelihood of remaining homeless
in the future.
As education is often seen as a
critical tool for breaking the
cycle of homelessness.
How her barriers like
Frequent school changes, lack of
support system, and a financial
means, and stigma can hinder
their educational attainment. HB
167 will remove the barrier for
lack of finances and allow youth
experiencing homelessness, to
begin to take the steps to move
to more stability in their
lives. We strongly urge the
committee to support this bill.
Thank you.
Right.
Ma'am, please welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Jamie
Trujillo. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico Adult
Education Association or
association represents 26 adult
education programs and more than
12,000 adult education students
in the state. High school
equivalency costs are a
significant barrier for many of
our students. The current
limited ad hoc voucher system is
difficult to access, creating
unnecessary barriers for test
takers and a significant
administrative burden for
the New Mexico higher education
departments, adult education
division.
As Doctor Gallup mentioned, New
Mexico was forty-seventh in the
nation for the number of adults
with a high school diploma or
equivalent and removing this
financial barrier for test
takers will increase the number
of graduates annually.
This $2 million appropriation is
a priority of the New Mexico
education or New Mexico higher
education division. The
Constitution of New Mexico
provides for a free,
high-quality education for all
young people. This bill helps
extend this to all New Mexicans,
including those who, due to life
circumstances were not able to
earn their high school diploma
in the typical amount of time,
but who still want the
opportunity to move ahead in
life and access family
sustaining careers. So we
strongly encourage
you to support this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. There's on my left
hand side. All right, please.
2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Marcela Diaz. I work for
a statewide immigrant-based
worker, uh, in racial justice
organization called Somoso
Pueblo Nido. We work in 8
counties. And we have, uh,
worker centers in 5 of those
counties, all of them but Santa
Fe are rural, and the number one
on ramp for our members who are
immigrants in our communities
and are in the workforce or are
trying to uh be able to enter
and
on ramp into the certain
industries in the workforce rely
on adult education programs as
that first on ramp. One example,
we work in the southeastern part
of the state. There is a very
large, um,
shortage of CDL licensed
drivers, uh, welders and other
traits oriented programs and and
needs, and many of the
certification programs, both
credit and non-credit, require
that people have high school
equivalency. And so it is one of
the main obstacles for a lot of
our members to be able to enter
into those more traditional
workforce development programs.
This not only would afford folks
the free testing that is very.
necessary, but also the
additional testing centers in
rural communities, and that is
one of the biggest needs that
we're seeing with the uh both
documented and undocumented uh
uh.
Workforce that
are in rural communities, and
that is why we are very
appreciative of representative
Vice Chair Garrett, uh, moving
this forward and we're in full
support and urge you to support
it for, for the sake of our
workforce. Thank you.
Thank you, there's on my left
Thank you, there's on my
left-hand side, that's right.
We'll go to my right-hand side.
Does sport, please.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Um, good morning, everyone, uh,
chair and members of the
committee. I am Rosalindarado
with El Centro de Walda Rechos
and in Central Poeraion, um, and
we are definitely in support of
HB 167 as our members are here
present in support of it because
we see the benefit it will bring
to our economy and many of our
members in our membership would
benefit from this. So thank you
so much, uh, for putting this in
place. Alright. Thank you.
Anybody else who wish to speak
in the room online?
in sport.
All right. Those that may be
against House Bill 167.
You raise your hand if you wish
to speak.
Because online, if you're
against House Bill 167, if you
would indicate by raising your
hand.
Right.
Doesn't look like we have
anybody.
Welcome to committee
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, I just
have a just a question on some
of the, the language that's in
here and also some of the
comments, um, in, in the bill
and in the language, it says um
provide free high school
equivalency testing to New
Mexico residents, um, and then,
but it was stated and.
And just also hearing previous
conversation, trying to
delineate, um, what are the
actual requirements, um, for
this and what determines a New
Mexico resident.
Particular
Uh, well, in addition to the um
eligibility requirements that um
oh, sorry, um.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, in addition to
the, uh, eligibility
requirements, Representative
Garrett mentioned earlier, so
you have to be 16, you have to
be, um, not enrolled or required
to be enrolled in secondary
school, um, and you have to be a
New Mexico resident, so, uh, New
Mexico residents means um
someone who lives in New Mexico
and has an address in New
Mexico, uh, the way that we uh
just if I may, the way that we
um.
Confirm this is actually through
the test publishers themselves,
uh, students, any, any, well,
student or person who um.
wants to take a high school
equivalency exam, uh, must first
register with either um GED or
highet, that's the other test
that people take to earn their
high school equivalency and um
that they have online systems
that verify um that that require
the address listed that verify
and that actually have fraud
protection as well to check and
see if that address has been
used multiple times or a
different names.
Um, Mr. Chair, thank, thank you
for that response. Just, just
clarifying.
The definition of residency per
as it relates to this bill.
Thank you.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
I apologize, you might
But what is the test prep before
they go and take
This exam. Obviously.
Be successful. District chair
members of the committee, uh, we
Uh, there, there are a variety
of ways that you can, you can,
you can prep, um, about half of
the people in the state, a
little less than half, uh,
actually are, um, are prepared
for the tests through our um
state funded adult education or
adult literacy systems. Uh,
there are also a little over
half of the test takers in New
Mexico every year, um, are
prepared by some other
organization that, uh, you know,
is not, um, uh, you know, funded
by the New Mexico Higher
Education Department.
Often, um, they, uh, after
they've left high school for
whatever reason, they go and
take the test at that time, or
they do a self-study as well.
Um, and to your point about just
making sure that people are
prepared and that we're not
wasting the money, we actually
require that anyone who receives
what currently we have uh the
system of uh free vouchers that
we've been using for some test
takers who access them and with
those vouchers and also the plan
is for these free tests, um, and
which would replace the voucher
system. What we
do is we require that they have
passing scores on each of the
tests for GED that sort the GED
has 5 tests. The high set has 4,
that make up the battery of
tests. They have to take a
practice test on each of these
and have a what we call like a
green light, before they're
allowed to access the voucher
and take the test and the same
thing would be the case in this
in this um.
In this uh free time.
Mr. um
You know, I, I just like a
comment that I understand, um.
You know, this is definitely a
need across the stage, um.
its barriers and
Of course if they can
College, so I, I try to be very
mindful when I look at the
amount of money on each of these
bills because.
looking at all these bills, it's
a lot of money that's flowing
through, so try to be very
cognizant of taxpayers' money.
And I, I truly believe that this
is something.
Um
To see implemented and be able
to help, um, move them forward
into other paths, uh, with that,
so Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for
that, um, comments
representative, and I just like
to add something to that, um,
with this uh appropriation that
we have here, it's important to
realize that um our our um
analysis shows that a New
Mexican who has a high school
diploma or a high school
equivalency makes about $6500
more per year, um.
when they have that credential.
Uh, and we've done the analysis,
and if we've got about 3500
people per year who take and
pass these exams and income tax
alone, we would exceed the
state's investment in this bill.
He
And I always believe there's
different pathways for.
Um, not
You know,
Not one size that fits all. So I
certainly appreciate this.
Represent Vincent
Thank you Mr. Chair. I believe
my question was answered. Thank
you.
Represent for a.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm so
glad I made it back for this
presentation from having
presented in another committee,
I want to thank the sponsors,
Mr. Chair, um, for bringing this
forward.
In, in, we just heard.
In another committee, and I was
shocked because the rate
increased.
New Mexico is now um has a 17%.
125 %
Uh, above the poverty or no
below the poverty level, and the
nation is 11.5%.
So we have increased
significantly.
And Mr. Chair, how I see our
investment, especially in
education.
There, as an economic developer,
we've always said that education
and economic development are
hand in hand.
As Mr. Chair, we see, we
continue to invest.
An increasing the opportunities,
access and opportunities to our
poor.
Population are those that have
not had the same um.
Opportunities and access, what
we're doing is we're ultimately
uh preparing them.
To be
Viable
Uh, economic developers and
local communities because we're
circulating that money.
In our local communities and
those local communities are
comprised of all of us.
Rich, poor, middle income, very
low income, we represent all
those communities. No one, no
matter where.
we are in the state, so for me,
This is one of those bills.
That is more than worthwhile in
terms of recurring and thank you
for placing it, um, Mr. Chair
and, and Representatives.
Um
You still have a recurring
appropriation. Is that correct,
Mr. Chair and Representative
and.
We are working on the banda.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, because this
making this investment
recurring, um, just for their
insurers that we're gonna have a
secure.
A stable
Uh, population and educated
population, whether it's higher
ed, um, career, whatever it is,
um, and they become and they're
already contributing to our
economy, but this will place
them in a place where um.
They will have a better
opportunity to do so, so, Mr.
Chair, I just wanted to make
sure that somewhere in our
budgets that we were looking at
that and how we can
Incorporate that as as a
recurring and um state that. So
thank you, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate it. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for bringing this. Um, one
question.
If I, if somebody wants to apply
for this, uh, will it be
automatically free.
Do they have to go to any
process, um, let's say I wanna
get my uh my diploma and I, I
just go and apply for the test,
do I have to pay? What would be
right away it's free because
you're not in Mexico resident.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, uh, it would be 100%
free. Uh, you would be able to
walk in.
Show that you have passed the uh
the GED practice test or the
high set practice test, uh, with
a green light, and then you
would be able to just take the
test. Um, all of the testing
fees associated with the testing
centers, the cost of the
practice exams, uh, the cost of
the instructional materials if
you choose, uh, and the tests
themselves would all be covered
uh by this free testing system.
Thank you. That, that will be
making it so simpler, Mr. Chair,
I'm just again one last question
too, um.
I, if it was me, I'm thinking my
fear of failing and paying 23
times will stop me from doing
it, so this will help me so much
to try it. Well, let's say that
I take a test, fail.
I want to try it again.
Can I apply again, Mister Chair,
members of the committee, that's
a great question. So, um, the
there are 2 test publishers, um,
accepted by, um, by, by New
Mexico, uh, there is the GED and
then the high set as I mentioned
earlier, um, both of the
publishers have different rules
about how many times people can
retake.
OK, so, um, I have to tell you I
can um find this information
exactly and send it to the
committee and provide it to the
committee, but if my
recollection serves, it's um
that uh, well, first of all,
you're unlikely to fail because
you've already passed the
pretest, but let's say you get
nervous and you, and you end up
failing the one of the tests,
right, um, then you would go
ahead and, um, you can take it.
I think you can take it 2 more
times and then at that point,
um, you have to have a cool,
what they call a cooling off
period.
Of a few months. And then at
that time, then you can come
back and start try to take that
test again, that often happens,
for example, with the math test,
people try, try again, and then
they have.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Spent.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I only
have 14 questions, so.
Actually, Mr. Turro, thank you
for your presentation. Mr. Cha,
move it do pass. All right, so
we have a do pass motion bearer.
I can represent Gonzalez.
Uh, is there any opposition to
the DuP pass, right? no.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you.
