Here.
We do have a car. All right. Hi
folks, I hope you all are doing
well, so we'll get started this
morning. Um, I was going to make
an announcement. Obviously you
saw House Bill 277 drop off our
list for today. Uh, that was uh
rolled at the request of
sponsors, so we have scheduled
it for Friday. We'll see where
we're at for Friday with that
bill.
How's joint resolution 12
Representative Small, good
morning. Good morning, Mr.
Chair.
Great to see you. Great to see
you, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members, ranking
member, um.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, New Mexico has ascended
to be the #2 state in the entire
country.
For higher education student
supports.
First student we're now #2 when
it comes to supporting students
who are uh working to attain
higher education.
It's a remarkable achievement.
It's a remarkable
responsibility, and so, Mister
Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members, House Joint
resolution joint resolution 12
takes a big step on
accountability or uh our higher
education institutions.
meet this moment. Uh, I want to
describe sort of very briefly
that I'll turn over to my expert
from the Mexico Department of
Justice.
Sean Sullivan and um and we'll
go from there. Uh, house joint
resolution 12 strengthens
oversight and accountability, it
ensures that our boards of
regents have an undivided
loyalty to care, good faith, and
inherits to state laws and
institutional policies in their
trusted position as regents. It
clarifies grounds for removal.
Um
It empowers oversight
authorities.
were the #2 state in the country
when it comes to supporting our
students for higher education,
the oversight and accountability
is a key component of that.
This, you know, will improve
institutional governance at our
higher education institutions.
We know that strong accountable
leadership is essential for the
success of our higher education
institutions, but
Really, that's the success of
the New Mexicans who are seeking
higher education, whether that's
a two-year, uh, sort of whether
it's a two-year degree, whether
that's a certification in a high
uh need job area, whether that's
a four-year degree.
Um, it aligns our governance
standards with best practices
and higher education oversight.
And it provides a very important
safeguard to protect the public
trust and taxpayer investment in
higher education.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, I turn
it over to Mr. Sullivan from the
Department of Justice to provide
a brief overview, uh, and, but
we don't want to take too much
time and so we'll leave it from
there.
Thank you, please.
Thank you, Representative Small.
Uh good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, my name is Sean Sullivan.
I'm a special counsel with the
New Mexico Department of
Justice. I want to thank you for
having the opportunity to speak
with you this morning.
Um, as Representative Small
noted, the proposed changes to
Article 12 Section 13, sought by
this joint resolution
essentially proposed to
explicitly clarify the
responsibilities that boards of
regions have and to put in place
proper protocols in the event
that they do not uphold.
those responsibilities.
Ultimately, it's about
accountability.
It's about transparency.
Really it's about reorienting
the focus back to the students
and the faculty.
Um, to briefly frame this issue
and of course this proposed
resolution would apply.
Uh, across the board to our
higher educational institutions
that are enumerated in the
Constitution, but to frame this
issue, I just want to remind
this committee, uh, why we're
talking about this in the first
place.
Uh, the situation at Western New
Mexico recently was the impetus
for some of these changes, um,
the Office of the State
Auditors, you know, released
findings suggesting that there
were a number of issues as it
relates to procurement travel
per diem, uh, to give you a
sense of the scale, $214,000 in
spending over 400 instances of
domestic and international
travel by then President Joseph
Shepherd, a nearly $150,000 in
spending.
covering improper procurement,
including expensive furniture
for the residents, things of
that nature.
Um, so we pointed out by the
state auditor, the
Board of Regents at the Western
New Mexico University instead of
seeking repayment, uh, agreed to
allow Dr. Shepherd to resign,
entered into a separation
agreement where he received.
A golden parachute $1.9 million
after those findings by the, the
OSA.
He's able to receive $200,000
per year to be a tenured faculty
member.
Teaches two classes, teaches
them remotely, and that's after
an 8 month sabbatical.
That includes a complete release
of any liability and an
indemnification against all
claims that might have arisen.
Uh, during his time as president
of Western New Mexico.
I mentioned that because I think
that it's an egregious and
unconscionable violation of the
public trust.
That's ultimately what we expect
our boards of Regents to be.
Uh, and we think that this joint
resolution goes a long way in
ensuring that that trust is met,
that we have good stewards of
taxpayer money and that in
instances where they do not meet
those obligations we have
enforceable, reasonable
oversight to address those
situations. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Right, so we will go to members
of our audience, so those
wishing to speak in support on
our Zoom.
Would you please indicate by
raising your hands, so this is
support for House joint
resolution 12, you would
indicate by raising your hand.
Then we will go to our audience,
so are there those that wish to
speak in support of House Joint
Resolution 12.
All right, so those of you with
your hands up, if you would form
a line right behind our panel
here and then we'll get a
microphone.
that you are
Provide your testimony as a
reminder to folks.
You'll have
Up to 2 minutes in this case,
state your support for House
Joint Resolution 12. But please,
welcome. Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, John Dier, AFT
New Mexico. Um, we represent
many institutions within the
higher ed, uh.
Uh, ecosystem here in New
Mexico, we do support House
Street Resolution 12. We look at
it as going a long way towards
modernization of our higher ed
structures, especially as we are
making these historic and
critical investments. Um, we
think this measure goes a long
way to making sure that that
money goes to where it ought to
go, um, and provide some
remedies when unfortunate
situations like the sponsor and
his expert have have outlined,
um, it's a transparency bill and
it's just a good governance
bill, so we appreciate the
efforts of the sponsor. Thank
you.
Thank you. Please.
morning
Morning. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of committee, John
Lipschitz with the New Mexico
Federation of Labor, uh,
representing over 40,000 workers
throughout the state. We stand
in solidarity with our higher
education employees and urge you
to support this bill. Thank you
very much.
Great, thank you. Is there
anybody else that wish to speak
in support about joint
resolution 12.
Right. Not seeing any others.
Members on our Zoom, if you wish
to speak in opposition to House
Joint Resolution 12, if you
would indicate please by raising
your hand.
What that populate.
And then are there any folks in
the room who wish to speak in
opposition to House Joint
Resolution 12.
Right.
one, sir.
Good morning. You'll have
Up to 2 minutes.
Please, welcome.
Thank you, thank you, sir Chair
and committee.
Jake Smith with the Government
to Change Project from Sandoval
County.
Although this bill is a great
step forward, I do fear,
however, that higher education
being full of corruption in New
Mexico is running rampant,
especially at certain
universities that tend to have
special privilege. I am speaking
directly about the University of
New Mexico. Um, I do fear that
this bill will intimidate.
Um, are, are, um, our regions
without having proper
protections in place to ensure
that the Attorneys general's
office properly investigates
cases that the uh regions
properly report cases and that
it's heard appropriately by
By the education boards. This is
something that I have direct
experience with as I was falsely
imprisoned at the University of
New Mexico. This is something
that I did report to the
regions. This is something that
I did report to the president.
This is something that I did
report to all the deans. This is
something that I did report to
even the uh student, the student
committees that I was a part of,
and the staff committees that I
was a part of as a sitting
member of a of the council of
staff. Um, however, as we see,
there is favoritism amongst
certain universities.
So I fear that without having
those proper protections in
place, we will actually end up
running more into corruption
than less.
I, I would greatly appreciate it
if it was revised, and I hope
you all have a wonderful day and
thank you for the time.
Thank you.
Or anybody else that we should
speak in opposition to House
Joint Resolution 12.
Right? Not seeing any, will come
to committee, so Representative
Mina Moya, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen, um, I, um,
I, I like
Most of this. I do have some
some questions and, and
concerns.
Excuse me, I do like the fact
that um that we're defining and
and and actually there's there's
specific reasons why and we're
putting that in statute. I, I, I
like that, um, and I, um, really
quick, uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
is the reason why it's a joint
resolution is because we're
moving it from Supreme Court to
district court, is that the
whole reason why that process,
why it has to be this, this
avenue,
uh,
Mr. Chair Mavoya for sort of the
legal piece. I turn to Mr.
Sullivan, but this require
because um
Our boards of regents and our
higher education institutions
are enshrined in our
Constitution, our House joint
resolution, which would then go
on to the ballot is necessary to
make what we believe to be these
increased accountability and
oversight provisions.
Perfect. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so my question is, um,
So I, I, I wonder why we struck
out so on page 4.
And starting in um line 19.
Um, it reads, um, you know, this
is what the reasons that they
can be uh removed and stuff, and
then, and we start striking out,
provided, however, no removal
shall be made without notice of
hearing and an opportunity to be
heard, having first been given
such member. Why are we taking
that out? Why isn't that put
back somewhere like so that, so
what I'm reading and and and if
and and if I'm mistaken, is that
there there is no like hearing
or, or a place where this person
can be heard in this process.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
a really good question.
That's actually one of the
reasons why.
We chose the district courts as
a forum to hear removal actions
as opposed to the New Mexico
Supreme Court. Really what this
Constitution is saying is that
we want procedural due process,
right before we remove somebody,
we want to make sure that that
region has an opportunity to
defend themselves, that there's
evidence that's presented from
both sides and that the fact
finder can make a decision about
whether or not that removal is
justified.
Problem with having that in the
Supreme Court.
Is the Supreme Court is an
appellate court. It's a, it's a
record-based court. They're used
to making decisions based on
pleadings, right? The lawyers
will write their briefs, they'll
come and argue those briefs, but
there's no really opportunity
for you to present witnesses to
hear those witnesses to apply
the rules of evidence and so by
vesting that jurisdiction in the
district courts were actually
ensuring that that due process
exists and that it's actually a
right that's realized. And so
we're not removed.
the due process, we're actually
putting it into a forum where it
can be actual actualized. Thank
you, thank you for that because
that brings a lot of clarity and
and that makes a lot more sense
because it's in that district
court, there is that time to
argue and, and, and argue your
point, I should say. Um, so I, I
do like that. There is something
else on page 4 that kind of um
the the certain things they get
because believe me, I'm a I'm a
teacher and and and then there's
on the bottom of your contract
is all other duties, uh.
That that's on the bottom, so on
a line 18 uh on uh ways, reasons
that they can be um removed,
breaches of other duties. What
exactly is other duties.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um.
What this is intend to ensure is
that we're not communicating to
those board members that only
those grounds that are expressly
listed are possible to to remove
them or to seek recourse. What
we, what we don't want to do is
undercut those things in the law
that the legislature has
required that boards do and
allow a board member, for
example, to violate one of those
things to um issue bonds when
you all said they can't issue
bonds to um to raise money in a
way that the legislature has
said they.
can't raise money. And then when
we try and take action to hold
them accountable, they say,
well, it's not expressly listed
in the Constitution, so I can't
be held accountable for it,
right? And so by putting other
duties, we're really putting
this catch all to say, hey, this
isn't, these aren't the
exclusive grounds. You have
other duties and statute that
you have to uphold also.
OK, thank you, thank you for
that. Um, my next question is,
um, figure out where it's at.
Um, I believe I should have
underlined it like I did the
rest of them.
Um
OK, so I believe it's on page 5,
OK, so yeah, so it talks about
it uh a member starting on line
3, a member can, uh, board of
Regents may be removed from the
board of Institution that member
serves as an action seeking
removal uh when it's filed and
in district court by an attor by
the Attorney general or by the
majority of the other members of
the Board of Regents, um, of the
institution so I just wanna, I
wanna to avoid a scenario of.
Um, there is one opinion or or
of of of uh that is different
than the rest.
And now it's a it's, it's a
retaliation type of thing, so,
um, and then I kind of just as
I'm reading this through,
correct me if I'm wrong.
This is saying not that.
The majority can't remove them
the the the majority, uh, if
they vote for it, then they file
that district court, and then
that that process happens,
right?
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
absolutely correct. And, and the
reasons that you just pointed
out were the same things that
we're concerned about, right? We
don't want there to be perhaps a
personality clash between two
members and that one member have
sufficient ability to move, uh,
to remove the member, right? We
want there to be an issue of
governance, an issue of
performance, something where a
majority of the members suggest
that, hey, we need to at least
petition for removal, and then
that's not the final decision,
right? That they're able to
standing
to ask the district court to
to remove them. So that's
absolutely correct.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
this brings a lot more clarity
to me too, thank you very much.
You represent ucker.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your
Presentation
Let's pretend for a moment that
I don't know what a border
regent does, you please explain
to this committee.
The current responsibilities and
function of the Board of
Regents.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, boards of Regents are uh
creations of our Constitution.
Uh, they have the ability to
control and manage the affairs
of the institution.
Uh
What the Constitution does is
lay out the appointment process
essentially and the performances
that are generally required of
boards of regents, uh.
Under statute, this, this body
under chapter 21 has created a
number of duties that boards of
regents need to abide by
anything from how it is that
they need to call meetings to
how they hire officers, how they
can control the tuition and the
curriculum.
Um, and then importantly how
they can raise money, right?
What they need to do with
taxpayer funds. So there's a
number of things that we require
of boards of regents in order to
control and manage the
institutions. What we're really
trying to say with this joint
resolution is that you have
those same powers and those same
duties, but you need to exercise
those within the guard rails. So
thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for that, and I, I think
that the
The important part about it is
we're I I understand about the.
Articles of the Constitution. I
understand that, but
But what I'm really trying to
get to.
Is really about the day to day.
How is it?
That these wars, is it when we
talk about, you know, as far as.
Um
Things that the, as far as the
That a region may do.
Who makes that determination of
that and what is it, what is it
they do and who makes the
determination.
Of wrongdoing.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair
Representative, so, uh, of
course, the boards are
deliberative bodies, right for
all institutions other than the
University of New Mexico.
There's 5 individuals that need
to uh in a transparent open
meeting uh decide what's best
for that institution, University
of New Mexico, of course, has,
has 7 members. Um, and so
ideally, you would be making
these decisions transparently.
In a way that provides the
public.
Uh, an opportunity to say, we
don't agree with that course of
action.
He is the individuals who are
sending our students to these
schools, we don't agree with
those actions, and we think in
the instance like Western, for
example, that these things would
have been discussed in an open
forum, you would have had that
pushback. You would have had
that concern. Um, and so
ultimately, it's open for the
public to decide if they're
institutions, their public
institutions are being run in
the correct manner. Um, also, it
gives um those folks who have
oversight responsibility like
the New Mexico Department of
Justice, the ability to say,
You did not have an open meeting
like you were supposed to or you
use taxpayer funds in a way that
we think merits a closer look.
Um, and so that's the reason
that boards have to meet in the
open. It's a public transparency
tool and ultimately it makes
those folks, including this body
that has oversight ability to be
able to better determine if
they're operating in the public
good.
Thank you for your answer, and I
guess what I'm really trying to
get is
What they do, so they hired the,
the, the president. That, that,
that's, I mean.
That's what I want to
understand, but I'm talking
about, I very much understand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair about
budgets and understand about
that. I'm, I'm talking about the
day to day things that must be
done in an open, so we were
talking about hiring the, the,
the president.
Can you give me just a couple of
other examples in simple
layman's terms of that, Mr.
Chair, um, and, and ranking
member or represent Baca, um,
they'll be responsible for
setting budgets in uh
collaborative fashion with the
university leadership with
selecting the projects that will
come before this body for
priority for uh for funding,
things of that nature.
Um, there, Mr. Chair, as you
point out, of Representative.
key responsibility is uh
Selecting and then oversight and
accountability of the
university.
Uh, leadership and then working
with that leadership to set
university policy.
budgets and
Some of those other components.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Actually,
when you put in that terms, it
sounds like a school board like
for K-12.
In many, in many areas as far as
budget, as far as hiring, right?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes.
And Mr. Chairman, now do, is
there currently a, a process in
our K-12 school boards that
allow for the same type of
behavior.
Or the same type of action if we
have an individual board member.
Acting in these ways that are
outlined in your, in your bill.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't know, um, for our, for
the, it's a great question. I
don't know. Um, I would be
curious if, if you have the
answer and
What strike, what really stands
out to me at in our role with
the budget.
So much additional investment in
the higher education and to see
The sort of we need to raise
that bar of responsibility from
our boards of regions and
Mr. Chair, representative, I
might say I hope that there is
that same ability on the K-12 on
the school board side, but I
don't know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Chairman. Um, well,
actually, cause they're both in
with state monies, right? Both
from the legislature. So there
should be that same level of
responsibility.
And that same adherences to
making good uses of that money.
To support the learning of the
students that they serve.
Um
And I'll just tell you that
there's not.
There's not that process.
Um
My final question, um.
Mr. Chairman is
Currently walk me through the
process. Let's say I wanted to
be a regent.
Or
Let's just say, you and him,
right?
What would the process be like
for some, let's say I wasn't in
this seat here, OK? What would
be that normal process?
To become a regent.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
from my perspective, the process
seems to be
Uh, heavily, heavily sort of
dependent upon the executive.
The executive, um, nominates, uh
folks to the Board of Regents.
There's not another process sort
of outside of that.
And so in.
whatever form or fashion that
In you in this case, you would
want to connect with whoever is
the executive, whoever is the
governor.
In the state at that. And thank
you and, and my reason for
asking that is that if we're
talking about a governor
appointment, you know, and we're
saying that.
You know, the process of
removing a regent if there is
substance behind that. I don't
want to be because it's a
difference of opinion.
And I think that's the important
part of it.
And I think that when we're
talking about the reasons for
removal is who makes that
determination or is it till
they're convicted of something
from the Attorney General.
Is it that, you know, that any
claim and, and who then besides
the attorney general will be
reviewing these allegations.
Mr. Chair Representative, so,
um,
We're really talking about two
different parallel processes,
uh, in the case of Western, for
example, the Attorney General
has brought Su based on what
we believe to be the
unconscionable use of public
funds. But when you're
referencing removal, the
ultimate arbiter is a judge.
It's a court, and in this case,
it would be the district court
and so each side would present
their arguments and a judge
because this is a civil matter
would make a determination based
on a preponderance of the
evidence, whether or not the
person asking for removal has
met their burden.
Thank you. And uh Mr. Chairman.
What of our universities weigh
in? I, I mean, usually we hear
like from New Mexico State or we
hear from UNM or Eastern or or
Highland, those that may not be
directly involved because I am
aware.
Of the situation in Western, and
I, I do, um,
You know, I, I am, um,
Disappointed to say that, but
What what is the other
universities weigh in, what are
some of those regions? What
would they weigh into this
process and was their input
gathered?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I, I certainly can't speak
to those other universities,
what I can say confidently, uh,
is that I feel very assured that
the faculty and the staff and
the students at those
institutions want to ensure that
their boards of regents are
acting in their, in their best
interest. And I think the way
that you can corroborate that
is, is right after uh this, this
contract with Dr. Shepherd at
Western, the faculty and the
staffsenate voted to a vote of
no confidence.
based on that decision. And so I
can't speak to the
administrator's positions at
those universities, but I'm, I'm
very confident in saying that
the students and the faculty and
those that were really trying to
serve at these institutions are
supportive of these principles.
And thank you and just like this
and we're talking about Western,
which may have triggered or
been.
Some of the reasons for this,
this is going to affect every.
Every institution
And when we're, we're taking
that, the
The wrongdoings of one or the
potential or the alleged
wrongdoings of one are going to
have an impact.
To the other 2.
5 or 26 higher institutions in
my, my question really is,
Why are they not? Why, why do I
not have everybody from
Mesa lands to northern to to to
give some input into this, and
I, I think, you know, um, that
is my question, and I'll, I'll,
I'll close with this, Mr.
Chairman.
I, I can see the need for it. I
would support this, but I also
think that it needs to be in
K-12 as well. That for one
individual member that is acting
outside of us.
That there be a similar process.
Because the examples and the
reason for this bill.
is in its current in schools,
and there should be some kind of
process to look at those and
address those issues as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
they're still trying to draft
and drop legislation so you
should you so wish, so you're in
that position representative.
Represent Royval Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you Representative and
expert.
Uh, so I just had some
clarifying questions.
How do we
Respond
The questions that we get asked.
About this being an overreach of
legislative, um.
Authority.
How do we respond to that?
Mr. Chair Representative, thank
you for the question. Thank our
responses. This is uh really
appropriate accountability and
oversight. We're not.
Overreaching, we're simply
ensuring that there's a core
fiduciary duty to the
universities at a time when we
as a legislature.
Have increased our state support
for those same higher education
institutions.
By very, very significant
amounts. So I think, Mr. Chair,
representative, the way I would
respond to that or the way I
will, is that this is simply
catching up to the financial
investment our state is making.
And requiring that fiduciary,
and I would take it one step
further and say that this is a
public institution. These are
public taxpayer monies, and so
by mere fact that we are
representative of.
The public
Um, we have a fiduciary as well
as a governance as well as a
legislative duty that we take an
oath of office to protect. So I
think um it's it's unfortunate,
Mr. Chair, that we're responding
or reacting as some people have
said, um, to what.
You know, to placing guardrail
put in place due to one
circumstance, however, that's
usually until there's a
complaint or until there's a
lawsuit or sometimes and
whatever that might be, uh, Mr.
Chair.
That's when
It comes to.
Brought to our attention. And so
I think it's, it's really
critical at this juncture that
we clarify that, and that's what
this um HTAR does. I saw
somewhere and I can't
necessarily identify it, Mr.
Chair, but, um, is you and them?
Uh, University of New Mexico.
Um, part of the universities
that would be covered.
Under HJR um.
Well
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
that's a good question. I
actually saw the same thing. I
think it was in um it was in the
fur, I believe, um.
I think that that was ultimately
based on a misreading of the of
the Constitution. UNM is
absolutely um one of the
institutions that this would be
subject to. The reason why I
think that mistake was made is
if you actually look at Article
12, Section 13.
The institutions are sort of
broken up into
Every institution which will
have 5 members.
then later on down in the
subsection, UNM has 7 members,
but all the other language in
any material respect me or each
other.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and that's
really important because um I
live in the University of New
Mexico world.
The same
Concerns, protections, um,
transparency, accountability.
That we owe to the faculty,
students, staff,
Across the board is critically
important because in the past
few years, as we've seen, um,
particularly
And I can speak to you and them,
uh, because I'm there is that
there's been a um
A lack of responsiveness to
those.
Bodies that actually
Make up the importance of what
University of New Mexico is.
Particularly as an Hispanic
serving institution. So there's
been a lot of uh concerns.
Uh, around the failure of the
university to respond.
Uh, in a manner is equitable.
and fair.
Across the board for everyone
involved at the university. So
it's important that we don't.
Let the governance body of
University of New Mexico, Mr.
Chair, off the hook, so to
speak.
In terms of their continued um
accountability and transparency
in these processes. So I'm happy
to hear. I, I did see that and
I'm happy to hear that, um, Mr.
Chair, that that University of
New Mexico is included because
it's imperative for us to have
that ability to go to them and
point out.
Um, where we believe they must
strengthen in their transparency
and accountability.
Well thank you very much, Mr.
uh.
Chair, I'm done. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
first off is a is a co-sponsor
on this bill. I wanna, um,
ultimately, you know, give, give
my support, you know, not only
for this resolution, but also
for all of our state higher ed
institutions. Um, I have the
utmost.
You know, respect for that
pipeline, um, but I truly
believe that this bill does add
transparency and trust back into
our higher education
institutions. I ultimately think
that, you know, when entrusted
with taking care of our, you
know, our state dollars. Um, I
think it's really important to
put that back in and I think
this res this resolution does do
that. Um, I do have just, you
know, just, you know, maybe if
you can add some insight, you
know, um, being on the back end
and ultimately, you know, I
think some concerns that you
know we may hear as legislators,
um, what
affect
What do you see this, this
resolution having like what
effect on higher education and
specifically you mentioned that
return to students and faculty
and staff, you know, that's who
are there for our universities.
Um, you know, what effects do
you see on higher education and
specifically how that relates to
our students, faculty and staff
at these institutions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Gonzalez and
thank you for uh being uh a
leader and a sponsor on this
also, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Gonzalez.
I think this will make uh our
boards of regions more
responsive.
I don't think it necessarily it
will protect against egregious
abuses like we've been talking
about today, and I think it will
raise the bar so that we're
getting uh.
The most return for increasing
state investments.
Um, thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, you know, in
one last one also just
clarifying, you know, um, you
know, adding in the specific
language of fiduciary duty, um,
you know, just again for sake
for for for protection of, you
know, the region of protection
of faculty like how far do you
see the definition of fidiciary
duties extend, how far do those
extend?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
what I will say.
Is fiduciary duties currently
exist, right? but they're found
in our common law, meaning they
are a mismatched group and and
multiple appellate cases. And so
really what we're saying is it's
sort of unfair to boards of
regents, a lot of which are not
attorneys to go and scour the
common law to to say what, what
is the expectation of me as a
board member, right? What are my
fiduciary duties?
By putting it all in writing the
legislature's communicating that
this is a priority, these are
the fiduciary duties that we
expect you to uphold. And for
those members who, who want to
sit on a board, you don't have
to guess at what the expectation
is.
It's here in writing, um, and so
these particular fiduciary
duties do care and
administration duty of undivided
loyalty, a duty of goodwill, um,
those come from it and I'm gonna
mess up the name, but it's the
association of governing boards
for universities and colleges,
um, they published a statement
in 2015 that really talked about
best practices in in this area.
And so these fiduciary duties
are pulled straight from that
resource.
And give a response and and
thank you, Mr. Chair, just, you
know, just wanted, you know,
just, just some insight, um, and
you know, ultimately the focus
is on improving education, it
is, you know, protecting our
investment, um, and ultimately
on, you know, just really
serving our students, our
faculty and staff at these
institutions as it was intended.
So thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chen.
He represented Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for
being here. Nice to see you in a
new hat.
some
Uh, my question comes from uh.
The council of university
presidents notes on the fiscal
report.
On page 4 lines 11 to 15.
It says the legislature may
provide for additional duties
for a board of regents and may
define the scope of the Board of
Regents control and management
of the institution at the board
serves.
Uh, now, Mr. Sullivan, you
mentioned that the duties are
actually outlined in the
Constitution.
However, they're interpret it
that this would permit a future
legislature by statute.
Rather than constitutional
amendment to become involved in
a number of matters.
Do you think that's accurate?
Representative Garrett, um.
Frankly, it's, it's a bit of a
confusing analysis. I don't
think that that's rooted in
fact, um, the legislature
already has the ability to craft
the duties that they feel are
important for the Board of
Regents, right? And that's what
chapter 21 is. The Constitution
is setting this, this framework,
but chapter 21 is really filling
in the pieces and we're saying
University of New Mexico.
You can issue bonds to raise
money. You can improve property.
You can sue and be sued and
contract and be contracted with.
So this body already has
The ability and the power to
create duties and then if
appropriate, refine those
duties. And so that power
exists. This doesn't broaden
that power. It doesn't restrict
that power if a future public
policy concern of this body
suggests that duties should be
refined.
That power absolutely continues
to rest with his body.
Thank you for that
clarification. And then Mr.
Chair, um.
And both of you representative
and expert witness.
I'm always concerned as someone
who's worked on constitutional
amendments, how they'll appear
on the ballot.
I do believe this will pass, but
I'm sitting there.
OK, how is this gonna read?
So I would just suggest to be
real cognizant.
Of the final language.
Uh, so that it works for the
average member of the public
who's gonna be pretty clueless
about what this is about. Thank
you.
Thank you. I don't have any
other members on my list.
What's the will of the
committee?
All right, so we have a do pass
motion by Representative Guer,
seconded by Represented Moya,
Madam Secretary, call the role
and you do pass motion, please.
Rip and Buck.
Yes
Represent Chatfield.
Representative Anita,
I mean Gonzales, excuse me.
Yes.
Representurrola? Yes.
Representative Lara? Yes.
Represent Maribal Moya.
Yes.
Representative Baral Caballero?
Yes.
Representative Colin Torres
Valesque.
sorry.
newly retired.
Faculty member from the
University of New Mexico.
Representative Vincent.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes
Representative
Vodka
Yes, from the second.
He's gentle
I get to book twice, you'll
remember that on the floor.
I'm sorry. Represented
Chapfield.
OK
Uh
Sure.
Yes.
Right? So you have a due pass on
house joint resolution talk.
Thank you.
OK thank you
Right
I am
I was gonna make a joke and pass
because then it would just come
back to me.
Yeah.
But I held it for afterward,
downtime when we switch.
Yeah, really,
and like Chatfield
vodka, dramatic effect by
waiting to vote and then you got
called out twice.
I
had the exact opposite effect.
like
Yeah, I know.
I was wearing
you guys drive me crazy.
That's right.
This is a 12
everybody voted yes.
Yeah, that's right.
Uh
Very good.
Representative Cullen.
You ready, house bill 2:38.
Mr. Chair and committee members.
I'm here with um House Bill 238.
It is, um, basically just uh
changing one section of it, um.
Is
A lining the um middle school
and high school.
Grades for professional work to
align it with the elementary,
um, providing 60 hours.
Or professional work.
I hand it over to my expert
witness and I'll have her
introduce herself.
I, I'm Renee Saucedo. um, thank
you for the um, sorry, Mr.
Chair.
Madam Vice Chair, uh, committee
members, um, thank you for the
opportunity, um, for me to speak
with you today as an educator
with 26 years of experience. I
taught 11 years of 9th grade
science and then moved to uh
high school administrator and
then currently I'm a secondary
school improvement, so I support
middle and high schools, um, in
Rio Rancho Public schools, um, I
deeply appreciate your ongoing
support for education in our.
state.
First, I'd like to express my
sincere gratitude for your
support of education in recent
years, particularly through
passing of House Bill 130.
This legislation, which allows
districts to count professional
development as part of the
required instructional hours
and.
scores your understanding of how
vital professional development
is for educators in our state.
Today we ask that you consider a
small yet important adjustment
to House Bill 238 that would
create equity between elementary
and psychocifically, we are
requesting that secondary
educators be granted granted the
same number of professional
development hours that are
currently available to
elementary educators. This
adjustment will help ensure that
all educators, regardless of
grade, the grade level they
teach, have.
equal opportunities to grow
professionally.
We know that the best way to
support our students at every
level is by providing them with
a well prepared, highly
qualified teacher.
At the secondary level, we are
beginning to face many of the
same additional li literacy
demands that have been
previously placed on elementary
staff.
It is crucial that all teachers,
regardless of the level they
teach, have the opportunity to
enhance their skills during
their contracted hours.
In addition to the equity
between for professional
development, the disparity, um,
in the professional hours can
create complications when
building uh the K-12 school
calendars.
Many families have children at
both elementary and secondary
levels and the different
differing number of professional
development days may result in
separate calendars.
As a result, attendants can for
secondary students can be
impacted. You often see
secondary students, um, staying
home when the elementary
students have in-service and
secondary don't.
Um, thank you for your continued
dedication to our education.
And for your consideration of
this request, we believe that
ensuring equal professional
development hours for all
educators will ultimately
benefit our students and
strengthen our educational
system.
Great.
Thank you.
questions
All right. So we'll go to
support.
In our audience of folks on
Zoom, if you wish to speak in
support of House Bill 238. Would
you please indicate by raising
your hand.
Populate
Looks in the room, ah,
preempting.
I'll ask the question first
though.
Are there folks in the audience
that wish to speak in sport of
hospital 238. Please raise your
hand. All right, if you would
line up behind our podium,
please. You'll have up to 2
minutes.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Lauren Hatch. I'm counsel for
Rio Rancho Public Schools.
And we ran to public schools and
the school board do support this
bill, and we would urge you to
to. Thank you. Please.
Mr. Chair, um, committee, thank
you. My name is Laurie Ortega.
I'm the executive director of
NEA New Mexico. We stand in
support of HB 238. This bill,
which allows for much needed
professional development,
planning, preparation, and
collaboration embedded in the
instructional day will help
teachers professionally and help
retain educators throughout New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Good Morning. Welcome. Hello,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I am, excuse me, I am Kate
McDermott, and I speak in favor
of passing HB 238, announced
that you vote yes on it, because
as a 30-year veteran teacher.
It's difficult to do PDs pasture
contract unless you're being
paid a decent stipend for it.
That's all. Thank you.
Great, thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is John Dich
with AFT New Mexico, we also are
in support of Houseville 238,
not because it's about
professional development, but
rather it's about how these
hours among the instructional
allowable hours are defined as
professional work hours, it's
much broader than professional
development, uh, as the way and
we all worked on House Bill 130
together. This was amended out
at the very end and, and we felt
really disappointed when that
happened a couple of years ago,
but those professional
work hours also include home
visiting, parent-teacher
conferences. Yes, it does
include professional
development, but we know that
there's a lot of that already
happening in the schools, and I
think most exciting to our
membership is that professional
work hours also include
mentorship, coaching and
collaboration between educators,
and we feel those are really
critical things that were
missing in how we traditionally
look at these professional
development times and as the
folks who are on LESC that
studied the no time to lose.
report and all these other
reports from other places, the
collaboration between
professionals in the place of
work outside of professional
development with some of the
most impactful things we could
do with our school time for
educators themselves. So we do
as well as everybody else
support House Bill 238. Thank
you.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, uh Lily Ortiz,
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico School Board
Association, and the school
board Association has two top
priorities that relate to this
bill, educated recruitment,
retention preparation, as well
as academic achievement. And New
Mexico School Board Association
ranks student achievement as the
quality and quality learning as
the number one priority. The
LASC analysis notes that the
most effective forms of
professional development for
teachers are
emb ed d ed in the course of the
normal school day. So it is
important for our students to
receive the best possible
instruction and professional
time gives our teachers the
critical preparation time during
the school day to achieve that.
We thank the sponsors for
supporting this bill, and we
highly support it and ask you to
move it forward.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot,
president of the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational
Leaders, the acronym for that is
NEMEL, also on behalf of Mexico
School Superintendents for all
the reasons you have heard
before, we urge you to pass.
Thank you so much.
Right, so I don't see any others
and support. Is there any
opposition to House Bill 238
either online or in the room.
All right, so I will come to
committee members before we get
there, um.
So I did want to provide a
little bit of context which I've
shared with sponsor, and I think
it's important um for the body
to understand is that um our
vice chair, um, Garrett and I
had carried House Bill 1:30. It
was collaborative work. We
worked on it all through the
interim, so many members that
are returning champions had
worked on that through LESC and
getting House Bill 130 was um
broadly supported and something
that we worked hard to get it
through the process at that
time.
Um,
you've heard from the testimony
that it got this portion that
we're hearing now was amended
out in Senate Finance, um, and
those of you that may not have
been following it as closely as
we did, um, we had a hearing
scheduled and then it got pulled
from the agenda.
scheduled and pulled from the
agenda and come to find out is
that the
The Committee was holding it
pending an amendment, that
amendment was just this amending
out the 60 hours of professional
development to reduce it to 30.
Um, and that was uh uh a hope.
Of the governor's office to
reduce that down to increase in
class time for our students, but
as the testimony and what we had
argued during that time was the
reason why we had that 60 hours
was because as a secondary
teacher, um,
Me, a middle school teacher like
Representative Garrett and those
of you that testified, it's
vitally important that we have.
This time during the workday in
order to do the professional
work that needs to get done
because a lot of that work has
to do with folks working,
working with our students and
providing feedback during that
day that we can't.
do that professional work when
nobody's at school.
Um, so embedding that into that
11:40 we felt was critical. Now
in order to get that bill
passed, um,
We had amended that out of the
bill to include that 30, um, and
get it moved on. So certainly
appreciate bringing this
forward, but I just want to set
the context of, of what happened
during um
1:30 and, and getting that
signed that became subject to a
lawsuit that was resolved most
recently. Um.
So with that, uh, representing
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for bringing this, um,
I, um, I like the fact that it
now reads the way it left here
two years ago, um, and, and
hopefully we can keep it that
way, um, as, as a high school
teacher, um, I, I really want to
focus like the gentleman, um, I
think it's 100% important. We,
we always think it's
professional development, um,
and, and, and I, and, and most
teachers are like, oh, really
another professional development
because some of it is, is, is.
Many of it is not relevant to
us, like, but, but we still got
to go through it. The, the, but
the mentorship coaching and
collaboration between school
employees. I think that is the
most important part in this
because.
That is what helps our brand new
teachers get their mentorship.
That is what helps them get that
that that uh.
That
just that extra in order to be
able to make it through, um, I,
I thank God I taught a much
easier, um.
Subject when I was a brand new
teacher, so it wasn't crazy if I
would have decided to be a, uh,
or if I would have started out
as a science teacher, it would
have been much more stressful,
um, or in the high school, it
would have been much more
stressful, uh, but that time.
is important and there's so many
things that go on in those PLCs
in those collaborations in those
coaching times or even um any of
that. And it's, and, and having
that embedded in that workday is
just showing the value and
respect that you have for
teachers and their time.
Um, and I think so many people
don't really.
Don't really notice that we do,
um, and, and we get it when
people don't value it and, and,
and don't, uh, and well, I won't
go in other directions, but
yeah, um, but, um, but like we,
we get it, and I think putting
this back in there is just
showing is is telling teachers
across the state is that we
value your time.
And we want you to be able to do
this and collaborate, um, within
that, that uh that that workday
because to be honest with you,
right now we still have a PLC
every week.
That, uh, we have to do so many
hours of, of, uh, uh, you know,
professional learning hours and
stuff like that anyway, none of
those hours if, thank God that
uh.
uh, hearing or the court struck
it down, but at that point they
were not gonna count for any of
those hours. We're not gonna
count for for our work hours,
and they all had to be either
adding extra days, taking away
some of our vacation time so
that we can make up with that
and having this embedded is
again, it's just going to um.
So a sign of respect for for
teachers, to be honest with you.
Thank you for bringing it.
Thank you. Any other discussion?
Represent Baca?
I don't think he was church to
clarify a point of order. Do we
have a 3 hour clock on this as
well?
Like on the floor that I can
debate it for 3 hours.
And is is that you mean in
committee right now to debate it
right now.
You want to debate it right now
for 3 hours, so he said I want
to make, make the rookie squad a
little bit, so
everywhere you're going.
No, thank you, Mr. Chairman, but
I, I do have some comments about
it. I do have some clarifying,
so, um, represent called, first
of all, I didn't catch your name
as far as your expert witness.
Renee Saucedo.
Renaissance, I don't wanna.
OK, um, Ms. Salcedo, you are
currently a teacher? No, I'm at
district office.
Well, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman. What is the average
daily caseload of a secondary
teacher, kind of, you know, I
know it varies by
Subject area, but would you take
an average of middle school and
high school. Can you give me
just a roundabout.
Does it have to be exact.
I see some heads nodding in the
back there, OK?
Um,
So with this caseload now,
currently we do have some, some
collaboration time, correct?
Is it true, um, Mr. Chairman,
that some, many of, much of your
time that is kind of designated
here our teachers are pulled to
do other types of activities,
IEP meetings, sat meetings,
other types of administrative
work.
They, they do have um a prep.
And
that that's not necessarily
collaborative time, um, because
probably the people in in their
content don't have that same
prep time.
Um
So during their duty hours, they
may or may not have time to
collaborate, but oftentimes
you're correct, they're pulled
for I other types of things and
I'm actually if you wouldn't
mind going through the chair for
the discussion so we can
depersonalize the debate.
Thank you. Oh no
a gentle reminder
as a teacher as to why we go
through the chair to
depersonalize the debate, uh
amongst these topics. The
represent.
Thank you.
It's actually my first time here
too, so we'll learn together,
right? So, um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Socio, uh, and
actually representative Cullen.
So, um,
Are you a
Are you aware of what
Are you aware of the issues that
we've had in the struggles we've
had with student performance and
outcomes in our middle school
and high schools. Are you?
Uh, I'm sure most real Rancho,
unless, you know, I know that
you do pretty well in a lot of
areas, but
How is it, is it also consistent
that we have seen a kind of
decreasing of scores that
actually reached a pinnacle in
high school.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Representative,
yes, we have seen it, uh,
decreasing it in scores and I
think every district in the
state has that concern and is,
you know, working on going
through the data and trying to
figure out what we need to do.
To improve our scores. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you.
That was my next question. How
often right now do teachers at
the middle school and high
school letter uh level get
together to discuss.
Strategy, discuss data,
differentiation, kind of test
analysis.
How, how often would you say in
our current system in our
current framework are those
types of behaviors or those
types of activities, um,
happening.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Representative, I
can speak for Rio Rancho Public
schools, and once a week we have
um dedicated time for PLC and
during that time, teachers
should be having that
discussion, but it's um for
secondary, it's a short amount
of time, 45 minutes once a week.
Thank you and uh Mr. Chairman,
and like I said earlier, pretend
I didn't know what PLC meant,
OK?
Professional learning.
OK. Thank you, Mr. and, and tell
me,
From your just general.
Um, understanding the
professional learning, what is
the underlying idea.
Of PLCs or professional learning
communities.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Representative,
the underlying idea for a
professional learning community
is to talk about um what
teachers are doing in the
classroom, how students are.
How, how they're learning, um,
how they're scoring on exams
and.
If I'm not doing a great job and
or my students don't seem to be
understanding this concept and
another.
Classroom, they are
understanding, then I can work
with that teacher to see what
that teacher's doing that maybe
I can change.
Man, you should have, you should
have wrote the book there with
the before, right?
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, um,
And representative, so.
PLCs, can you tell one of the
biggest issues many of our K-12
schools are dealing with right
now.
His attendances and engagement.
How do you see?
That the PLC process or
providing time during the
workday.
May address those huge issues.
A student who's engaged is more
likely to attend Mr. a student
who's engaged is more likely to
attend class and so through that
conversation of why my students
aren't doing as well as another
group of students. You're most
likely to find out that students
are being engaged in another
class and so it's, it's vital
for attendance and student
engagement.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
then the other parts of it is
really when we talk about
communication, communicating
both with your students and with
uh the parents as well is also
um my understanding, Mr.
Chairman, could be part of this
process where we have
Uh, this opportunity to
collaborate.
And, and thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman. The other, the other
part that I want to say is, once
you get
Your classroom and they hand you
that set of keys or now they
hand you that fob.
We teachers and staff, not just
teachers, administrators, other
staff.
Ne
the opportunity to learn and
grow with within their
profession. So,
Mr. Chairman, I will say that I
support this.
Bill 100%.
Because I recognize the fact is
that we
Even as his adults.
We look
We work and learn best working
together. We were, we were in a
pre-meeting this morning, Mr.
Chairman, and one of my
colleagues. I won't say which
one he is, but he's a handsome
guy with a beard. That's what a
PLC is. And I said it's actually
what we're doing right now. We
were, we were talking about it,
we were talking about different
points of view. We're talking
about different
Um, areas, and that's what I
said that in
The basic terms is a PLC.
So, um
You know, Mr. Chairman, I do
always and I will say this till
as long as you guys have me on
this committee.
That it's quality not quantity,
and that if we're able to refine
our time.
And we're able to be more
efficient and effective in our
practices, our students.
will perform better.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for representing you
are talking a lot today about on
the ground stuff. I was thinking
about setting up a shadow for
you, for a university region and
for teachers during their PLCs.
So you can really get a good
idea of what they're going,
you're really interested in the
day to day. Represent Gorola,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
one question to clarify this,
um.
Some of the schools went through
a long process to try to
accommodate the to the uh
legislation from 2 years ago.
This bill adding that.
Intended 30 extra hours
originally um it's up to 30
hours, correct, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, so if there's something the
school has already in place and
it's working.
They can just leave it as it is,
right? So just to try to avoid
things like it's got you have to
change it and move things
around. But if it's working,
they can stay there. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chair and I'll let her.
Mister Chair, Madam
Representative.
Um, yes, if this just gives an
option for your instructional
hours of different ways you can
count instructional hours, so
it's just that you, if you have
some have to change it. Thank
you, that was my question just
to make sure that nobody gets
like. I will have to change
everything, Mr. She
and, and I agree, uh
professional work is the best
word to say it, and I wish
everyone who has is in the
leadership position in schools.
Uh, takes the teacher's input
when developing PLCs. Thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right.
Torres Velasquez.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee and uh Representative
Cullen and Miss Salcedo.
Thank you so very much for
bringing this bill forward.
And for not letting anything
that happened in the past stop
you from doing so.
I have to tell you how much I
appreciate.
The care that you are
demonstrating for teachers in
the district who do incredible
work with our students.
I also want to point out, Mr.
Chair,
Um, this is a perfect example.
Of the misinformation around the
Martinez lawsuit.
Um, the Martinez lawsuit worked
with teachers.
Um, we brought in a number of
teachers to speak with our
attorneys, and this was one of
the issues that came up, and
this was one of the issues of
the lawsuit. This was brought up
in the trial. Your
superintendent, um,
Superintendent Cleveland gave
testimony about the importance
of professional work hours and
And I, I just don't believe that
we haven't been able to do
anything about it, um, even at
the effort, the past efforts of
this committee.
Um
If we're looking at
Teacher preparation, which was
not in lawsuit, we should be
looking at things that were in
the lawsuit as well.
It doesn't seem like the money
that this would cost.
Would be that outrageous, and I,
and I don't remember if this is
a bill that costs money or not.
Um
But I want to support you on
this, and so please let me know
how I can support you on this
very important issue because
Not only is it important for
teachers to have the time and
the work hours to discover their
discuss their profession and
their craft.
It's also important in the
Martinez lawsuit because of the
four categories of at-risk
students, and in order to meet
those needs, we can't just be
expecting teachers to uh take
all the letters courses without
the compensation or take the
microcredentials without the
compensation.
And we can't be expecting them
to just take them and not have
the opportunity to discuss and
work together in planning
through how this will affect the
school, the students, the
families, the community, and so,
um.
I guess I'd like to know if
there's anything I can do to
support you. Um, please let me
know.
Alright, thank you. I think the
Experience from House 1:30 is
that it's not necessarily the
legislature because this is a
bill that passed out of off the
house floor without a no vote
and then off the Senate floor
with 6 no votes, but I don't
think this was necessarily the
issue and maybe amongst a few
senators it was the issue that
it had been amended out as
problematic. I think the issue
is going to reside as we talked
to Representative Cullen with
PED in the governor's office,
because that's the tension that
we've been having between I
represent Baca mentioned is.
is uh quality versus quantity
where.
With uh PET, the governor's
office, quantity, the amount of
days that students are in school
versus uh the quality of the
instruction that the students
are receiving in their class
each and every day. So, um,
we're at a little bit of a uh uh
a philosophical disagreement
that's being reflected in a lot
of different bills. Um, so
certainly we wish you luck on
your journey there,
Representative Robot Caviero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I may I
move it to pass?
I make a motion to do pass on
238.
All right, so we have a motion
for due pass on House Bill 2308,
a second by Representative
Torres Velasquez, um.
Let's do this. Is there any
opposition to the DuPass motion.
Seeing none. What was that a no
on the bill or a no to my
question. OK, that's clarifying.
Just want to get it right. All
right. So we have a unanimous
due pass for House Bill 238.
Congratulations on the first
billing committee.
or something.
All right, well done.
OK.
So, um,
Lily May, would you like to
remind us about the school
board?
Association breakfast on Friday,
please.
Right into the microphone,
please. So in case any of these
folks find folks at home, wish
to join us.
Yes Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, well, the New Mexico
school board conference starting
on Thursday, but we have a
wonderful breakfast on Friday
that we've invited you to, we
would love to host you and honor
you for all your work, the
breakfast starts at 7 a.m. It is
uh at the El Dorado Hotel and at
the breakfast we would also
allow you a few minutes to speak
to the membership. There's going
to be at least 300 school board
members, please join us.
Friday 7 a.m., great food and
great people in that room with
good hearts for students. Thank
you.
Definitely, if I could put a
plug in, um, because the work
that we do is not just
representing our independent
districts, but all 89 school
districts, so the school board
breakfast is a great opportunity
to meet with um folks from
different school boards to hear
their issues and to talk about
um how the decisions we make
here or considering here will
affect other school districts,
um, outside of our own and then
important for us is that on
Friday, we will start at 9
o'clock, so that members can go
to the breakfast, have time, I
will have to stay afterward
because I give a talk about
what's going on here in the um
During the legislative session
in the world of education to all
the members after breakfast. So
we'll start here promptly at 9
o'clock. I think the agenda's
already gone out, so we'll see
you at 9 o'clock again on
Friday. So, thank you, folks.
See you Friday.
