Representative land that.
Here Representative meant to
read.
Representative metric.
Representative Roybal Caballero
Senator.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser.
Here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garrett here.
Chair.
Here we do have a quorum
chairman all right.
Thank you so much Mr chairman Mr
chair Alonzo needs to be let in
he's on the inside thank you I
did promote him to panelists did
you chairman I am here yeah you
look here in the upper left hand
corner okay thank you for
calling because I could just
make a quick point of order Mr
chairman before we get started
Representative place Mr chairman
we were struggling a little bit
going over the bills today
because it seems like there's a
pretty significant dragon FY
ours coming
house bill one sixteen one
hundred and eighty five
all of those seem to have a hard
time getting FIR is coming in to
help me Senator Ortiz I.
Seven forty two AM this morning
so Mr Mays you know I know we're
we're struggling in the process
in terms of trying to to do this
this whole provided cycle or
session on a on a virtual
platform but it is it is very
difficult to to really
understand what these bills do
without without all the proper
analysis and hoping you're able
to on to make those comments to
to those that can maybe get
those things moving will quicker
Mr chairman thank you thank
thank you representative and I
was just going to address that
so I appreciate those comments
so we've been trying to schedule
further in advance in order to
accommodate the different
agencies that need to weigh in
on these bills in order to do
that I do understand that you
know things are are moving a
little bit more sluggishly so
we're trying to plan
on a week in advance on the
bills is as we have them so so I
think that's important and it's
up in a point well taken it will
be sure to our to do that so all
of the amendments you all know
we put them twenty four hours in
advance and ask members to get
them in before I when are
committee secretary leaves the
building in order to accommodate
some of those concerns but I
appreciated that's point well
taken and definitely if I have
to schedule a little bit further
in advance as well so that those
things get
Ready by the different agencies
and and and through the process
points point well taken
Representative Baldonado the.
Mr chairman may I on that
Representative Dow please thank
you Mr chairman and so if the FY
are keen at seven forty five
this morning at and we are to
give twenty four hours notice on
amendment if I found something
that I would like to mend on the
bill I'm still going over it how
would you suggests that an
amendment be made to improve the
bill when you can't read the
analysis we have ten minutes
before the committee starts in
your lesson party on the twenty
four hour notice for a minute so
that's a good question
Representative Dow I mean I
think that's unfortunately
that's that's a bit on the
agency as far as getting these
analysis out and again I
apologize for doing it but I'm
trying to do everything in my
capacity as a chair to make sure
that this is fair and that these
documents are getting out and
and you know there will be an
opportunity should these bills
go any further in order to make
those amendments that you speak
up but it's a point well taken I
and I'm gonna do my my best to
to get things scheduled in the
pipeline for for on the agencies
in order to get those analysis
out more quickly and I'll be
sure to reach out to them to see
what the issue is and and how I
can help in getting that but
I'm sorry for that
Representative thank you thank
you Mr chairman I think part of
the problem is is that the
server within the capital keeps
going down and our analysts are
going twenty four and forty
eight hours without being able
to access the information so
maybe we should have amended the
bill when we did we would stop
business if this that webcast
went down while we were in
committee but we didn't consider
the destruction of the work that
helps us make good decisions
when we are voting thank you Mr
chairman and I do I do I.
Really empathize with your
situation and the staff on the
committee so please don't take
it as anything personal on that
I just I think we should be
making.
We should not be giving up the
proper process of lawmaking at
because of COVID.
Thank you thank you for.
Excuse me thank you
Representative Dow I I totally
understand and that's why I
Asked in the in the past week
and a half in order to extend
some of the Scrase I mean I
understand the complications by
extending back sort of grace
period so that we can work
through some of the troubles
because we are under a time
frame in order to work I'm
totally aware of that and I'm
willing to work with everybody
in order to get that remedy it
we're just under special
circumstances and and working as
diligently as possible with
everybody the staff
our staff here within the
committee L. U. S. C. in order
to do that so certainly
appreciate your patience and
I'll be working diligently to to
as best I can on my side to to
make sure that those are the
cases
So thank you I hope that
addresses some of the concerns
of committee members I certainly
appreciate that you all are
bringing these forward but again
I mean I appreciate your
patience with this trying to
work things as smoothly as
possible but we're in a little
bit of a a Brave New World so
thank you all so much for that
and anything I can do please
please reach out to me.
So one of one other thing I did
want to address and I think
these are all very good points
and and
one of the other issues so all
at all at my own separate issue
we're just having trouble with
the organization of bills so you
may see them on the website in
one order on the agenda in one
order and then in our share file
in one order so we're we're
figuring that out and how to
place those in the proper order
so I like to do it where we have
it in
ascending order so from lowest
to highest in the larger
I I know on the website it gets
like flipped so it's from
highest to lowest but that's
just how I like to do things but
if there's ever a change in that
I would like to get it so that
it's uniform but again I
appreciate your patience and
that and will always announce
which bill that we're on and it
might be helpful if we can
figure out a way to to have on
the screen I'll talk with the
tech people if we could have
something on somebody screen I
see Representative these elves
nodding your head maybe on your
screen we can have the bill
number.
skating but we have a bill
number somewhere that indicates
to everybody watching that we
are on house bill fifty two
we're on house bill seventy
seven I think might be might be
helpful in this digital platform
for for the public so
So I'll talk to the tech people
and see if we can get something
like that or maybe I'll be
something low tech like a like a
shoulder pad with a white board
on my shoulder here
I don't know we can try to
figure something out
no no way that we have one
though I and I can't write Mr Mr
chair if you will give me that
number all right it down and
keep it right here.
I appreciate that Representative
so today with that in mind will
start off with house bill fifty
two okay house bill fifty two so
Representative Figueroa do you
have any experts.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
would you please move other
hands on the ladder into our
panelists category.
Yes ma'am.
All right.
Thank you to everybody.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative you sell.
Okay Mr chair we have a bill and
we have a couple of amendments
how would you like me to proceed
with amendments to the bill if
if you would present the bill
and then we can start after the
presentation of the bill then we
can go to your amendments.
What what the S. as in my local
legacy the blue devils day call
me daily as a grant John met
early is key up as in that
studies light a little more and
lay the bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council.
This bill codifies and law and
statute.
The bilingual multicultural
advisory Education Advisory
Council.
What are cultural Education Act.
This call in parity in line with
the education the Indian
Education Act and the Islamic
Education Act.
It will ensure that the voices
are.
Stakeholder communities the
richness of the diversity of
language that is the strength of
New Mexico.
Those voices will be heard.
In the preparation of bilingual
teachers in the building of
programs for bilingual education
in New Mexico.
Many has existed in an ad hoc
form for many years so what this
bill does is protected in
statute and brings it in line
with our two other major
education acts.
Yes that's a general overview of
the bill Mr chair.
Great Mr Sunderland would you
wish to make some opening
remarks.
Mr chair members of the
committee I simply want to echo
let's Representative Figueroa
shared just now the the notion
that to the bilingual to culture
Education Advisory Council has
been around for fifty years
doing some incredible work
supporting in the New Mexico
public education department in a
collaborative way and we wish to
continue to do so and this this
bill will support is said to to
stay there and to definitely
continue to support our legacy
and our future for our students
and our teachers.
Thank you.
Right thank you so much so what
we can do is is we can go to
public testimony and then
entertain your amendments how
does that sound to the
committee.
okay.
I appreciate that so remember
attendees please first and last
names if you want to include
your organization do it at the
front or the back but I will be
calling people with their first
and last names okay on the list
you'll have up to two minutes
but
Privative is it is my policy
here so please do not be
repetitive we have a long agenda
for today okay so if somebody
said something that you approve
of just acknowledge that I hope
I see hands up.
Students not following
directions
so those in opposition those who
are opposed to house bill fifty
two please raise your hand so
this is opposition if you are
against house bill fifty two.
Okay we'll go to Christine send.
Christine welcome you have up to
two minutes.
Thank you.
My name is Dr Christine Sims I'm
an associate professor in the
department of language literacy
and social cultural studies in
the college of education at the
university of New Mexico I am
from Aqaba Pueblo and I in
support of this bill I served
actually on this committee
almost since its assistance in
section back in the eighties
nineties others served for
number of years with my
colleagues
doctor the couple Martinez merry
gene Haberman other members
I wanted to provide my support
for this House Bill fifty two
out of the concerns that we make
sure that there are people who
are knowledgeable about
indigenous languages of New
Mexico I know that the expertise
in these languages are us is
often lacking at the agency
level within the department of
education often times we have no
speakers of these languages so
this committee is an essential
part of providing the
information in the guidance
that's needed to develop
appropriate policies and and the
implementation of different
initiatives in bilingual
education so I am fully in
support of this our.
This house bill fifty two thank
you very much.
We were next.
Thank you for that I'm so we
were on opposition
so I'm assuming that there is an
opposition so we'll go to
support.
For house bill fifty two so if
you would raise your hand if you
wish to speak please be brief.
We have a long agenda today.
All right Meredith.
You're welcome thank you I'm
thank you Mr chairman I am
verification Education co chair
of the legal women voters of New
Mexico and we are standard
the strong support of this bill
and say that is will help to
address are very diverse
population we're very pleased
with the sponsor thank you very
much for pre for this bill and
we thank all those who served in
advisory capacity now time to
for realizes because of the
Yazzie Martinez Madam and so on
we really need to structure a
high quality equitable education
system so I hope that all the
members will support what this
bill thank you so much great
thank you madam.
So next we'll go to Jeremy.
Jeremy welcome you have up to
two minutes.
Thank you chair members the
committee German thank you
director of youth learning for
Santa Clara pueblo speaking on
behalf of governors have ria
Senator public fully supports
this bill we work with the
members of the bilingual
multicultural visor Committee in
many fashions moving forward and
my other role I'm also the vice
chair of the Indian Education
Advisory Committee S. Hennessey
in the great work that these are
committee members have done so
in that notion was in Santa
Clara Public fully supports this
bill I can share.
Excellent thank you Sir.
All right so next we'll go to
Steve good morning Steve.
Steve you're with us good
morning good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee
Steve see on use with any a New
Mexico on behalf of more members
would like to share that we in
we are in full support of this
bill this bill is definitely
aligned with our state
legislative goals international
goals in that our education
system must be rebuilt our core
values of honoring our students
will be and and and systems of
discrimination and
marginalization that do not
allow all students to learn and
perform to their full potential
we think the representative
reinforced this bill and our
members are in full support of
HB fifty two thank you.
Thank you say.
Next we'll go to jasmine.
Yes ma'am good morning thank you
for being here.
Good morning madam chair Romero
my name is jasmine yep that and
I am with the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty a member of
the education team and and CLP
we stand in support of the
legislation because it is
consistent with it Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit which calls for
the full implementation of the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act and we believe
house bill fifty two would
further the state's efforts in
providing access to culturally
and linguistically relevant
education to the for student
groups in the case thank you.
Thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to the
doctor you minutes late them.
Good morning doctor.
Learning Mr chairman and say
members of the committee my name
is Patricia Jimenez late so I'm
I'm the project manager for
transfer medication New Mexico I
would like to thank
representative to go out for
sponsoring house bill fifty two
New Mexico is recognized
nationally as a leader in
bilingual dual language or
language development this is due
to the fifty years of expertise
study in advocacy of what was
the **** and now the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
in order to ensure we can
continue to develop and support
high quality bilingual dole
language or language development
and English learner programs in
New Mexico for the years to come
is essential to put the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act into statute happy
golden anniversary to the
committed members who have
served and continue to stir
transportation Mexico is in full
support of house bill fifty two
Mr chairman thank you very much
for the opportunity great thank
you.
Next we'll go to.
Dr Byrne Steen.
Dr currency near request good
morning.
Joining Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for this
moment to speak in support of
this bill we believe in the
Albuquerque teachers federation
that a filing will citizenry is
an and rich citizenry L. takes
us one step closer to the
promise in trying to in our
constitution thank you.
Great thank you doctor
Princeton.
And then we'll go to.
Kevin Shendo.
Good morning Kevin you're with
us we have a to two minutes.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee hello this is
Kevin Shendo education director
for the public famous and we
stand in support of you too we
are coordinating our efforts
here in the public payments to
focus on language immersion of
to strengthen our language and
so we fully support this bill
but also encourage that all
immersion efforts within tribal
communities be supported equally
as bilingual and other language
initiatives as well thank you
very much right thank you Sir.
Next we'll go to Vernon lu Han.
Mr I'm here with us in the.
me.
Can.
Chair Romero.
Members of the committee.
This morning I am chairman of
the task of the board of
education.
And I just want to say thank you
for giving me this opportunity
first of all and to
Representative Figueroa for
introducing this bill.
Since fifteen forty eight.
And before that this.
Land where we live has been
multicultural multilingual and
we want to keep this tradition
intact this R. as.
We are concerned more Pueblo as
we would like to attain
The same status as other
languages have.
In that we want it to be a
requirement among some of the
schools that.
Serve native American
populations that our children
will be able to earn of language
credit for speaking their own
native language so that's what
we would like to see as one of
the goals of this type of
legislation and we appreciate.
You're committee's efforts to
work towards.
This kind of education for our
children.
The **** that you recognize
that.
Multicultural multilingual.
Society is important to our
nation thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Next we'll go to actually long.
Actually the above two minutes
please good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is actually one with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico we stand in support
of the spell thank you.
Great.
Thank you.
All right so go to Curtis
Chavis.
Good morning Mr Chavis.
Can you hear me.
Can okay good morning chair and
committee my name is Curtis
Chavis and I'm the development
director for the carriage
children's learning center and
coach the Pro Bowl and we stand
in support of House Bill R.
fifty two.
All right we have a like we have
a new champion of privative.
Thank you Curtis all right
awesome so with that we'll go to
your amendments before we go to
questions from the case so if
you could I know you have a
couple of them so if you could
read the first two oh two number
please.
Certainly Mr chair it's two one
nine two two nine point one.
Some members this is the first
amendment on our shared drive.
One of the top in the bill
folder.
We have adequate wait time for
people.
Okay.
Representative if you would
explain the amendment.
I'm sorry can we can we have a
motion to discuss the amendment
please Mr chairman members for
discussion.
Some of.
Welcome and we'll have you as a
secretary Representative Herrera
please Representative.
Thank you Mr chair this bill
address the composition of the
and vice three council from
three to five on page two line
ten three two five
representatives appointed by a
tribal nations.
This is more in line with the
Indian Education Act and these I
organizations to ensure complete
representation these I also have
existing bodies that can appoint
someone so we have on page two
line eleven.
They will be one member from the
Navajo Nation the Mescalero
Apache tribe that he can do to
try the southern pueblos and the
northern pueblos each of these
bodies of each of these groups
have a body that can appoint for
example there is and body called
the eight northern Indian
pueblos council so they can
appoint for the northern plains
also and I as a better
representation of the indigenous
communities in the state.
That was changes on page two
line twelve the strychnine and
change it to H..
And I'm page two line eighteen
strict three and change it to to
so the total composition of the
council stays at fifteen.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for that so do we have
discussion on the amendment.
Session.
Okay.
Okay
great thank you Representative
Stapleton were you trying to
make that motion as well that
what you're yes I said
enrollment option of the
amendment okay since I heard
Representative Dow give it to
her I'll give the second to use
Stapleton Representative
Stapleton
there anymore discussion is
there objection to adopting the
amendment.
Okay seeing none you have an
amended bill
Can you read us the two oh two
number of your second amendment
please.
Yes Mr chair two one nine three
eight four point one three eight
four point one.
Great so members in your share
file this is the second
amendment.
Mr chair on the amendment for
discussion thank you
Representative Sweetser also
it's Representative Figueroa if
you would please explain your
amendment.
This addresses some of the
issues pointed out by our
fabulous analyst in this
committee.
There was an internal
inconsistency in New Mexico
really was appointing home.
So on page one.
and also that this council on
page one line twenty to advise
the governor this council
advises the secretary PED and
staff at PED so straight the
governor.
One twenty three.
Thanks to provide twenty two.
Issue line twenty four.
There is an existing committee
you heard that in public
testimony as well as from the.
It is the existing committee co
chairs.
That will help draft a list so
we are adding on page two line
twenty four the existing ad hoc.
Committee co chairs.
Three line I just to make sure
it's absolutely clear straight
members and insert new members
the new members of the committee
will select the New Mexico
chairs.
Three line six.
There are some of the bill that
establishes a three year term
for everyone on the committee
everyone would turn over at the
same time.
There's a loss of continuity and
knowledge for the council in
that respect so we're pointing
out that the existing council
members will finish serving
their terms and that will ensure
that the on going the new
appointed members will be
selected like the current
members are.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative do we
have a discussion about the
amendment.
I move the amendment.
Second option of the amendment.
Thank you Representative care
second by Representative Eli no
discussion is there any
objection to adopting the second
amendment.
All right seeing you have a
second amendment to your bill
all right so open it up to
discussion from committee on
the.
Twice amended bill.
Representative care please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Figueroa I I
totally support this but I just
want
I have one site question so we
have our native American and
Hispanic Advisory Council and
obviously there will be some
overlap and the missions these
various committees have but I do
want to insure
That I'm a long time teacher of
students who are learning
English and I feel this is the
one committee where you get some
of the educational experts in
parents that have children that
are not native American or
Hispanic I mean I have Arabic
Hungarian you name it in our
schools and even in rural areas
depending on certain businesses
there are.
Who are multicultural but not of
the Hispanic or native American
to Senate do feel that this
multicultural council in statute
will address that just what kind
of that assurance.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative Garrett yes
because languages in this bill
are not specified
Parents of the parents who are
appointed and the educational
experts that are on this council
address.
Bilingual and multicultural
students in all languages and
even specifies in the bill
whether or not they have been
identified as in a federally
recognized bilingual program so
the effort is to address.
Bilingual multicultural
education for all of our
different rich diverse languages
in New Mexico thank you.
Representative.
Thank you representative next on
the list is Representative
Roybal Caballero please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative and everyone hear
it in support thank you for
introducing this bill it's long
time in coming I Mr chair just
wise to be fully supportive.
you know in in my case Mr chair
had I had the opportunity
growing up.
As a tribal member as an
indigenous woman and child to
have been exposed to and learn
through curriculum and through
checks my native language of
Tijuana I would be a lot I would
be traveling.
I would exemplify how important
it is around to have not just a
cultural understanding of your
traditions in your family in
your history in your ancestry
but I would be able to convey
that today Mr chair to my
grandsons I would be able to
ensure that the richness of my
cultural heritage which is
multicultural because time is
spent on indigenous native I'm
all of the above.
I would be able to be.
Really ensuring that through my.
knowledge and my ability to
speak and to share that rich
cultural history that I am body
I would be able to now share
that with my my grandchildren
who are biracial in addition to
multi cultural heritage so you
see Mr chair this is an
incredibly important
You know what I I don't even
know what to call it it should
be already embedded in our
institutions but it's a
admirable and I would say thank
you for that because I think
this council on it has a
tremendous charge I have
complete faith in all of I will
be Representative and I really
appreciate the amendments that
we passed because that further
clarifies how important it is to
be inclusive in this process so
Mr chair I just wish to thank
you and we support passage of
this bill thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative for the bill
and I understand the heart of it
and support that I guess could
you please explain
it to me are you this New York
codifying in changing the
membership or is this a
duplicate committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative for the question
it is not a duplicate committee
it is codifying an ad hoc
committee that already exists
and protecting it in statute so
that it can't be disbanded and
and if future date.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
thank you representative will
per diem and be paid out for
virtual meetings.
Well Mr chair and
Representative.
I was going to say yes because
will per diem rate paid out is
is a test of for virtual
meetings I have no idea how per
diem is handled in the agencies
regarding per diem
So I do not know the answer to
that question I do know that the
current ad hoc committee has
also qualified for per diem and
in two thousand twenty and a
whole is seven hundred dollars
was requested and per diem.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you Representative
for that and as an advisory I
guess one of the things that was
frustrating to me before
becoming a representative and
even now that might cause
frustration this year has been
looking at the steps to care
coordinating council courses at
CYFD and that their the findings
and recommendations that they
made to CYFD an advisory not
only does the wife do not have
to respond to them they don't
have to take action on any other
recommendations so as an
advisory committee I mean I'm
just thinking and for this
committee and ask me because
legislators we create these
committees but we want them to
have meaningful input and some
of the atrocious things that
raise right founded by the steps
to care according counselors you
CYFD is a wire children move
thirty forty fifty sixty seventy
eighty times between different
support families non biological
family foster care whatever
can't even get a response from
CYFD so as you move for just a
consideration that maybe the
agency must respond to the
recommendations at least respond
to them even if they don't have
to take action on them maybe to
respond if they intend to take
action if they don't intend to
take action so that this is this
has some something more
meaningful than just making
recommendations
And I think it's something we
should consider all of us as we
move forward advisory councils
or in any sort of body that that
that we convene that that we
want agencies do we don't hear
from them we wanted to take
action based on the feedback
so.
Does.
I think that I think that's I
think that's all for my
questions thank you Mr chair and
thank you for bringing the
forward.
Great thank you representative
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee it's good to
actually connect with you this
morning I.
I worked with Mr Santa and his
team this summer in the center
of Natalie Figueroa trying to
to get this bill to get the
language in this bill
Move forward I think that
they've done an excellent job I
backed off a while back in just.
They have the
expertise that was necessary to
move it forward and I really.
I'm glad that Representative
Figueroa has championed the
bill.
I think that it's so important
to move this forward you know
it's a bilingual teacher and
Twenty one years of teaching as
well as an advocate for
bilingual education for many
years and the.
We don't do this now.
Another up hill battle so I
really really supported I'm
thankful that they brought it
forward thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
maximalist representative in
cell please.
Thank you very much most of my
questions for as by.
Representative Dow but I'm also
looking at some of these
analysis and.
My concern is.
We have already.
Find it now let me we have
already set up.
One program.
Well the house bill one fifty
nine multicultural education I
prime framework that was amended
from the two thousand nineteen
regular session so now we have
two new divisions M. P. E.
state.
Are we going to I guess my
question to the representative
to the prisoner of the bill
Representative Figueroa.
Are we going to be expanding the
Hispanic Education Division as
well since we just now have
expanded the native American
one.
Mr chair and representative this
bill does not expand any
division or department's simply
codify something that already
exists no ma'am we Mr chair and
representative Figaro I believe
that
we added more members on to this
particular sale and the concern
there was the per diem as as far
as the new members went.
So what are we expect the that
membership increase on the
Hispanic Education Division.
Mr chair representative on the
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council I have no idea if
they are proposing to expand
their membership.
Mr chair.
Representative like I said most
my questions were answered by
Representative Representative
doubt thank you very much for
your time.
Right thank you representative
Representative Stapleton please.
House bill fifty two twice
amended and move it to pass.
Thank you.
Your second.
At.
So we have a due pass motion
from Representative Stapleton.
A second by Representative
Christine Trujillo is the one
that I heard.
So as a man then as as amended
as Amanda.
Secretary if you'd call the roll
please on a do pass motion.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative dal yes.
Representative is now.
Yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes Representative lane.
Yes Representative Ladda yes.
Representative land day yes
Representative much of red yes.
Representative robocup I at all
yes Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Absolutely.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes.
Fifteen two zero it has to to
pass all right you have a do
pass on house bill fifty two is
twice amended thank you Mr.
Thank you committee.
All right so.
Mon.
We will go to house bill seventy
seven.
Okay for some reason I can
having trouble removing Mr
Sunderland Mr Santa could you
remove yourself from our panel
please thank you.
Mr chairman all right good
morning Mr chat field
Representative Chatfield I'm do
you have a an expert that you
wish for me to walk out of the
crowd.
Mr chairman I do Dr Kate
Ziegler.
All right doctor Siegler could
you raise your hand please in
the attendees list and I will
move you all for.
Is it the person known as Kate.
Yes doctor Kate all right.
If I see her.
All right.
Dr Kate are you with us yes Sir
all right good morning welcome
to Representative Chatfield
please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee please bring for you
this morning house bill seventy
seven house bill seventy seven
making appropriation of two
hundred thousand dollars to the
general fund for the border
regions of New Mexico State
University.
For expenditure in fiscal year
two thousand and twenty two and
subsequent fiscal years for the
cooperation cooperative
extension service to study the
quantity and quality of
groundwater resources in Colfax
hearty more and union counties
with a focus on Colfax Harding
counties for the purpose of
determining appropriate land use
in rural rural agricultural
areas Mr chair when I go to
write a check are I look at the
bank and see how much money to
the bank make sure that's right
sure that check is good and
we're right now a lot of checks
on our water in New the state of
New Mexico and I think it's
important to understand how much
water we have and whether that
water is
Is.
Being recharged how old water is
some of these offers might be
three thousand years old they
have no new water moving it to
others maybe new water that's
just a every time it rains it
recharges that Aquaphor and it's
important as we use water to
know where that water comes from
how old it is what to call it
what to call a quantity and
quality of ideas and the Mr
chair and like to turn it over
to my expert witness to talk a
little more about this program
that's been going on it's a bit
on going for eleven years up in
our part of the state.
So if you could say.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I want to thank you
all for taking the time to hear
this bill that's been put
forward by Representative
Chatfield my name is Kate
Ziggler I'm Ph.D consulting
geologist and I run my own
consulting company and we've
been working with the counties
in northeastern New Mexico for
over a decade now working with
them to try to understand their
groundwater resources so that
they can both manage them
appropriately and think about
proper economic development that
might be beneficial for the
region and making sure that we
make decisions appropriately
given that water such a precious
resource in this area for those
of you who maybe haven't been up
to the our world in a little
while there's very little
surface water and so the vast
majority of the folks that live
and work in northeastern New
Mexico they rely on groundwater
and one of the problems that we
faces as you all now
groundwater's basically
invisible we can't really see it
so it's kind of hard to know
what's really down there
in the decade plus that we've
worked up there we've discovered
a lot of interesting things but
we still have a long ways to go
and as Representative Chatfield
noted a lot of the wells are
sampling different groups of
groundwater many of which are
not recharging and human
lifespans and so trying to work
with our communities and
producers through something like
the extension services where we
can educate and promote and
partner with our rural
communities and folks so that we
make sure that.
Information is collected
appropriately at the correct
levels of scientific
Quality that we would all prefer
to have but also that
information is transmitted
quickly and appropriately to the
people who need it so decisions
can be made quickly as you all
know we spent another year and
I'm in a very deep drought
things have been difficult for
folks out there and so this is
information that I wish we would
have a long time ago but we're
doing the best we can to get it
into the right hands as fast as
we can.
Right.
Thank you Representative deal
stand for questions.
Mr chairman I sent the
questions.
Great thank you all so we'll go
to our attendees list
if you are in support of house
bill seventy seven please raise
your hand.
All right.
So please be brief Camille if
you add your last name please I
will not recognize anybody with
only first names.
But Johnny.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Johnny Montoya on the state
director for government
relations at New Mexico State
University we stand in strong
support of this legislation and
we'd like to thank the sponsor
for introducing this bill
We look forward to working with
any collaboration that can
actually study accurate
groundwater resource data in the
north on northeast part of the
state so so again we stand and
support this bill and we thank
you for your time.
Great thank you so we'll go to
Bruce.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm very
CENIC's with the cooperative
extension service and as doctors
in there said this is very
important work to be able to
work with our producers in
communities in the area and as
the non formal educational arm
of New Mexico State University
of corporate expansion service
works extensively with our
communities in northeast Mexico
to provide them the the most
current research based
information so that they can
improve the quality of their
lives and their communities and
so we stand in full support.
Great thank you Sir.
Valerie.
Good morning Valerie good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me today gallery where the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we support this bill as
groundwater helps grow sixty
four percent of our food we feel
this bill can help the listed
counties determine groundwater
inventories available for
agricultural use and we stand in
strong support of HB seventy
seven.
Right thank you so much.
I don't see any other hands I do
see hands on our side so first
on my list is.
Representative Sweetser please
Representative thank you Mr
chair and thank you
representative capital for
bringing this forward great
ideas that much needed my only
question is when you gave your
introduction I thought I heard
you say in calendar year twenty
twenty two and subsequent years
slide show it as the non
recurring expense.
Mr chair most of the so funds
from their appropriated they
have a three year life and.
And I knew that's what you then
I just want it on the record
that this is a one time two
hundred thousand dollar expense
but it could go out over several
years but it's not two hundred
thousand for recurring years
correct.
Yes press chairman all right and
thank you Representative
Chatfield and and good luck if
needed.
Great thank you representative
Representative itself please.
Mr chair when appropriate I
would like to make a do pass
motion.
All right so I won't accept that
motion but duly noted I'm going
to my next.
Speaker Representative direct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative Chatfield
Representative Sweetser asked my
question.
Okay great thank you
Representative Lotta.
Thank you Mr chair a.
Thank you Representative
Sheffield for bringing this bill
I I this is a really important
bill as you know water is is is
very right final resource in our
state and said that Mr chair I
do want to ask you know we're
we're to the two hundred
thousand dollar price I come Mr
Pierre you're coming such a
large area that you would need
more than two hundred to two
hundred thousand dollars to do
to start project.
Mr chair representative for this
project has been funded in many
ways he said it's been funded by
the local ranchers of put up
money the local soil and water
conservation district to put up
money
I would.
Defer to my expert witness to
add in anything that she wants
to say about the funding that I
would just say that it's been
patched together by many many
people who are very very
dedicated to knowing how much
water we have and what the
appropriate use of that water is
Dr K. do you have anything to
say further.
Mr chair representative
Representative Chatfield correct
this is been ten years of us
patching together little bit
here a little bit there and so
part of the funding is going
towards making some big heavy
lift centered in terms of data
collection that is a little more
on the
the more expensive side but for
some of these counties were also
work into a phase of New if I
could just back up one second.
Union County was the first one
that we started this groundwater
monitoring in and so that they
have a larger and more robust
data set that started to grow
and so they're a little bit
further along in their
information but we have a couple
counties that have lagged behind
and we're sort we're trying to
bootstrap to our counties up to
be at the same level as the
other two counties and get
everybody moving forward
together and so
some of this it is for some of
the heavy lifting those other
two counties and some of this is
for maintaining on going
measurements of static water
levels checking water chemistry
from time to time because as we
all know as groundwater depletes
we start to see water quality
issues facing a lot of folks and
so we also do have a very small
matching funds coming from our
solar water conservation
districts as well as individual
ranches and farms that have
stepped in to help keep this
thing moving forward from year
to year thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative thanks for the
question and I Mr chairman just
one other comment so it I was
reading the analysis in the
office state engineer is all
this is where I got the the
question from because they
believe that the corporation may
not be sufficient.
Because of the aquifer's and and
the distance and the and the
space you have to cover to to
provide these are first and one
of the things I do appreciate is
that there is a collaborative
effort and that's that's that's
a that's very a commendable
because I I think it takes
everyone to to to find and
locate these resources.
But my concern is that two
hundred is that gonna be enough
so but you other than that I
think this is a great bill I
think this is a good opportunity
to seek those additional
resources and fully support the
bill thank you Mr.
Thank thank you representative
so I don't have anybody else on
the list before I go to
Representative results motions
for to pass I I would like to
say I Representative Chatfield
thank you for bringing this
forward I think from the panel
it's it's pretty clear that this
is very much needed and you have
some some advocates on the
appropriation committee here to
try to help you out getting that
Representative Latta said he
would like to see more so I'm
but the burden on his shoulders
but I will say that typically in
the past two years in this
committee you all remember we
had those of you that are
returning members would remember
we have a subcommittee to here
appropriation bills right and
then as a committee of the whole
we would adopt the
recommendations from the
subcommittee on appropriation
bills because more often than
not these appropriation bills
themselves
typically don't get worked into
the budget right and it's it's
been this committee as as a
whole
of of an obstacle and it's
difficult when we evaluate
programs to not be able to to
allocate the money attached to
those programs but with that
thank you Representative thank
you Representative Chatfield for
bringing this forward thank you
doctor Kate and with that all
except Representative is the
sales motion do I have a second
thought on second Mr chair great
second from Representative
Figueroa is there any opposition
to the do passed motion.
Okay seeing that you have a do
pass on house bill seventy seven
and that will be looking to
appropriation numbers to help
out thank you Representative
thank you Mr chair the committee
many.
All right so we'll go to house
bill eighty five.
Thank you Mr chairman morning if
you if you would let me know who
your and and I just want to make
that announcement for everybody
is you've probably noticed I'm
just asking I have gotten emails
and I did get your email
Representative one thing about
your panelists I'm I'm sorry
though with all the screens
going on I have before me I
can't possibly do it unless
unless you buy me a another
computer but just tell me who
they are and I'll pull them from
the attendees list okay.
And
what Representative meant that
mentions your name if you could
raise your hand so you go to the
top of the list for me.
Thank you Mr chairman I will buy
another computer but if I could
please have Jimmy O. Yankee the
attendees this raise your hand.
Kevin Shendo please raise your
hand as well as Theodore Ted
hola please read your hand.
Those three Mr chairman are my
part my expert witnesses and
they will be here to help answer
any questions when times
appropriate so again it's Jamie
Yankee Kevin Shendo and your
whole.
For one thing representatives
that we learned about distance
learning is to allow for a
little extended wait time.
So I got Mr Shendo and then
Theodore whole is.
And when you're ready Mr chair
just let me know and I'll start
all right thank you
representative from and then
thank you representative needs
L. good morning panelists if you
would house bill eighty five
please thank you Mr chairman and
good morning good morning
members house bill eighty five
is a bill that was introduced in
the twenty twenty regular
session it was presented in this
exact committee house Education
Committee and passed unanimously
last year House Bill eighty five
as part of the tribal remedy
framework which was developed by
a lot of the tribal expertise
tribal leaders tribal staff
parents students tribal school
administrators tribal teachers
indigenous professionals and was
endorsed by the Navajo Nation
hickory Apache nation the
Mescalero Apache nation as well
as the all public council of
governors through tribal
resolutions.
Not hospital eighty five is part
of a series of legislation to
address the findings in the
consolidate lawsuit the Martinez
Yazzie versus New Mexico and
expected to coordinate with
proposed curriculum and
materials development house bill
eighty five sixty develop and
build tribal education
capacities to enhance community
based education opportunities to
address the barriers native
American students faced in
accessing school based programs
so specifically.
What is looking to appropriate
funds to is to fund tribal
education entities specifically
tribal education departments
programs and services centered
within native student
communities specifically tribal
education departments tribal
libraries early education or
early childhood education excuse
me programs native language
programs and provide teacher
support and with me this this
morning is that as I mentioned
earlier is Mr chairman thank you
Mr Kevin Shendo and Mr Theodore
Ted hole up all of which are
here to help me answer any
questions but if you would
please Mr chairman allow me to
give them just a quick minute to
introduce himself Mr Jameel
Yankee is the tribal education
director at Santa Clara pueblo
he's also the spokesman for the
all pueblo council of governors
Education Committee and is
currently the vice chair of the
Indian Education Advisory
Council which is a state mandate
council for New Mexico so if you
would please allow Mr Jake yeah
moment.
Please.
Mr chair wasn't our members the
committee thank you
representative Lente
as of the Representative
introduced me I guess I'll just
get into some talking points
house bill eighty five contains
numerous positive
characteristics of the
intergovernmental policy that
have been identified by both
state and tribal experts this
includes local control including
the financial story sure to cook
county building and what's your
funding agreements which reduces
the administrative burden on
both the state and the tribes
and I think for the tribe's most
importantly it's a cultural real
culturally relevant curriculum
moving into this you know as it
increases capacity building we
do use our was it proven
characteristics for this you
know including professional
learning communities if all the
tribes are funded in this
fashion it would allow an
ongoing process for us as
educators we're collaborative
eight eight in recurring cycles
as we move forward just to
better our students it goes
along with the two thousand six
LFC recommendation to make
tribal education departments
local education agencies in
eligible for state funding and I
know this because as we've seen
in the past years K. five plus
an extended learning time has
been pushed as the number one
topic but it can be noted that
asked for fiscal year twenty
fewer than half of the districts
with a sizeable native American
student population offered
extended learning so even though
it's being funded it's not
happening in the districts
around us that districts are
serving us.
Another big part of this bill is
the educational access that is
noted in FIR that you received
this morning overall the state
is at twenty one point eight
percent of students not having
access to internet at home but
it for the I. E. schools and I
use this as a notation fifty
five percent of the I. E.
students do not have access and
I do know this wallet is a
federally run school our
students are transient marks the
systems most of my students will
started to be a school but then
end up at a Publix junior high
school or high school you know
having to catch up in that lack
time or moving back and forth
through the systems and I say
that for educators and teachers
as well move throughout the
systems the last part of this is
the appropriation to the UNM
indigenous design implying
institute which will allow for
immediate technical assistance
without a lag time of other
consultants meeting to learn
about the nuances of our
community and our governments
work so with that thank you
chair thank Representative
twenty thank you Mr so I Mr
chairman.
Excuse me hello place got thank
you Mr chairman the sorry about
that thank you Mr or Yankee Mr
chair if you would please allow
me to introduce Mister Kevin
Shendo Mr Kevin Shendo is the
tribal education director at the
agency Pueblo and is the former
chair of the Indian Education
Advisory Council again this
statutory council from the state
of New Mexico so Mr Shendo.
It is usually should bite the
issues that the well above the
low we did a little weird Melide
good morning chairman members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity to address the
committee in support of house
bill eighty five on one of the
game port aspects of this bill
is to empower our tribal
communities on as was mentioned
building tribal capacity is very
important and for the public
payments and much like many
other tribal communities we've
looked to reorganize our
department of education that
encompass everything from our
early childhood programs all the
way to our college students and
adult learners for the Pueblo of
him as we've been fortunate that
the community has held to the
visioning sessions in ninety
nine of our vision twenty ten
and in on two thousand eleven
twelve for vision twenty twenty
and what the community provided
us was a role that in a
direction to align the systems
of education for community that
support in a rooted in language
and culture all an owner tribal
values traditional values all as
was mentioned local ownership
and tribal control are critical
in helping to help us build
capacity because as tribal
communities how we define
success is very different from
how other people define success
and that leads us to the begin
to rethink Education redefine it
for ourselves so many of our
communities are dealing with
language if the language loss
that the way that we.
Now look at education as a means
to be able to retain strength
and revitalize our traditional
home languages has become a
critical component and a lot of
times what we set the standards
on and if how we define success
and how we want to excess assess
and evaluate our young people is
very different from what the
state of New Mexico or the US
department of education ovals
that are defining standards and
assessments all our and so.
Have you resources
as such would help enable us to
be able to develop things on
that are home grown of that
enable us to be able to maintain
our languages and cultures
ensuring that our young people
are grounded in who we are as
indigenous peoples of this land
but at the same time knowing and
understanding that we progress
with the times how we
incorporate different aspects of
education and technology into
our systems of education and so
I think those of critical pieces
of this bill that help support
local ownership tribal control
and helping us this tribal
departments of education to
really define for ourselves and
our communities all what is
success and how we see envision
ourselves getting there so thank
you very much for the
opportunity to address the
committee this morning.
Thank you thank you Mr Shendo if
you would please Mr chairman
allow me one more time to
introduce another my panelists a
this time we have professor Dr
Theodore Ted hola who is from
this little Pueblo has a
distinguished career as an
educator and practitioner in
urban and regional planning and
other related subjects
particularly specialty a
specializing in indigenous
planning since nineteen eighty
he has taught at the university
of New Mexico and he currently
serves as their as the director
of indigenous design and
planning at UNM and he's going
to speak briefly about the one
million dollars appropriation to
the indigenous planning and
design institute in the school
architecture you know as as we
all know that right now
everybody wants to fund
broadband resources to every
single part of this of this
State but I think what what is
missing is that do we really
know how to do it in a basic
teaching way so that we're not
just throwing money at a problem
laying lines over lines of lines
and is burning money so the
point is is that he Mr are Mr
theater hole or drive a whole
lot would like to provide a more
strategic planning outreach so
that make sure that we are
capitalizing on this type of
effort to infrastructure
installments so doctor will if
you would please.
Dr okay.
came up when getting back good
morning chair representative
Representative
on I am technical and I just
want to give a brief overview of
the fact that we are faced with
incredibly complex communities
that have multiple relationships
and provisions and the pandemic
has really and that's that's
kind of showing us that there's
an enormous digital divide
within our communities
there's lots of estimates
regards to how many of our data
students have been impacted but
I think that we can all build
consensus around the fact that
half of them are really
struggling with trying to build
that sense of interconnected
with the but it gets really at
the heart of what it is that we
are trying to deal with in terms
of looking at the future of how
we actually invest in technology
and how it is that we build it
in an effective way in order to
be able to serve our students
and our communities this
particular.
Element of the legislation is
attendant to looking at the past
determining what's the president
and then using this is the
foundation for developing a
vision that will help the plan
and guide investments what we
basically have been proposing
for a long time now to develop a
comprehensive plan and that it's
necessary in order to be able to
stage this and a very specific
way one is by looking at tribal
case studies to see what kind of
programs actually have been able
to implement technology in an
effective way
or why is that they're
ineffective in some situations
also if you begin to sort of
deal with developing local
inventories of how it is that
technology is actually available
within the communities what's
missing and how effectively is
actually working in terms of
being delivered to native
students another aspect is to
actually serve a what kind of
the existing infrastructure
exists in terms of information
technology and what is the staff
capacity that is actually
Representative in each of these
localities and finally I think
one of the things that we've
been trying to champion for a
couple decades now is really
beginning to develop the.
systematic age cohort
demographics study that really
is have determining where
students are located and how
exactly they're sort of rising.
Within the education system in
order to be able to do that kind
of baseline planning for how the
better effectuate and anticipate
the kind of movie the students
both in terms of geography but
also in terms of the ages of the
school systems that are on
having to serve them so with
that
Mr chair ninety four back to the
representatives for any
questions that they may ask.
And with that Mr chairman we
stand for any questions thank
you Sir.
Right thank you all so we'll go
to our audience those in support
of house bill eighty five if you
wouldn't wish to speak please
raise your hand.
And again if I mispronounce your
name I'm terribly sorry just
correct me and all all the
better.
All right so we have quite a few
hands going up and we do want to
stay on our schedule hopefully
get out of here by eleven but we
do have a number of other bills
so if you would please keep your
comments brief you'll have up to
two minutes and please do not be
repetitive.
The first on my list Cynthia.
Eighteen chair Romero and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you today I am a take us on
the honest registered lobbyists
for the Navajo Nation office of
the president and vice president
the next slicer administration
who is in full support of house
bill eighty five and we want to
thank representative Lente for
sponsoring this very important
legislation house bill eighty
five the probation for New
Mexico tribes nations and
pueblos to respond to Yazzie
Martinez versus state in New
Mexico.
The bill proposes to improve
education for the state's native
American students by
strengthening the role of tribal
governments and communities in
education governance and
planning.
The bill of bills tribal
education capacity for greater
education sovereignty community
based education culturally and
linguistically relevant early
education childhood education
and native language programs the
appropriations in the bill which
will ensure.
That community based education
programs culturally and
linguistically relevant early
education curricula and
materials assessment tools and
evaluation instruments will also
expand library services that are
culturally linguistically
relevant native language
programs to serve preserve
sustain and revitalized native
languages.
And the legislation creates an
I. T. departments that improved
internet access for entities
involved with education.
On behalf of president now has
and vice president Leiser we
want to thank representative
Lente again for sponsoring the
legislation and encourage you to
support house bill eighty five
thank you.
Thank you.
All right Joseph.
Good morning welcome.
Mr chair and committee members
I'm just SABATINA I am the co
chair of the New Mexico library
association legislation
committee.
The the library community over
the last forty years is had in
our association a group of
native American librarians who
have grown and collaborated in
become a force for education in
their communities.
And our we appreciate the
struggles that they have this
year in.
Doing the best they can under
the circumstances to continue to
provide things particularly wifi
hot spots and curbside delivery
and other.
Resources from the their tribal
libraries.
The New Mexico library
association supports this bill
thank you.
Great thank you so much.
All right.
Good morning
what's help talking to help push
the straight cross was guided
to.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is person
style I am the first attended
governor for the public backlash
again thank you for this
opportunity to allow me to speak
on the legislation before you
today bubble back my is in full
support of the tribal remedy
framework and educational
concepts and solutions offer an
H. B. eighty five the bill is
critical a critical piece of
legislation that fits into the
overall education and academic
needs of Ackerman children the
funding contained in the bill is
extremely important for building
out the capacity of the Public
Education Department currently
we have limited staff with
limited resources and limited
funding we believe in having
tribal governments take greater
control and involvement in the
education of our children any
shared partnership with the
local school districts our
tribal education departments can
certainly be a conduit for this.
Was in full support of the
committee based education
concept using tribal libraries
as hubs for programs and
services including early
childhood programs and we're
programs helping preserve in our
native languages again we need
the state's help we need for you
to invest in our children's
future as with that so that we
assets you support HB eighty
five and both favorably for the
bill thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee this
concludes my comments thank you
Mr for ten a governor.
All right we'll Ballard.
Up to two minutes please do not
be repetitive of the other
speakers good morning.
Good morning Valerie Austin was
for together action and I come
from Sony portable I'm the
children's program coordinator
at a public library.
I'm in my second year us this
position I hold and I support.
B. fifty five I support it
because I'm learning I'm going
I believe our space is that safe
space and I believe for a space
for you to have their voices be
heard well now I'm not sure what
we need okay I do this by
providing a community board and
they know that when they answer
questions they provide their
name so when they come back
they're like this is what I
wrote and a lot of the time we
write about the whole their
hopes and dreams we also started
that book club caught there is
kids book for the kids we had
thirteen participants greats to
second six who read three
chapters books we made a trip to
twenty twenty legislative
sessions last year where we went
and gave our library slack to
our McKinley County lead.
We also started a volunteer
fifteen minutes before you right
right fifteen minutes before you
get on screen time before the
pandemic closed us down we were
reaching four hundred minutes a
week which equates to six hours
of reading total from the kids
who come to our library and I
believe that we're a spot for
building leaders by giving them
the spaces invoices and as I'm
learning as I'm going on a I
believe and I totally support
that libraries are the heart of
our communities so thank you
representative Lente for
sponsoring house bill eighty
five and I support it the
upcoming auctions and the.
Thank you.
Right jasmine please.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee once
again my name is jasmine yep
that and I am with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we stand in support of house
bill eighty five as it works to
fully implement the Indian
Education Act by building local
capacity at the tribal community
level as you all have already
heard tribal education
departments play an integral
role in collaborating with
school districts schools
themselves and his system in
meeting the needs of native
American students when tribal at
departments are fully funded and
staffed they can better meet the
diverse needs of native American
students harm in our
communities.
Tribal libraries also serve as
the main educational facility in
many native communities as you
just heard
They are often administering a
wide array of educational
programs such as tutoring
college preparation programs
after school programs and
provide quality wifi for our
most vulnerable students.
H. B. eighty five's main
function is to build capacity at
the local level for our tribal
communities and to therefore
bring culturally and
linguistically relevant
education programs and services
that are more accessible to rule
rule based native American
communities I think
Representative Lane T. for
sponsoring the bill and thank
you for this time.
Thank you so for the other
people if you would please keep
your comments brief I'm hearing
some repetition in the comments
we have other business to attend
to as well.
When.
I pronounce that correctly this
morning
everybody my name is clinical
Martinez of the publication of
trials and the Navajo Nation I
am the University of New Mexico
American media education
director and a professor of the
department of LSS I am in full
support of house bill eighty
five because it addresses the
urgent need to reform curriculum
instruction delivery of
instruction and educational
policy of the bill supports
establishment assessments of
educational pathway in pre K.
twenty education through
comprehensive educational
planning efforts to address the
critical need to provide
additional staff foundation for
all state county holders to
enhance services for indigenous
children of New Mexico in
conclusion this bill
acknowledges families and
communities as vital partners
reflecting our core principles
and integrity of the project
which is founded on the holistic
education of indigenous youth
and their indigenous languages
cultural traditions and
sovereignty thank you and have a
great day and please be safe.
Right thank you.
The next will go to Carmen.
Hello Karmen.
Morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Carmen Lopez I direct college
raisins and college access
organization that serves native
American students from
throughout New Mexico and the
nation I'm also a parent of
three Navajo children who would
also like to make some comments
here what I'd like to share in
support of house bill eighty
five is that applying to college
and exploring career options
requires quality access to
internet you can not apply to
college without that and the
fact of the matter is is that
it's a high school students must
apply to college outside of
instructional time so this is
why it's critical to be able to
have quality internet access
in to students homes and
communities and that's why we
support so much of the
infrastructure work the second
part of what's important to is
that
That half of the students that
hello that I worked within
twenty twenty when the pandemic
hit fifty percent of them relied
on screen based devices so this
is why it's really important for
us to support this
infrastructure the last thing
that I'd like to say is to as a
parent now is that we are in
support my mother is a Navajo
language teacher and she's
retiring this year and so
bringing that instruction to the
school learning is is critical
and I'm gonna now just let my
children say twenty seconds of
Hey thank you please create.
Hi my name is Sheila and I'm in
the eighth grade.
Hello my name is Henry and I am
in the fourth grade.
Hi my name is Kenny and I met in
the fourth grade.
We want our Navajo language and
culture in.
Of school thank you.
Great thank you.
So next we'll go to JD
Bullington I see some people
with organization names or
abbreviated names in the
audience list if you would
please change those because you
will not be recognized otherwise
thank you.
Eighty point can.
Yes thank you Mr chairman that
was a little I'll be very brief
Mr chairman this is JT will
represent the Pueblo of Laguna
and we strongly support House
Bill eighty I want to thank
representative Lente.
For the reasons stated I can't
add anything to what's up Mr
Shendo has already commented
about this bill it's of great
piece of legislation thank you.
Right thank you.
So we'll go to.
And those are.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
Dennis are representing the
pueblo of Santa Ana which
strongly supports the bill and
thank the sponsor for bringing
this forward.
Great thank you so much.
Dr eighty minutes later on.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's
Patricia humanness late them
project manager transform
education New Mexico
transformation cation New Mexico
is aligned with all of the
beautiful testimony in Committee
provided by our colleagues
transformation cation also is a
very thankful to representative
Lente for bringing this
legislation forward all twenty
four gonna station members stand
in support for house bill eighty
five thank you.
Thank you.
Janis.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee my name
is Dennis could be from the
public for gonna I am currently
the librarian at the Laguna
Public Library and we strongly
support house bill eighty five.
tribal libraries the reoccurring
funding to support staff as the
provide a multitude of programs
invested in tribal libraries
will help develop capacity to
support students in their home
communities when they are not at
school thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you so much.
So.
Center.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
to set on the register lobbyist
for the public service let us
and play pay Zuni and okay when
again want to thank the chairman
and the committee for this
legislation this bill for all
the reasons previously stated my
my my clients strongly support
this legislation and we urge the
committee to adopt thank you
very much appreciate the time.
Thank.
Thank you.
Where I am only.
Morning Emily good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm Emily well to our
and I am here representing New
Mexico voices for children to
stand in support of HB five
again we support this bill for
all the reasons that have
already been stated and thank
you so much and we ask the
committee to support this bill.
Great thank you Emily.
Martinez.
Are you there.
Good morning.
I'm learning this is Claudia
Vigil niece I'm the director for
the hickory Apache department of
education we're watching the
zoom from and that Martinez's
office who is our public
relations office the hickory
Apache department of education
is in full support of HB eighty
five for all the reasons I have
been given and.
Hopefully this bill will be
looked upon as a blessing to
this need of New Mexico that the
effort is truly being made to
meet the needs.
Of the impoverished children and
hopefully not to be looked upon
as impoverished children but to
look at the native American
children and the Hispanic
children the black children all
of them as one and to be treated
equally thank you so much for
the time thank thank you and hi
everybody else watching along
with the.
All right so go to kind right
you know.
Please good morning.
Mr chair can you hear me we can.
All right thank you thank you Mr
chairman members the committee I
am the registered lobbyists for
the public's of Aqaba and
transfer blow and your heard
from lieutenant governor style
earlier but I just wanted to
provide the committee a little
bit of narrative history to this
bill I work with a group called
the tribal education alliance
and they reached out to tribal
communities across New Mexico
and help to crafting what's been
known and referred to as a
tribal remedy framework of the
framework contains a number of
solutions as well as
comprehensive plan for meet the
needs of native students
the solutions that are
were crafted are captured in
house bill eighty five and we
really appreciate Representative
led to working closely with the
tribal education lines in
bringing this up legislation for
and for those reasons risk chair
members the committee I would
ask your full support for this
legislation thank you very much
great thank you.
Norman.
Good morning Sir.
Good morning chair Romero and
members of the committee and
thank you to representative
Lente for giving me this
opportunity she called on all
want to okay hold Norman clear
to that should surely my name is
Norman J. created on the former
governor for the pueblo of Zuni
I am currently working at the
university of New Mexico center
for native American health as to
tribal relations liaison and as
a great grandparent as a
grandparent as a parent as a
mentor as a teacher and also as
a student I stand in full
support of house bill eighty
five.
It is high time that the state
of New Mexico has honored what
has been rolled as the
constitutional mandate to ensure
that all children in New Mexico
including native American
children are given that
equitable education just as any
urban native child would be
receiving at the moment and one
of the provisions for the house
bill eighty five is this use of
technology but I think the
pandemic as highlighted the fact
that technology is not available
and all of the rural and remote
communities whether they're
native or non native.
Including the Hispanic
populations and so to begin the
push forward to ensure that all
children are include educated we
must build the capacity within
the local communities to their
tribal educational departments
to their linguistic programs and
through the early childhood
programs including libraries to
ensure that when technology
fails that communities can
continue because we have been
able to build capacity based on
this bill as well as other
sister bills that will be
brought forward and I think as
members of the committee that
are Representative and teen all
of the constituencies of New
Mexico it's high time that the
state of New Mexico honored to
come student constitutional
statute on the basis of how this
bill is created and I think
Representative like the for
allowing me to talk this this
morning thank you madam chair
and I thank you for.
Thank you Sir.
So money
Up to two minutes please.
Can you hear me.
Can.
Thank you chairman and committee
my name is Mario Atencio I am
the vice president for Victorian
star league chapter house.
our students in our community
attend
can the Cuba Independent schools
which is a poll and regarding
Martinez case.
And all my colleagues in the tri
chapter region of Oahu Encino
accounts for all of the Navajo
students account for nearly
eighty percent of the students
that attend the Cuba Independent
schools.
This was so I personally and and
and.
Part of my office stand in full
support of of this bill
we have an severe needs in
everything as as it as it is
listed we have a tribal library
we're only tribal Navajo
community as a tribal library at
the local level so you
everything you're doing is is
directly impacting that Yazzie
Martinez case so owner thank you
and thank you to a professor
left the for for allow for for
bringing this bill fourth in a
strongly recommended to pass on
this legislation thank you.
Great thank you more.
So.
Good morning.
Mr chair.
Committee members.
Thank you for giving me this
opportunity on behalf of task
pueblo I am the board the.
I'm sorry chair of the board of
education.
And we are in support of house
bill eighty five for the reasons
given by.
My predecessors I also want to
say that the pandemic.
Has brought to the forefront
many of our limitations and
shortcomings here the community.
It's unfortunate that it was a
lawsuit that brought to the
attention of the state the fact
that for many years they have
been negligent in the.
Education or minority children.
Specifically native American
children.
But the pandemic because also.
Exacerbated the digital divide
among our communities.
The news you saw that the Navajo
Nation was at the forefront of
this that.
lack of connectivity but many
tribal communities throughout
New Mexico are suffering from
the same lack of technological
services as is PTA's Pueblo and
we.
Found that we had to negotiate
directly with a local internet
provider to provide this service
much needed a service to our
students and right now we have a
lot of.
Of
Fiber optic lines laying on the
ground under the snow subject to
damage and we support this bill
because we want.
The funding that is necessary to
provide this kind of to return
children.
Reshape.
this Representative at.
Thank you for and that was two
minutes.
I was please.
Chair I'm sorry a good morning
chairman representatives my name
is Alyssa Travis loan from the
public simply be in service
education director for my home
community and I'm also a member
of the local council of
governors Education Committee as
a tribal education department
directors are Department service
a critical resource in our
communities and answer to
requests for assistance with
education at every level I am
fully in support of HB eighty
five as the funding would
greatly increase the capacities
of our tribal communities to
best serve our students through
strategic investments in our
departments libraries early
childhood programs and with
technology infrastructure thank
you for your time.
Thank thank you.
Curtis Chavis.
Please good morning.
Good morning chair and committee
members my name is Curtis Chavis
and I am the development
director for the carriage
children's learning center I
also sit on the board of regents
for the southwest Indian
Politecnico Institute and the
tears children's learning
centers in support of HB eighty
five thank you great thank you.
Good morning.
Sir.
Good morning good morning chair
and the committee members.
My name is onset don Chavis and
I'm the EDD of the NM native
vote and we are here today to
offer support for H. B. eighty
five we know that the COVID
nineteen pandemic white in the
digital divide that our
communities and native students
face this particular bill we are
in support of because it was
created
through tribal
educators coming together to
create this tribal remedy
framework and we know that every
child has a right to an
education that enables them to
succeed one of the tools that a
lot of our tribal students do
not have is that I. T.
infrastructure and so this bill
helps to develop that
technology and that
infrastructure for our
communities that are so vital
and we know with all of the
losses in our communities due to
the COVID nineteen pandemic that
we also do need to invest in
native language programs to
continue to preserve and sustain
and revitalize native languages
within our communities so we are
in strong support and aligned
with this piece of legislation
we'd like to think
Representative Lane T. and all
of the folks that help to create
the tribal remedy framework
because we know that these are
solutions that are vetted with
our educators and our
communities and there are
crucial to the success of our
native students so we ask that
the committee members please
support this key piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you.
David.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
my name is David Rogers and I'm
the executive director of
language education New Mexico we
thank Representative Wendi and
in the community that did such a
good job in crafting inventing
this this wonderful bill and we
stand in support of it being
passed to this morning thank
you.
Thank you.
Christine sams.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee elected thank
Representative Wendi forces are
carrying this bill I think it's
an excellent piece of
legislation that reflects the
much needed approach to
supporting our tribal based
community based efforts to
transform education in a way
that they know best how to do I
respectfully urge the members of
this committee to support this
bill I represent the American
Indian language policy research
in teacher training center at
UNM and I'm from Michael Pueblo
thank you.
Thank you.
Gail.
Okay good morning.
Good morning Mr chair and thank
you for representative Lente E.
for allowing me to to present my
the comments I I am a professor
at the university of New Mexico
school of medicine and a family
practice doctor I'm from the
whole nation my role as mentor
role model educator and most
importantly grandmother is to
honor our Indian ways of knowing
what tribal libraries will
assist as well as.
Increasing our knowledge of stem
courses and being able to read
and write and to be career ready
and college ready I serve on the
bachelors to medicine the B. A.
M. D. admissions committee and
it is so important that we see a
diverse group of our next
doctors in New Mexico that not
only come from the far reaches
of New Mexico but those that
come from our Indian communities
to to not only have the best
education in stem and science
and reading but also in our own
Indian ways of knowing how to
stay healthy so I think you
representative Lente the I think
you of to the committee thank
you thank you or I'm sorry I
support house bill eighty five.
Thank you.
So we'll go to our last speaker
Mary Martinez.
Very good morning good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members I would like
to thank our representative
Lente let T. for sponsoring this
on H. B. bill eighty five I'm in
full support of this
this bill to strengthen all the
components components that are
listed in HB eighty five and I
am a language teacher from Taos
Pueblo to to to a language in
the public schools and we're
constantly having to you know
get funding through other
sources and through grants and
other sources of funding so I
think the state of it would be
nice to have consistent
continuity with funding to our
program so that we can develop
the language programs and
materials that we need to to
develop on teaching our
languages and it's a very
critical need to continue to
teach our native languages
because we don't want to lose
you know we're at the brink of
losing our languages and I speak
from the heart and I think that
it's it's something that needs
to be funded and we ask for your
support and we need more at
language teachers as well so all
these are wonderful components
and HB eighty five is on need a
needs full support so thank you
so much have a good day moms it
to yeah well then we'll look on
my and and and to a.
Great thank you very.
All right so we'll move over to
our committee I have
Representative the cell eight.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Lente I thank you
for your presentation all the
people that did participate all
the participants side I do
appreciate that I.
It's important that people do
stay involved even though there
to remotely just like everybody
LCS Mr chair and representative
will tell you.
Whether we're talking about the
money that is going to the
Navajo Nation I have read the
breakdown on how that money is
to be dispersed is this for the
entire Navajo Nation or is it
strictly for the New Mexico part
of the Navajo Nation.
Mr chair representative sale it
is strictly for the chapters
that are within the boundaries
of the state of New Mexico for
the Navajo Nation.
Okay thank you for that response
because I was very unsure how
that would work out if that was
to be distributed on into
Arizona and Utah as well
will any of these funds be re
utilize for the B. I. A.
schools.
Mr chair representative Elton up
now okay.
I can't remember the.
The lady's name that was.
And I can't say it over here my
participant
list.
She was talking about Cuba can
you kind of enlighten me there
Mr chair and representative
Lente.
Mr chair representative Zell
these cool the Cuba Independent
School District is one if you
it's between basically the town
of Bernalillo and farming ten
five fifty eight we are.
This is those three remote
Navajo Nation chapter houses
that are within the area of Tory
own hello and see no one
counselors and so that's why
Vice president Mario Atencio and
meet that made mention of that
says that the majority of their
students make up make the
majority of that school district
in Cuba.
Okay but Mr chairman and
Representative.
Chair Lente.
Some of that money for the
Navajo Nation would be
distributed through those three
district is that correct is that
what I'm hearing from you.
Mr chairman and and and
Representative is L. so the way
the money would be dispersed and
would be simply to go and help
those to be a Navajo Nation
chapter houses.
The disbursement to the respect.
That's the way it is said not
not not to go to the Cuba
Independent School District but
to the chapter houses themselves
okay and Mister chairman
chairman Lynn today whenever
this money is being divorced and
I have read the bright down on
it and how each portion of it.
Will be allotted to the
different pueblos and tribes and
nations
What type of oversight would we
as legislators if we do approach
this what would be the oversight
on each one of these can you.
In a nut shell I know it can't
be in that show I'm sorry very
briefly although for held
oversight will take place and
our reassurance that this money
will go to where it's needed.
Mr chairman and representatives
of the great question and
through working with the Indian
Affairs Department for the state
of New Mexico it would be a fun
set of similar to like the
tribal infrastructure fund to
which then money would be
dispersed that way the minister
that way and when we look at
statistics or or measures of a
team and in terms of.
We're just gonna throw money at
a problem and hopes it goes away
right you're going to improve on
those that districts that make
New Mexico last today in
education and so at this point
in time looking at utilizing
those statistics to create
propose improvements to
improved proficiency rates and
reduce dropout rates are going
to be those measures that are
going to be very important as we
move forward with this very much
locally based
Way to educate our own people.
Mr chair a chair plan take it
very good explanation there we
know that it does not work to
throw money at a problem and try
to fix it because it doesn't
work we've seen that with our
education system right now and
I'm tired of New Mexico been at
the bottom of the list so
whenever there's oversight and
we know that those dollars that
we are expanding to try to get
help our children to get them
educated in the best way.
Possible and also have the
parental involvement with our
kids to me that's very important
it is proven that it is three
parental involvement that our
kids do succeed faster so Mr
chairman and chairman Lente
thank you for your presentation
today I look forward to the the
questions.
Thank you representative
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lente for
bringing this bill I just have
one question and I don't know
that it's just more of a
technical question but I'm pages
at least in these occurrences
pages two lines by the nineteen
page three line five and
seventeen and then on page four
line six the the language that
is appropriating money here it
just simply says for each Pueblo
it doesn't define by name the
levels and I'm just wondering if
that's an issue for for the bill
in any way shape or form
obviously we know
which those which Pueblo in a
which a entities exist already
but I'm I'm curious if we should
define that in the bill where it
was that even discussed at all
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair and representative
Baldonado you know I I think at
this point that there there
should be no confusion that the
pueblos reference in house bill
eighty five are the New Mexico
pueblos that make up of the
consortium of the problems here
and so there's there there there
really is no.
The way that I read the the the
act in the way that it's been
formulated to the tribal remedy
framework that there is no
there's no way to confuse Pueblo
in this case in this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and just to
clarify through this through
this appropriation on every
single tribe Pueblo an Indian
nation gets some kind of
appropriation to this everyone's
included.
Mr chair and representative yes
Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for answers
questions.
Great thank you Representative
so I will say to at the
beginning of the bill it
mentions New Mexico native
American students kind of as as
a catch all and then it goes
down to break down tried and
then Pueblo so I think that's
not for the reassurance that its
New Mexico native students.
Thank you next on the list
Representative Dow please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing the
bill.
ax three with this in intent and
just have some questions in
logistics of the bill I'm in the
twenty twenty two million
dollars from the general fund.
Twenty two million dollars to
the general fund rather than
advocating for reforms in the
way our expenditures well.
Mr chair representative I you
were kind of in and out I think
the question.
You so there's is can you hear
me now.
I can hear you better yes ma'am
so it the twenty two million
dollars I agree first of all
we're trying to accomplish and I
appreciate you bring the
buildings are logistical
questions and just more.
Right so the twenty two million
dollars from the general fund
what the general fund rather
than waiting for reforms in the
way that PED dollars are
expended and distributed.
Mr chair and representative we
at this point in time have
worked this type of of
appropriations bills for the for
the twenty nineteen session
twenty twenty session and then
now going into twenty twenty one
and so this approach using
general fund dollars is really
the the only approach that that
we've thought about thus far
using the time with your family
as a new approach to doing so
and utilizing and knowing that
you know in PED they have a
hundred and fifty one million
dollars in the at risk in the at
risk fund index that has been
spent because of restrictions
things that go along with that
that there is money available
within that general fund to fund
these types of programs and when
you look at Mr chair and
representative of and budget
education budget of three point
three billion dollars of that
what you know that this small
amount of money's small
relatively speaking amount of
money she should be made
available to provide of release
or a relief if you will for that
constitutional obligation that
the state has to conforming with
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you chair.
You you mentioned respond and
that is exactly where I was
going because there are a
hundred thirty million dollars
reverted.
Many of which are recorded from
your district in these tribal
areas.
Implement.
Extended learning and and other
rural areas that.
With the very specific standards
are put into the program.
But I do believe our body are
forty two have to direct and so
responded appropriate place this
appropriations.
Or stand watching you advocate
for your communities and I feel
such as
you're trying to do because I
think a lot of the rural areas
are experiencing the same thing.
Maybe more.
Relation more migrant population
well maybe just you know simply
don't have the capacity to get
to work with local communities.
impact aid will be same
population be receiving as a
result of the recent lawsuit at
per year.
If I if I may though
Representative before answering
that question sorry I that I
think just just to clarify
things that you're talking about
at risk but I think I think what
you mean to say is the reform
Fund so the money that's
allocated to K. five plus
extended learning and then it
reverts into the to the reform
Fund in this fund is a fund of
money okay just just just just
as a point of clarification for
for the committee thank you
thank you sorry yes you're
correct so we have created a
school reform Fund and spent
expenditure first from the
special projects that we
allocate pre K. K. five plus
candor
extended learning with school
districts do not act opt into
those because they can not do it
or they don't have the capacity
to for whatever reason the local
school board you negotiations
those dollars are regarding into
a school report.
And am I correct Mr chair stands
around a hundred and thirty
million right now.
I think that's that's that's
about accurate.
Thank you for the clarification
I.
So next impact Aid will this
population receiving.
Recent lawsuit.
Mr chair representative thanks
for the questions I I appreciate
you bringing that that the
notion of the impact aid.
The impact aid dollars will go
to school districts and not
necessary to tribal communities
and so impact Aid on its own our
our federal dollars that come
from the department of education
federal aid to those school
districts to offset the the SCG
and so that is something
completely separate than what
we're talking about with the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit which is
again the state's constitutional
obligation to provide our
children a an adequate education
and so when we're talking about
about those two types of of
concepts yes they they make
compliment each other but
they're absolutely completely
separate by way of of federal
monies in state monies and a
state constitutional obligations
so well impact aid dollars may
be felt and appreciated at a
district level at a school
district level these entities
Yazzie Martinez dollars
specifically for house bill
eighty five are those that in
the findings of Martinez Yazzie
are those that come through and
say this is how you will create
and this is how we should be
able to create and enhance and
provide our students a inability
to become college and career
ready so again they may be
complimented the maybe they may
receive some type of benefit in
some way shape or form but
they're completely separate and
and one cannot be used to
provide relief for the other.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
chairman I guess.
As I think we're supposed to
freeze our.
Question I believe that the
amount is going to be around
sixty to sixty five billion per
year I was noticing in the bill
that we're going to appropriate
funds to study and.
The the needs of early childhood
facilities and libraries and so
I'm asking this question in
regards to you is do you believe
that these would be duplicate
capital outlay efforts for we're
going to be building out these
facilities.
Early childhood classrooms for
example apple the district level
and at the community level this
is where I was going.
It Mr chairman and
Representative upgrade questions
you know I I honestly think that
and going back to your point of
the fix the court will fix for
impact aid is yes in fact.
Fully speaking about eighty
million dollars but then that's
that's the that's that's the
federal aspect of it we're
looking at your point of are
these going to be overlapping
institutions are these gonna be
overlapping a waste to help
infrastructure I would say no
because the monies that we will
receive from impact aid will not
be appreciated not will it will
not be evident in any tribal
community just simply because
it's not set up that way and so
again based on the findings in
Yazzie Martinez when you look at
costly competent relevant
education curriculums when you
look at extended students
services we look at all these
other findings in the act are in
the finding self all of these
are delineated and that's why do
the work of the tribal remedy
framework we identified using
that framework where and how to
best to local authority improve
our outcomes for our youngest
and most vulnerable students in
the tribal communities.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman.
Representative would determine
what we're nation these in the
future the early childhood
programs is being constructed
facilities being grouped.
Appropriation.
Operation with the study finds.
Mr chair and representative
doubt of these types of
facilities would be built within
the tribal communities because
we Mr chairman and and
Representative out when our
students and and likely any
rural students when they leave
their school facility for the
data for the for the weekend
they oftentimes hopping a bus
one one hour back to back to
home and leave every single
option an opportunity
opportunity to learn they're at
the school because they don't
have the facilities they don't
have the infrastructure they
don't have the capacity to
continue to learn elector
appears to that may be more
fortunate or maybe just that
have that option to babies not
fortunate but just have that
option to live in a more urban
area where that capacity to have
internet access is there and so
when they leave that school
district they're they're done
for for for the data for the
weekend and in the summertime
for the summer and so that being
said these types of
infrastructure investments will
be done.
Importantly enough strategically
enough within those tribal
communities.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm sorry receipt Germany was.
Right did you want to come.
You know Mr chair in the in the
interest of time.
Yes Jareth if you wish but
please be brief because we still
have three agenda items to go
through.
Mr chair thank you
Representative said chairman of
Robert Representative Dow in
relation to the early childhood
facilities these would make a
great impact and for tribal
communities we with the new
department the early childhood
education and care department
has actually started
conversations on how to maximize
funding for all the trouble and
state citizens I do believe
there's a misunderstanding that
our tribal **** starts just
serve only tribal citizens but
for many of our show starts we
do serve non native students as
well to in that fashion it's
working with the state and
investment such as these will
help us maximize the
programmatic aspects for all of
our citizens close to our area
thank you chair thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
chairman.
Here is I like the idea of these
facilities being in the local
community that children are not
being transported multiple
programs that the hospital is.
That's really really important
years especially for students
who have disabilities or sensory
integration our our attachment
issues I'm the least transition
what we send teachers better
which is why I'm just
there's there's seven million
appropriation for on screen
time.
Then if you consider the fact
that you want local libraries
look look early childhood these
are things I agree with you on
by the way Mr chair
representative Lente and it in
the five point seven million is
is outside of what we are also
proposing as a body in mandating
school time extended learning in
K. five plus so I feel like with
the tribes are sending we want
to raise our children to educate
our children want to teach the
language when I teach that our
cultures and that's that's done
in the local community yes our
legislative agenda for the early
track for education is to build
more infrastructure at the
schools and that meets your.
Right so look at it because
you're gonna have to
disabilities twice the teachers
twice the capacity
infrastructure and children will
have to go between two programs
during.
Outside of the insufficient
hours that are PED programs are
able to provide is right now PED
programs with schools closed so.
When schools close so our pre K.
but when you're looking
communities had starting an
example or community based
organization their vote and
those in the ECC program have
been open through the entirety
of COVID we're PED programs have
been closed so I mean to me the
ideal situation for us to be
doing at the Education Committee
is using those those school
reform dollars in the most
flexible way and letting our
local schools and communities
make the decisions on the
reforms they want locally I
understand you're bringing a
bill because we're being told
we're not going to get
flexibility we haven't seen it
yet even though we're told we're
going to get it so it makes your
bill necessary but also somewhat
redundant because we're gonna
pass.
The budget bill and these
members that are also an
appropriation saying no we're
going to build a policy
mandating K. five plus an after
school programming stated
community schools all PED
campuses when we all know in our
hearts our local communities
need to be making these
decisions and so I'm I'm support
what you're doing.
Really simple to use me as a
dollars all of students.
The school choice but I
understand what you're doing and
why and I definitely support for
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Representative care.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you so much the chairman
led to a.
Have a couple of questions I'm.
Menderes interrelated missing
collaboration that's required to
make this work I don't want to
see us create like that silos
how how does this money.
How do we ensure that were
appropriate all the tribes and
pueblos are interacting with
appropriate state agencies
starting with the department of
Indian affairs obviously I think
it was discussed the last time
the bill was presented US
secretary Trujillo said she
would have to hire another
financial person have you talked
to that department to see any
other coordinating staff that
needs to be hired.
Mr chair and representative
thank you for the question
that's a that's an extremely
important question because the
last thing we want to do is
impose on the department is set
them up to fail which in turn
allows us to fail as well and so
what what we what would be done
over the past over the interim
really is is a have met with
those the cabinet secretaries in
high AD and PD in ATV and all
these other department for the
state to make sure that that we
are all on the same page and
just as early as yesterday.
I had a conversation with
secretary Trujillo from the I AD
in in in collaboration and
making sure that we're being as
transparent as possible to
understand that we are not
trying to set ourselves up to
say that if this money is going
to do to be dispersed and and
provided for and that we are
asking them to be the the the
managing agent for that that we
do not want to overwhelm them
that being said we we we have
worked closely with them and
we're looking closely because
they're the they're the
department and knows best how to
interact how to facilitate
communications and cooperation
with tribal governments and so
through agreements
accountability is like contracts
and grants these are the ways
that we can facilitate how
effective and how efficient and
how Putin we're going to be able
to disperse this money to those
local tribal communities and in
that way it'll set us up not for
failure but will set us up to
hopefully show and reap those
benefits that our children will
be performing better in in
school.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Lente I think I'm
concerned I'm I'm part of the
that house broadband team.
which we dropped our bill
yesterday House Bill ten and I
really appreciated Dr homeless
comments.
How that what the bill says
about linking all the
technological and broadband I
just want to make sure that we
don't duplicate what's being
done because we really care
about every single new Mexican
child getting full access to
education and everything else
but I don't want to see
duplicate duplication of studies
happened and so that's why as
the previous question how do we
coordinate all of this so that
our our money is used our time
is used person is used do you
have anything additional that
you could say about that.
Mr chair representative Garrix
to your point regarding doctor
whole us presentation I did
share with with Representative
Figueroa earlier during this
presentation doctor whole as
contact information because we
want to make sure that yes in
fact we are not being duplicate
to of any work that is being
done and and really drive whole
us and the and the appropriation
house bill eighty five to the
university New Mexico is really
just thinking outside the box in
in the sense in terms of how we
planned best so that yes COVID
has made New Mexico specifically
native American Mexico the
poster children of discrepancies
when it comes to.
A broadband access to internet
access and so doctor who and his
wealth and brain trust their to
university in the folks that
that have worked with on this
bill I understand that there is
a certain way and a certain
characteristic and and and a
flavor and flair and how to work
with tribal entities and how to
work with the best and so if
they can do that perform that
that over all tribal study on I.
T. infrastructure on tribal
lands then at that point with
any monies that are that are
created that are developing or
had either federally or state
through our state to attack
broadband expansion if there is
a smart way to do things doctor
whole as team and the report
from this will identify that and
so that's what we're going to to
be smarter and allow us to work
smarter and not harder at the
end of the day thank you your.
Chair and representative I'm I
just want to thank you for doing
this because language and
culture our life blood and if we
don't we need to our native
American languages to be robust
and continued well we have our
elders with us I'm and that
preserves our family culture so
thank you very much that's it Mr
chairman.
Great thank you Representative
but the terrible Correa.
Thank you Mr chair and if
appropriate I'd like to move
into passive house bill eighty
five.
So we have to do to get her help
so that was that was that why
you asked to be on the list
Representative Stapleton.
Yes I was going to hold the
motion okay so you'll be the
second all right so we have a
due pass motion on house bill
eighty five
Madam secretary if you call the
role plays on a do pass motion
for house bill eighty five.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative del yes.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Swetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes fifteen zero we have have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
eighty five I'm I'm sorry in my
haste in accepting that motion I
forgot I did have one question
on very briefly so as mentioned
the and and I can't remember who
mentioned it but about tribes
not being able to and not
utilizing E. L. T. P. money
I was wondering some of the
reasons why there may be some of
the speculation or or actual
reasons why that may be.
Thank you Mr chairman for that
question you know I I think a
lot of these programs that money
is being offered for our very
prohibited in the nature in
terms of how I can apply for
them and or how tribes are able
to to utilize it these monies in
a timely fashion so.
For all intents and purposes
yeah the money is available but
when it comes down to try to
actually applying for them and
and then utilizing that that
they're just that there's a lot
of red tape in a vault in
utilizing these types of funds
and that's why you see that that
at risk many of the education
reform Fund so large at this
point just because you know we
we we we we don't have any any
use for that.
So yeah yeah I mean I think I
think it speaks to the issue and
we heard broadly about
flexibility in utilizing that
money and that's something
hopefully we'd be able to
address in a way that that more
school districts around the
stable better utilize and
specially on tribal land so
that's hopefully something we
can.
Rely on on your panelists to
give some input on as well so
that that money can be accessed
not saying that it's a solve all
but it's there to be utilized in
and hopefully it can be can be
utilized to recurring costs to
the state but with that thank
you all so much I really
appreciate it
And we'll move on to house bill
ninety three so thank you the
committee.
Right so house bill ninety three
is that you Representative Lara.
Yes Sir Mr chair that's correct
all right do you have and expert
that you need me to summon I yes
I do I how about work for people
I have a.
But to show Julian now.
All right so if if for as he
calls your name on the attendees
list if you would raise your
hand please and that's quite a
bit of experts so we're gonna
need The presentation to be
brief.
To to to Mr chair truly experts
are our main witnesses the other
two are are back up just in case
our so the next person Mr chair
we have is that the I'm not
really a lot when this.
Megan meet.
And
because scientists.
These are essentials.
If you would please raise your
hand
thank you.
Sorry I get used to.
Engine one button and then have
a different one this time I
don't want to kick you out of
the meeting and keep you in.
All right has still ninety three
so we still have three bills to
go and it's the always the
intention of this committee and
and we do get through all of the
bills but if we could have
brief presentations and and
stick to the points of the bill
on for our panelists thank you.
Thank you Mr chair house bill
ninety three is released to the
limiting the use of out of
school suspension for as a or
expulsion as a disciplinary
method and this is specifically
addresses the needs of our
homeless youth and foster you so
for twenty years of my twenty
two year career in education I
was up at a homeless education
liaison for my school district
and I I am very much aware of
the struggles that many of our
homeless and foster youth go to
go to just just a cap on normal
day at school so that you know
so one of one of the issues that
we that that we would repeatedly
come up was suspensions or
expulsions especially of our
homeless youth because once that
happens they have nowhere to go
school was the only place they
could feel safe schools only
place you could meals and for
what we for whatever reason is
happening in their personal
lives obviously there's a lot of
issues happening their personal
lives but that adding the
suspension out of school
suspension or expulsion to that.
Just in danger the student even
more and we would lose many of
our students are aware so that's
the purpose of this bill is to
implement restorative justice
practices and to limit as much
as possible the expulsion for
the suspend out of school
suspension for the students and
now I would like to pass on
structure to is Julian Act.
Please.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Larry can you
hear me OK.
Yes yes we can.
Thank you thank you very much
chairman and members of the
committee good morning this is
Patricia Julien L. from
schoolhouse connection I'm very
excited to speak in favor of HB
ninety three and to provide some
information
for background I'm an attorney
working on state policy across
the country by providing support
to local educators and advocates
on the specific needs of youth
experiencing homelessness in the
state of New Mexico for over a
year now I've been partnering
with a broad group of
stakeholders from across the
state including youth themselves
service providers and educators
and that group identified the
policies in H. B. ninety three
as necessary and appropriate
strategies to help students stay
in school I believe the bill
analyses included some of the
significant research on the
benefits of trauma informed and
restorative justice I won't
repeat that now in the interest
of time I would point out just
one study that was not in the
analyses and this came out of
Pennsylvania where the pace
School found an increase in
attendance and also students
exceeding benchmarks in math and
writing after adopting trauma
informed care models so we know
that that approach works however
despite that research we also
know that schools are
disproportionately punishing
many of our most vulnerable
students and that includes
students of color and also
students experiencing
homelessness New Mexico doesn't
actually disaggregate discipline
data for students experiencing
homelessness specifically but my
organization has looked at all
of the research from every state
that doesn't disaggregate
discipline data and in every
state has found that students
experiencing homelessness are
subjected to punitive discipline
at twice the rate of their
housed peers and also more often
than other little.
It seems as you have frozen in
mid sentence.
We'll see if we can get back to
work do you have another
panelists of which to pick up on
their end Mr chair Act Jana for
most of the public schools.
Or at the end good morning.
Chair Maryland members of the
committee my name is up ten of
the day up on December program
coordinator for the Atlantic
program here with the Santa Fe
public schools and I also have a
background in counseling a
master's in counseling I served
as
school counselor at Santa Fe
high school and I also have a
background and early
intervention and and my
experience would definitely let
me to to speak anecdotally to
the issues of trauma and stress
on a child's brain.
We've seen over and over again
in the research I think that's
probably highlighted in the in
the reports that you have
speaking at a totally I I can
definitely speak to the fact
that students who have the
stress responses those those
students who might be labeled as
troubled or as acting out are
actually exhibiting stress
responses to
frequently traumatic childhood
childhood histories.
just really quickly give you one
example we have a student in
high school who suffered from
pretty severe neglect and
childhood abuse along with
experiencing homelessness and
the student was having
difficulty getting to school on
a regular basis
and we work with the student and
develop interventions got him
appropriate mental health
services and
and once he was he was on board
to to get to school on a regular
basis he started getting to
school but it was going to
school tardy and what started
happening was school
administration was placing the
student in in house suspension
so we have a student who was
finally ready to become we
engage with education and what
he was met with was not
welcoming face or understanding
person the issue the issue that
he was faces of that that he was
placed in a segregated setting
in in school suspension so as
you can imagine for a student
who was severely disengaged
to then be segregated in in
school suspension of or out of
school suspension which can
frequently happen for students
experiencing homelessness
the
the damage that was done was at
the the student became even more
disengaged from education.
and so you know the the the the
research and the data speaks to
the fact that we absolutely need
to find alternatives to
addressing discipline issues to
addressing attendance issues
our students are are on the
fringe as it is and I would
definitely so I definitely
support the passage of house
bill ninety three
to serve as a Guiding Light for
our school districts to better
implement our policies that can
support our students are
experiencing homelessness
who are exhibiting the stress
responses I'm so happy to answer
any other questions that folks
might have been happy to be here
as well thank you.
Right.
Here are several petitions act
it's okay she can continue her
what she was saying.
Sure please thank you Mr thank
you Mr chair representative
black cut my camera off
hopefully that will help with
the audio I'm not sure if you
heard towards the end before I
got cut off when I did say that
students experiencing
homelessness are subjected to
punitive discipline measures at
twice the rate of their housed
peers and more often than other
low income students in every
state that this aggregates data
on that datapoint.
at the same time as this is the
case we also know that removing
students experiencing
homelessness from class hurts
them in ways it does not hurt
other students and
Representative Lara already
explained that so I won't
belabor that point but I will
just let you know some specific
information from New Mexico
shows that more than one in
every three homeless high school
students in New Mexico attempt
suicide over the course in just
one year.
And more than one in every five
homeless high school students in
New Mexico reported being raped
over the course of the year so
you can imagine when you add now
a suspension and expulsion to
the impact of these kind of
mental and physical health
traumas that when you send these
children out of school and I
want to say send them home
because they don't have a home
to be sent to but when you send
a lot of school you're sending
them to despair deprivations
violence and maybe even death
and that sounds melodramatic but
unfortunately it's it's just
true so those are the reasons
behind HB ninety three keeping
students in school keeping
schools safe but also helping
our students get what they need
and helping them to graduate we
know that not having a high
school degree is the single
greatest risk factor for young
adult homelessness so if we want
to break the cycle of
homelessness and we need to make
sure that our students are
experiencing homelessness now
have the opportunity to go to
school to graduate from high
school and to not have to
experience homelessness into
adulthood.
So for all these reasons I
support H. B. ninety three I'll
be happy to address any
questions and again thank you
for your patience with my
connection.
Thank you Mr chair and the the
other two ladies that that we
have so that I have is as
witnesses I think are in the in
the.
In the into the basics of of
time you know what I will would
you know I will ask Megan and
Eric thank you for your answer
the questions that up that they
have expertise in the recording
when we are with the with the
during the question thanks so
with that Mr chair we stand for
questions.
Great thank you all so we'll go
to the attendees list so those
that are in support of house
bill ninety three if you would
and wish to speak with.
Steve please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you very
much we are in support of this
bill great presentation for the
obvious reasons and so we just
wanted to make sure that we got
our voice in this room and to
support this bill thank you.
Right thank you.
Remember please if you wish to
speak include your first and
last name.
Family.
Please good morning good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee and we will have
representing New Mexico voices
for children we stand in support
of HB ninety three at and I want
to thank Representative Lara for
guiding this bill and we support
this bill because it considers
the whole child in matters of
school discipline out of school
suspension expulsion should
always be a last resort through
restorative justice justice
practices and by considering the
circumstances of each student
your children will lose valuable
school time and one step be
supported by their educational
community.
Children with disabilities and
children of color as well as
children experiencing
homelessness are
disproportionately expelled and
suspended and acting this bill
as a matter of racial and social
equity and justice we ask the
committee to support this bill
for child well being thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Good morning welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee it's it's good
to see and hear you even if it's
virtually I just wanted to stand
in support of I house bill
ninety three not only is a
parent and grandparent but
because it's the right thing to
do thank you Mr chairman for
your for your attention to the
mat.
Thank you.
Dr Byrne sting.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on burn sting
Albuquerque teachers federation.
The teachers union in
Albuquerque is working in
collaboration with the
Albuquerque public schools to
implement and support
restorative practices in all our
schools I think it's very
complex to move systems that are
used to suspending as a matter
of discipline to whole systems
of restorative support and I
hope that this bill helps us
move along in that direction
thank you.
Great thank you.
All right.
We don't have any more hands on
will come to committee so first
on my list I have oh I'm sorry
the audience that there's
opposition.
Opposition.
I've moved on from support.
I'm sorry it will come to
committee so first on my list
representatives L. please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Lara
I do have a few questions for
you and and a few concerns.
Our.
Our our schools required to pay
for an alternative measure of
education whatever the students
are suspended.
Mr chair representative result
by beating a to my knowledge
they are not I don't know if any
my experts have a specific
culture that.
Mr chair that brings me to a
question I know some school
districts do go that extra step
so these kids these young people
that have.
Wonder what your suggestions are
in this bill that those are
those are being taken care of
and this just chair and
representative Laura I guess my.
I would like to see these
limitations that you have put in
your bill
This very sanctions.
I see them better served as
being.
Suggestions.
To to the various school boards
throughout our state
I think your bill is a little
bit over reaching because one
size does not fit all.
And.
I think it's taking away a lot
of our school district's local
control in the school boards
local control Mr chairman.
What are additional like these
need to be guidelines that may
be PED puts out there for school
districts for them to have some
sort of suggestions of what they
could.
Do and what they should be
looking for and evaluate diss
the situations on an independent
basis instead of saying this is
what you have to do of I'm just
really torn over this I I
understand the plight of a lot
of these young kids I in my
particular district we have lots
of single parent households and.
It's really tough for school
districts but they understand
the need to get these young
people educated and we do go to
extremes to make sure that that
is done data my air if we go to
continue constraints on them we
are more list tying their hands
I would like to see these
sanctions going in as guidelines
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lara.
Thank you representative
Representative doubt.
Thank you representative large
bill can you hear me.
My call was north of Albuquerque
so I'm having a lot of connected
vehicle you you're okay if you
talk probably a little bit
louder okay.
This is.
So I really appreciate the
intent of this bill I actually
assisted the school district in
writing restorative justice
grant and that is an evidence
based model to address
behavioral redirecting children
and but there are a lot of other
evidence based models out there
as well and so especially
restorative justice it's to
prevent that we went you know
students are at risk of
delinquency there is usually
between a victim and offender
some sort of crime Perkins and
has been
has occurred and they want to
repair that relationship and
create.
Really great behavior model I
was I was glad that the grant
was funded and as long as the
principal was there and he was
he was the only that it was a
hard hard to shift the culture
from suspension it was heavy and
what ended up happening was when
the principal left the program
basically fell apart so I just
think I don't like that
suspension is considered an
absence I think there is a need
and you're on the right path but
it just feel like we are
legislative body about to
mandate One evidence based model
happens to be one of my
favorites but it's in evidence
based model that depending on
the leadership at each school
district.
If they don't have the right
culture and they don't have the
right the right leadership may
not work in a small talk to the
that has to be in and so I just
you know I I'm not sure this
makes when you mandate that
every single school do this it
could diminish their capacity
from a lack of training so what
what are the steps.
We'll schools access to training
and how will they develop
develop implementation plans
that guarantee sustainability.
Thank you for that
representative thank you Mr
chair so what we're there's one
thing that that isn't being
included in this is that there
is already a federal law that
protects the students and that's
to me to the McKinney vento act.
So that's already in place what
we're trying to do or what we're
trying to accomplish with this
is is put into rural that that
these services be offered as an
option to give the school
districts of flexibility to
utilize this type of option for
the for for discipline measures
so you know.
Making a bento the McKinney
vento act.
Has some very very strong
protections for students to meet
the definition of homeless.
What we're trying to do with
this bill again is trying to
enhance or it or give the
students the that opportunity to
stay in school while to continue
their learning despite any
discipline Act it disciplinary
actions that meet that they may
have so and so you know it gets
you know we're kind of I I'm you
know I when I when I was working
with the program you know we
were very very careful since
it's a federal law not to
violate anybody's civil rights
and we open up of the the the
program and we make sure that
the students stay in school
because of that law specifically
is intended to keep children in
school and out with that if it's
working Mr chair I'd like to ask
Miss Julian L. for to to also
response that.
Please.
Thank you representative are Mr
chair I just wanted to add a
little bit of the context of the
development of the bill together
with that committee of
stakeholders that I mentioned
earlier initially there actually
was a draft being discussed that
was fairly prescriptive very
long required a lot of very
specific actions on the part of
school districts and charter
schools and then you know as the
group of stakeholders talked
about on the eve the very idea
of flexibility and that every
community is not the same in
every student is not the same
really peel that back and ended
up with just the sentence that
is in the bill now which refers
to a process that accounts for
student homelessness but doesn't
mandate what that process would
be what that process would look
like with the steps would be it
talks about exhausting
interventions but what those
specific interventions might be
in a particular school or for a
particular student certainly can
very so there's absolutely the
intent to respect that need for
flexibility while certainly
putting in state law these
issues around the benefits of
positive discipline practice and
the impacts of adverse childhood
experiences on those behaviors
so there is the that that intent
to try to find that balance.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that Madam chair backs what
are the next steps for students
to participate in this program
but they continue to show on
Wednesday behavior sometimes
criminal behavior could be hard
to others what what are the next
steps other students civil
rights partners because of the
behavior that's being imposed on
what what are the next steps.
Thank you representative on Mr
chair so we it's
Once once again I'm gonna refer
back to the McKinney vento act
you know that that that federal
law protects the students and
and that gives them the
opportunity to to to continue to
attend school regardless of the
situations that they may be in
and what with that you know of
any Mr chair if any of my our
expert witnesses would like to
help me with this answer you are
with our with our Asaram.
Mr chair representative lar this
is a potentially now if I can if
I can jump in just briefly.
Please another aspect of of the
bill it does say that there may
come a time when suspension or
expulsion is required for safety
reasons and at that point for
their interventions would not be
required and suspension or
expulsion could take place for
the student.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for and do you believe that
we allow schools to descend role
children who were chronically
absent that just to avoid the
term suspension of schools could
yes these kids have a lot of
issues and I appreciate your
hard for them and that's where I
as well it it does this presents
school districts because right
now we allow Edison rolling
after a certain number of
absences.
Could not just be a workaround.
But thank you Representative
down Mr chair eight the the
students to my knowledge the
students once identified as
making you've been taught
eligible had have to have
certain interventions in place
before that happens so the the
school districts are responsible
actually to the school district
the homeless liaisons are
responsible for following up and
ensuring that the that the
student has as many
opportunities to stay in in the
school in class as possible R.
eight and the Mr chair if any of
my expert witnesses would like
to add to that I would I would
welcome that now.
Sorry.
I'm sorry quickly I just wanted
to add that the New Mexico
attendance for success act also
would certainly come into play
and issues of attendance.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I I think
the schools can only descend
role students if they have ten
consecutive absences so I'm I'm
not sure how that would be able
to work around unless the
student missed school for ten
days in a row.
I don't think suspension would
be
yeah I I I I I think that's a
different situation in this
instance thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you
Representative.
I know that schools can already
use risk for restorative justice
with this mom out this will.
For the second time it's
probably not something we can
address but I think I would
really want to hear from experts
that are using restorative
justice and and experience with
the committee what their
successes or challenges with the
implementation because it just
it's hard in a momentary setting
Rikki Lee are really committed
to this process so in the in the
context of a mandate.
I've seen these trainings cost
as much as fifteen hundred
dollars per staff member in
order to implement these
programs already acted
absolutely not the hard as
Representative argument we we've
talked a lot about we support
the children who need it most
and that's where my heart is and
and I think that's reflected in
the bills I introduce it just it
feels like an unfunded mandates
feels like Liz and something
that is is is really hard to
impose on schools that may or
may not have the yes it's based
model thank you Mr chairman.
You representative so I'm sorry
in my haste I skipped over the
opposition to the bill so I'm
gonna go to lily may R. T. is
with the New Mexico school board
association I'm sorry about that
we we made but you have two
minutes.
No problem Mr chair can you hear
me thank you so much and I
obviously wasn't quick enough
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am a
millimeter tease the let's say
reliance on for the New Mexico
School association school board
association and we have a
membership of eighty nine
districts and we are four
hundred fifty strong and school
board members Mr chairman house
bill ninety three requires every
school board to expand its
disciplinary policies when
suspending or expelling a
student from school and
specifies an exhaustive
exhaustive list of interventions
to be used we appreciate and we
applaud the intent of this bill
to do all we can to keep our
students in school safety and
learning in implementing of the
mandates of the bill public
schools may incur costs
associated with providing
additional staff to engage in
this process of exhausting all
interventions costs might also
be required to pay for training
to professional development on
restorative justice practices to
implement it to be implemented
the bill does not contain an
appropriation and consequently
requires local school districts
to cover any additional staff
and staff training costs with an
already limited budget in
addition the mandate eliminates
the local decision making
options NMSA believes that this
should not be mandated and
intervention should be optional
with decisions made by the local
board and M. S. B. A. supports
the content a concept addressed
in this bill but it feels it
should be a local option rather
than the state mandate if the
bill moves on we ask the sponsor
to consider including it as an
option for local school
districts rather than a mandate
and that funding be provided
provided for the additional
intervention efforts we well and
and must be a supports the
intention of this bill will
stand in opposition to
legislation.
Thank you Willie Mae but that
was two minutes I'm sorry about
that I was quick on.
The opposition side so I'll come
back I broke my own rule of wait
time so are will come back to
committee Representative lane
excuse me for that.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair as I
understand this bill it is
designed to make sure that
schools do in fact implement
exhaustion of of interventions
and and we talked sort of
justice.
And that those interventions are
exhausted before any level to
expansion take place is that
correct.
Mr Senator yes that's correct.
And Mr chair also just wanna
make sure I understand there
there are no exceptions.
To that requirement based upon
the gravity of what it student
doesn't schools that correct.
Mr chair representative and
noticed your your force if
there's any CTE issues or are or
any issues of that answers or of
of severe issues then and now.
Mr I'm sorry I think maybe my
are you broke up
there there are no exceptions is
that correct yes yes there are
exceptions to to a safety
issues.
Okay thank you Mr would you show
me where in the bill that
exception languages.
Mr chair representative we're to
that I have different teams
doing now.
Yes thank you on page two of the
bill of lines fifteen sixteen
the process that the school
district or charter school use
could determine that suspension
or expulsion is the only safe
response.
Mr chair so just looking at the
language though it it does say.
In line ten eleven shall be used
only following the exhaustion of
interventions.
And then it goes through that
list and then it says.
Inverse caring line fifteen and
determines that suspension or
expulsion going state response
to Mr chair would it would
appear that.
Because of the board and is used
instead of or that you still
aren't fact obligated to the
school district to follow those
exhaustion of interventions Mr
chair I stand ready for a
correction but but because I
think the word entities rather
than or I don't I don't think it
is optional if there isn't the
only sector spots Mr chair.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chairman is doing now you
have any comment for that.
Yes it may be that I I
misunderstood the question so
interventions are required
however there could be a part
there it has to be a process so
line thirteen is really talk
about the process so suspension
expulsions starting online for
use as a last resort following a
process that accounts for
circumstances such as
homelessness foster care
placement adverse childhood
experiences and determines that
suspension or expulsion is the
only safe response so that
process that the school board or
charter school uses to determine
what kind of discipline will be
needed out that process could
determine that suspension or
expulsion is the only safe
response.
Thank you Mr but again I I just
look at the point language in a
bomb on the school board member
or superintendent trying
understands language.
There's nothing in the actual
point text of the bill that
would say you know based upon
the exigencies of the
circumstance you have let's say
a you know a violent offense or
or a deadly weapon is brought on
the school campus something of
that nature there's nothing the
point language of the bill that
would say that that school
district is is authorized and
not have to exhaust
interventions especially be of
students say that doesn't have a
part despair history.
and I think really that is my
main concern with the bill it's
not the the design or the heart
behind the bill was trying to
accomplish I think we we all
agree that you know I I
represent municipalities before
may have employee handbooks and
maybe they implement progressive
discipline to similar philosophy
it's pretty common you shouldn't
just jump to you know separation
of employee and I think the same
concept applies when it comes to
education we want to make sure
our students are in school and
they're getting educated but
with that I think there also to
be built into you know this type
of bills that if it gets to that
worst case scenario best school
district does have the
discretion to be able to in fact
maybe suspended for a day or two
and not have to exhaust the
interventions use language
that's found in line eleven so
thank you for that Mr chair.
Thank thank you are thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chairman Mr chair if I may you
know our.
There's been comments made about
funding and paying for things
and and putting restrictions are
asking for unfunded mandates.
You wanna and I I'm gonna
mention this again the McKinney
vento act is a federal act.
That provides protection to
these particular students so
even even if the student were to
bring any of economic to school
they would still have to go
through the due process our
process to go through because
they are protected under the
McKinney vento act and this is
the federal law.
And and also review your Mr
chair you know it's not an
unfunded mandate because there's
federal money becomes the
states under making you bento.
That provides for the hiring of
a liaison and provides for
professional development and
provides for other things that
may be needed to allow the
school districts to implement
this program at the school
districts so the argument that
it's something that is not true
its final to Thailand one making
you rental funds so it so I I I
just wanted to make sure that I
make that clear that this is
already in the the the federal
laws are in place that's been
around since nineteen sixty five
so what we're doing here is
we're asking for school
districts to implement
restorative justice practices on
top of or in addition to build
making their to making event so
make individuals very specific
with a lot of these things all
we're asking is that we allow
the students to to go through
this restorative justice
process they already have many
protections in place under
federal law already so like once
again we are what we're asking
is that we implement for include
restorative justice in the
process.
Thank you Mr.
And
Representative Representative
Eli since you were the last
speaker if you want to get a
word in our question but please
be pre.
Thank you Mr chairman I didn't
raise any issue with regard to
unfunded mandates that's not
what my point was and due
process is a different concept
than the actual punishment being
administered and so due process
absolutely should be followed
but again you're limiting the
type of interventions that can
happen here so thank you Mr.
Thank you I I do believe for
Representative lot I'd die
believe that was from the
criticism from the audience not
directed at you as far as the
funding if I'm not mistaken but
point well taken Representative
Eli Representative out.
Thank you Mr chairman sorry I
just I.
Education I don't think that all
districts get making candy Act
funds and there we are.
From district to district I
think.
Hello my district.
Ten thousand and fifty cent
redistricting funds.
So that that's a good question
NSF from Ellie S. C. would are
you able to address that for us
if all school districts get can
even funds do not have an answer
to that but I will find out.
But Mr chair to my knowledge
also all school districts are
eligible to receive making event
of funds but they have to apply
for them through the RFP
process.
But either way any it Mr chair
if any students are identified
as homeless regardless of the
school district receives or
applies for making event of
funding they have to provide
those services.
Great thank you so we can get
clarification on that as well
for that thank you
Representative Dow so go to
Representative Roybal cut you
know please.
You Mr chair and thank you
Representative for introducing
this bill I I do thoroughly
understand your intent but I
wanted to just make sure.
I believe it's your intent to
promote and ensure that there's
more of a collaborative process
but also that it fall within the
letter of the law so that it's
not just
Eight issue which is why we're
trying to I think I while you're
trying to institute this this
bill is if we don't stand as
strong cooperative message about
the state working in tandem with
the local independent school
districts in ensuring that we
take has representative
mentioned a full due process in
in my view restorative on and
intervention processes are part
of that entire due process is
that Mr chair and representative
in my clear an understanding
that that your intent.
Mr chairman yes this so thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative I have been
witness to the restorative
justice and intervention
approach on in California for
example where my grandsons are
in school and in the heart of
the Los Angeles Independent
School District and I've
witnessed the schools that have
absolutely gone from extremely
high risk high suspension rates
all of the all of the
of problems associated with
for
working poor schools that
struggle with communities on
inner city schools it's great
struggle with communities faced
with these conditions and I'm
doing the history of punitive
approaches that L. A.
Independent School District took
for years that rule to be
unsuccessful because they still
had high numbers of crime in the
by by in the communities they
had high numbers of a dropout
all of the.
Parable criterion conditions
exist in.
Mr chair and representative
they've since I I don't remember
how many years probably and
within the last ten years taken
a restorative justice approach.
Beginning with the state.
And then filtering through to
the end of school districts and
they have seen in the worst
district in the heart of LA they
have seen huge success us so
thank you Mr chairman and
representative all of the social
cultural economic factors and
taking them all into full
consideration in this
interventions interventionist
approach which were calling
restorative justice it has a
proven track record and I think.
Approach that we're taking and I
see it as a positive approach
rather than a punitive approach
and positive collaborative
approaches Mr chair
representative always work
better all right then Senator
reproach us so I just wanted to
make sure I was clear on your
intent and what we're you're
asking us to do Mr chair and
representative and I fully
support your bill thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
pass on this bill.
We right so we have to do pastor
should by Representative
Trujillo or second by
Representative Stapleton on
before a fully accept that
motion on I would like to say
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I think one other source
of funding for districts this is
something that's outlined in
need House Bill five Senate bill
one as well that can be used for
at risk funding all I know
within my school district in
Albuquerque public schools that
they're on implementing a
program on with the help of
former representative re well
but to to all move toward
restorative practices district
wide in in dealing with any sort
of disciplinary action for
students
and and I think that might be
one source but I I would
encourage you representative to
get with the school board
association to to talk over some
of those possible issues to make
sure that that funding is
available all and and as you say
it is in the end we're taking
your word for that that every
school district has additional
federal money to to help with
initiatives like this I think
it's super super important that
we as a state also have that
accountability tool for the
school districts to implement
something like a restorative
practices in our schools that
that that certainly prove
beneficial just in the in not
just in my anecdotal experience
is a high school teacher
But but also District and and
statewide I think it be
tremendously helpful but I would
encourage that we get that
straightened out and and really
working I would encourage also
members here is working with
with their local school
districts as well in helping
them identify money that may or
may not be used and how it's
being used in your local school
districts and for what
initiatives it is
With that we have to do passed
motion the second by
Representative Stapleton madam
secretary called the roll wanted
to pass motion please.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
No one I'd like to explain
about.
Representative dial nope.
Representative al.
So.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lang.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative about curry at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative Garrett.
Like to explain my vote.
Chair.
Yes.
I.
All right so what I affirmative
tend to I see in the past and
house bill ninety three we have
a couple explaining the votes if
you do that briefly please
Representative Chatfield place.
Sure thank you I spent seventeen
years on school board and then
during that time we faced many
instances like this I do I think
this is a good process but
that's the I believe in local
control and I think the the
local school board knows the
situation and they should have
the freedom to act accordingly.
Great thank you Representative
Representative Garrett.
I yes I'm thank you Mr chairman
I listen to Representative Lane
comments and I would suggest
that Representative Lara
consider if there is a way when
there is some type of the
imminent danger a situation
where you really needed
immediate thing without going
through a process just something
to consider thank you.
Great thank you all right with
that do have a due pass ninety
three thank you Representative
remembers.
All right.
I'm so Representative Lotta
Europe on house bill one hundred
is that correct yes Sir thank
you Mr chair that is correct for
each B. one hundred my experts
if I can have a Lillian Torrez
superintendent lotus.
And superintendent us to go to.
All right superintendents if you
would please raise your hand in
the attendees list.
I saw.
Really and had their hands
raised.
It comes up and goes down.
All.
All right I think I captured
million okay yes we did enter
and all right Kok please house
bill one hundred thank you Mr
chair house bill one hundred
It is a us is that we be pop and
promote and offer the
opportunity for college and
career that you are ready to
systems statewide for our
students are I believe that this
addresses of some of the
concerns under Martinez Yazzie
there's also an appropriation of
three million dollars for this
there's a companion bill in the
Senate that that's being carried
by Representative by Senator
Gonzales and we we are very much
aware of the ask for the
appropriation the the the point
of this is to give our students
the opportunity to be ready for
career and or college when they
graduate high school and with
that Mr chair I will leave it up
to I will hand it over to our.
Our our superintendents.
The superintendents.
Mr chair at Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank.
Opportunity.
My name is Dr Lillian Torrez and
I am the co chair of the New
Mexico Alliance for college and
career readiness I'm also
superintendent of task mystical
schools for seven years and have
worked diligently for forty
three years in New Mexico
education starting as a special
education teacher for ten years.
I would like to let you know how
important it is to enhance and
expand our college and career
readiness for every child in New
Mexico from K. twelve we need a
system open to all districts in
New Mexico we have pockets of
new and emerging programs but we
need a system and we need to
restart the programs that are
now gone because of short term
funding and the districts had no
choice.
This is directly aligned with
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit using
research based systems showing
evidence of significant
increases of proficiency rates
and graduation rates in minority
students also we need to make
sure that social emotional
learning is embedded in all that
we do in college and career
readiness because this develops
a child for effective college
and career readiness.
There are research based S. C.
out embedded systems available
neko Interxion we evidence of
significant increases in
proficiency rates and graduation
rates of native American ELL and
special education students along
with all of our other students
so thank you so much for
considering this and I just want
to honor each and everyone of
you for all that you're doing
for New Mexico children thank
you.
Thank you.
Representative is out that you
have something immediate you
needed to address yes Sir I'm
kind of was trying to look
something up where can I find
any information on the New
Mexico Alliance for college and
career readiness.
And that would be directed
towards Mr Taurus our last
speaker please try again fine
where where to go.
I think that we will act be
willing to give you any
information up and answer any of
the questions that
you have at this time we do have
a couple of other
available people to answer any
questions that you have or or Dr
what was going.
Just to pretend.
Well I I think it would be
really helpful for all of the
participants to be able to see
what the.
Goal is what the end result of
this assisted of just being told
and that's what I was trying to
look anything up on this matter
and I'm not finding anything and
I was wondering if any of the
material was available.
Is it is it is there in shore is
there a website I think she's
asking for that would be helpful
looking
at what these funds are what the
organization maybe.
at this time we don't have a
particular website we have all
of our documents and information
that can be sent to.
Any of our legislators right now
So if we could it will go
through the presentation of
questions come up and if you
have material that can be
emailed to us on our website
are.
Email is readily available on
this just hi
In the interest of time.
Representative is all but my
concern is Mr chairman other
people that might be reading
this bill wanting to they don't
know that we have been told
where to go to look for the
information that's my concern
thank you very much.
Great thank you we'll work on
getting that so please make that
available Mr us but doctor
Segura if you would please
briefly.
Yes good morning chairman and
members of the committee I am
the superintendent of truth or
consequences municipal school
district as well as the co chair
of the New Mexico Alliance for
college and career readiness
you know when we're at our our
goal is to establish a system as
well as sustainable funding
with HB one hundred that
supports college and career
readiness for all of our New
Mexico students as outlined in
the Yazzie Martinez Madam
findings our objective again is
to support all New Mexico
schools and districts
You know to support districts
that already have established
systems in place to support the
development of new systems and
to provide additional support to
those who may be struggling due
to funding and support our goal
is to develop a comprehensive K.
twelve system of college and
career readiness for our R. I.
students here in New Mexico and
in my experience as a teacher
principal and now superintendent
in New Mexico what I have
experienced over the course of
fifteen years is that here in
New Mexico we have high teacher
and leader turnover which
disrupts teaching and learning
so we believe that strong
systems are necessary for
continuity of learning we also
have high student mobility
within our state and so this
would also support students to
have some sort of continuity if
they're moving from school to
school or district to district
I'm.
Any funds that the legislature
allocates to the bills will be
sent to at the college and
career readiness bureau led by
Dr Lang penne alla and we'll go
through an RFP process for all
districts to be able to apply
for and the reason we wanted to
be in this at times structure is
because districts and schools
need to be invested in investing
and a college and career
readiness system that will work
for them because we know that
implementation with fidelity is
very important
We also want to make sure that
our teachers are getting a
robust program of professional
development if Mexico the Mexico
pandemic has taught us anything
it's that our teachers are
frontline workers need to at
need that support with
professional development to
support digital learning for all
of our students.
this again just like
superintendents put as mentioned
we want a system that's going to
support social emotional efforts
as well as students succeed when
they experienced success purpose
and belonging and this student
purpose and engagement and
belonging leads to less students
suspensions and students falling
through the cracks which is the
common narrative within our
state
We we feel I'm again that we
want to establish some
sustainable funding for
districts to support strong
implementation of research based
college and career readiness
systems that support all
students with the foundational
and essential and executive
skills for postsecondary success
and achievements.
And that's what I have right now
so thank you very much.
Yes Representative if I may you
know I would like to emphasize
Dr Torrez is point that that
there was something similar to
this before but the funding
dried up so we're trying to to
revive that in and get that up
and running again thank you Mr
great thank you all right so
we'll go to our attendees list
is there any body on the
attendees there's less that
wishes to speak in support.
Support all right so we'll go to
stand so if you would please two
minutes but please be brief
Others have committee at one and
we still have another bill to
attend to so please briefly.
Thank you very much stand rounds
are representing the New Mexico
school superintendents
association as you heard from
our to superintendents college
and career readiness has
diminished as far as our systems
approaching stated New Mexico
this is a request to bring that
back to the fore and connected
to the public education
department we stand in support
of this bill thank you.
Great thank you.
We may.
Thank you Mr chairman willing
more teeth provided relies on
for the New Mexico school board
association and the school board
association supports the three
million dollar funding and the
legislation that will establish
career and technical pathways
and opportunities for high
school students we thank the
sponsor for bringing this budget
legislation forward we stand in
support of it and we asked the
committee to give it a favorable
favorable consideration thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Joseph good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee just
ask beta Albuquerque public
schools we stand in full support
thank you great thank you.
Steve good morning welcome back.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee some say ceiling
is with any a New Mexico on
behalf of our members I would
like to share one of our core
value in legislative priorities
and that is that we believe that
all students should have access
to successful programs that
close educational opportunity
gaps that are culturally and
linguistically responsive and
prepare them for college for
this reason we stand in support
of HB one hundred and thank the
legislature for bringing this
bill for.
Great thank you for we'll go to
Meredith.
Meredith.
Yes Mr chairman thank you very
much and members of the
committee Meredith mai chan I'm
speaking basically from my
experience as a long time
educator I was vice president of
Santa Fe community college we
had many many were bused
programs
that that of were largely
dependent on federal funding in
the state I also worked on many
higher education committees
we lost when called Perkins
funding was gone and school to
work funding was gone we lost a
very robust system that was
really helping to improve
achievement rates and give
students very of very very
practical skills and job
connections and you know it's
it's a shame that New Mexico
doesn't support these programs
when federal funding dries up we
need to have the sustained other
states have been doing it for
thirty years and we only have
tiny programs now three million
is just a small percentage of
what is needed to have robust
college and career readiness
systems but I really appreciate
the sponsor for bringing this
forth and hope we can restore
some of these programs.
Thank you right thank you.
Right so go to trees the size.
Good morning.
Good morning good to see you
again Mister chairman members of
the committee Theresa size
advocate for New Mexico Alliance
for college and career
readiness.
I support house bill one hundred
not only as an advocate but as
formally working in education
especially during these times of
virtual learning and hopefully
progressing towards in school
learning district teachers
students need the support as
they work towards helping their
students with college and career
readiness another point I'd like
to add Mr chairman members of
the committee is all districts
and schools can apply for these
dollars through the PED
application process and use the
systems of their choice for
college and career ready now
systems thank you Mr chairman
members the committee.
Right thank you.
So is there opposition to house
bill one.
Speech director.
Given my appropriate wait time.
All right so we'll come back
panelists.
Representative result please.
Mr chairman thank you very much.
I was glancing down through the
attendees and I see the
superintendents from like our
third.
The school district is on their
list of big I and I always I
always butcher her name Sarah
came baggage area and also super
Dr Shawn Pueblo who is heading
up the eastern New Mexico
university rules will and I want
to know what their response
might be if this additional
funding came into play Mr
chairman the reason I'm bringing
this up I think it was my.
Second term up here I know that
Representative Hector Balderas
supply.
Kerry this very as it built very
similar to this so we
incorporated where are.
Local community college grant
colleges could help are more
underserved schools in prepping
these kids where they could
start their career path and I I
just I don't know if they would
even want to speak in response
to this if this would be more
beneficial or would it really
make a difference and I don't
know if doctor pal is still on
there are not or the or Lisa.
Mr Powell raises very very.
Okay you would Mr Powell all.
Dr bell.
Dr **** gives me good morning
doctor helper.
Yes sure and and Representative
thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today
I saw this bill and I was
interested in it because
anything that will promote
student success and college
readiness is something we ought
to be looking for.
We are.
The other efforts to help
students become more ready for
college we do have some federal
grants that are available we
have received such as Europe and
we do have a title I grant to
also serve under served
populations we are NHS I at the
end of your all's well the ship
which is the address the
committee.
Well I did not mean to put you
on notice so fast and I don't
know with a lease a bit thank
you area is on or not but I know
that these programs especially
in what I call the valley
schools which is dexter Hagaman
like are there and living in
particular and not only helps
them with college readiness it
helps them with.
Of.
The ability to make a decision
whether they should be going to
a technical school.
Also.
Also
May be.
The premise type thing so I
understand where you all are
going with this and I do
appreciate the bill being
brought forward thank you very
much.
All right thank you
representative is L. but people
on the spot I like that's cold
calling.
All right so.
Any other questions from
committee members.
Seeing none I'll entertain a
motion.
Mr chair Representative Roybal
Caballero place I'd like to move
it to pass on house bill one
hundred so we have in the past
motion on house bill one hundred
Representative this.
This I have a question out okay
Representative Stapleton.
Mr speaker Representative Lara
on your bill it's specifically
said that the three million
dollars go to PED to go to when
I'm all done Is ation.
I'm that's where my concern is
about the I'm all gonna
isolation
to do that work that is
currently being done by PED so
could you explain that to me
please.
Thank you Mr chair and Madam
floor leader yeah I would to
defer to many of the doctors who
worked out who could answer that
for us please as to why that's
in there.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I believe that the
money all we're.
I didn't I didn't I didn't hear
what you said what did you say.
We are I believe the funding
would go to New Mexico Pat
college and career bureau and
they would put out an RFP.
And they weren't
B. the people that the
organization that so lax
after after looking at R. S.
P.'s
Pat Woods select who the.
who would give the service to
all of our districts.
We.
Representative Lara
House Bill ninety one that gave
two million dollars to pay.
It's Hopkins dollars.
Another set of money which make
it a total about five million
that I've put into COVID
technical education and those
funds are distributed from PED
directly to school districts
okay why would the money be
distant go out to bid two eight
to all reservations that would
do all the stuff what's the
purpose of that.
I believe the organization is
the district in other words
Perkins and all of these are for
high school children this goes
would go to from kindergarten
because we were waiting too long
to do this we really need to
have kindergarten through
twelfth grade kindergartens need
to start thinking about college
and career readiness so
this.
Would would involve every child
so then it's not okay okay so
then it should with all the
station it should say from
twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty four to contract with
school districts to address long
term economic development
throughout the state to increase
readiness by.
When kindergarten through
twelfth grade research based
knowledge so right now at the
college college and career
readiness bureau.
The kids are not involved
to respond as well to receive
funding however however they
receive
it curriculum information tool.
To to show what career readiness
is all about and we in this
level in the elementary level
and then middle school and high
school that receive funding to
the next Gen dollars that I put
into the budget so.
You say all.
In.
What is me because they try to
do that I have done that only
start people will
watches we each other's gets
that we get the information and
get help and get the reports so
this language about and all the
session doesn't say school
districts I'm saying the money
would go to school districts.
That's a concern for me.
This bill.
Mr chair and representative.
All right thank you thank you
better floor leader in and Mr
chair so and I and I and I
totally see what you are trying
would do with that what you what
you are saying and you.
It's R. rated so Katie Davis a
principal Mr chairman and
perhaps you know and David so
okay with the with the with the
with the team I'm open you know
to amending it now or we can do
it at another time Mr chair.
Representative I will leave that
to the will of the committee I
mean I will remind committee
members that this is an
appropriation bill in a strictly
appropriation detail on that I
assume is not budgeted for is
that correct
Representative Lotta.
Mr chair yes or for.
Okay being that it is not I mean
it's it's difficult for this
committee because we don't have
say on the matter is but I would
like with those concerns and
there's a recognition of those
concerns if we can roll the bill
get a clean amendment and so
that we can look at it and we
can go straight to the motion on
the table if the committee
wishes after seeing and if the
committee approved that
amendment does that work for
committee members.
Yes great okay so that that's
what we'll do if you could
prepare that Representative lot
of that would be awesome get
with a floor leader Stapleton I
think she raises some some.
Good questions and and and and
some good possible language to
get started on that amendment
but we'll get this
Ship shape and then will return
to to the to the amendment and
then to the bill.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for uploading or staples and
simple worker in her with her
problems thank you.
Thank you Representative lot I
think you understand clearly
what the what it thank you.
Great I'm I'm glad we could
appease all in the committee
that's awesome all right so with
that being said I got word from
our last bill sponsor that
wishes to roll it over so
Representative Dow the fact we
didn't get an FIR actually works
out in this case
by it'll have to be scheduled at
a later time so the agenda set
for Monday we will not have a
Saturday hearing yeah that's the
good news the bad news is is
that it'll probably be our last
freeze Saturday in this
committee.
We'll see how things go so enjoy
your weekend everybody I hope
it's safe one have fun take care
get some rest and we'll talk to
you all soon and see you all
soon.
Hi everybody thank you for the
good work today.
This
is not good.
He.
Quickly meet Cheryl there.
All right I'm.
Sen Mary and and I can we get
together quickly I'll send out I
was also an enemy.
Thank you we'll see
Representative Madrid.
