Representative Madrid.
Representative more about my
of here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo here.
Madam vice chair here Mr
Chairman we have court all right
so we have a quorum
Representative.
Thank you.
All right so we're going to go a
little bit out of order today
because we have a lot of musical
chairs to be played just like
Monday
so to free up our vice chair so
that she can take over the
duties as chair mmhm.
Well I'm part of those musical
chairs will start off with helps
Joint Memorial seven and then
we'll go to our second item
house bill forty one
Representative Eli.
All right and then we'll go down
the list so madam vice chair has
Joint Memorial seven thank you
Mr chair thank you committee
how straight Memorial seven
replaced the very demanding
house bill thirty which we
discussed at length
is simply request the public
school capital outlay oversight
task force to study the public
school heating ventilation and
air conditioning systems and
recommend a sustainable funding
mechanism as you recall when we
got into the weeds of house bill
thirty was like well who does
what this fund is over here this
is over here so we've simplified
it to really address together
with the L. E. S. C. the public
school finance authority and
other organizations that we look
at the mechanism the for with
excellent the for pointed out
that a cell free ported survey
of the school H. fax systems
could be conducted we don't have
to go in and do the massive
checked that house bill thirty
requests to do the initial
understanding of what's
happening in the state so we
would probably do the survey
it's a major health issue as you
all know and then those groups
would really look at all the
funding sources and mechanism
and figure out how we can
advance into the future that
would also involve the LFC and
LESC in the study I have LFC
member Thibodeau here to answer
technical questions did you want
to add anything okay and with
that we stand for questions
right thank you madam vice chair
so we'll go to our audience
those in support of house joint
memorial seven if you're online
if you'd indicate by raising
here and then I'll go to my
right hand side those and
support.
Mr speaker of up to two minutes
the committee good morning good
morning and of this gentleman
this is how we make good calls
you bring all players together
in an interim period with the
help of the LFC and others and
with the proposal capital outlay
oversight task force which I
serve on I believe we can reach
a rate resolution so thank you
for bringing this for Madam co
chair and we support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you others and support
please Sir you have up to two
minutes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee jokey
and with Mexico school board
association also is chair of the
public school capital outlay
council we support the new
initiative and we think it's the
right way to go thank you
Representative thank you others
in support of my right hand side
please Sir give up two minutes
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico we
appreciate the sponsor working
on this on the bill and then the
memorial to figure out the right
path thank you right anybody
else in my right hand side I
will go to my left hand side
doesn't support.
I will start in front please Sir
give up two minutes.
Committees isn't the registry
office for the sheet metal
workers local forty nine come a
long way with this bill this is
Donna memorial to do a study in
look forward to working with a
sponsor and the all the folks
included and then standard on
sport hope you will as well
thank you thank you please turn
the vacuum to make use of all
Carmen members the committee my
name's JT Bollington lobbyists
for the Gallatin county school
district and we also support
this legislation thank you for
thank you anybody else in
support of placement morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee from the COVID Lopez I
am the director of the sheet
metal contractors association
and for the president in stated
we ask that you support this
morning please thank thank you
anybody else in support.
All right so good opposition is
there any opposition.
House tomorrow seven online
folks.
All right not seeing anybody
will come to committee committee
discussion.
Representative Ezzell please.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
I do support this.
But I during the bill
presentation I pointed out some
problems that might one of my
schools is facing.
And.
Our problem that we have in our
area as I pointed out earlier
is.
Whenever we do have work done on
our ventilation systems most
that work does come from out of
state it does.
Not encourage any workers from
our area to be able to do this.
And we had a problem with the
company that did come out of
Albuquerque to do the repairs on
this particular school I was had
concerns about whenever it was
shut down tell to be evacuated
and it is a new school.
So I.
It I still.
Have concerns about how we are
addressing the problems in our
school because.
It could have been handled a lot
easier than the way it did
transpire so thank you very much
that's all Mr chairman right
thank you Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I I two of support to the fact
that student health and
violations important I guess my
question Mr chairman and
Representative cure is forced.
How the hell is this the house
is going to be carried out there
because we we say maybe like
many other studies.
You know I wanted to be
successful and I want to make
sure that we do what we intend
to do and that we have the
information so that later on we
can determine next up so Mr
Chairman representative there I
I know that you have a plan or a
course outlines farmers who will
be doing the the the inspections
how the data be gathered and how
will be reported out as soon
through the L. yes here's a
through the capital would be
through the other committee
capital Mr chairman Mr chair
representative great question we
want to get it done and you've
heard people who set or chair
all those committees are present
and it's been duly noted what
Representative Ezzell commented
as an issue to look at
and again I think the FIR points
out that to get the data to be
considered for the mechanism
that could be done by survey not
the inspections at this point
so I think and and I will
personally also make sure it
happens and cannot make sure
that happens and so in stand
will make sure it happens it
will happen.
Thank you Mr chairman and of
thank you Representative it
wasn't it wasn't that I don't
think that it would happen but I
just know that for many times
there's an idea there's things
that we have it's a good idea I
just want to make sure that you
know surveys in these types of
things you know I I if I may
have to be a combination of both
and that's all I would say is
that in looking at this we want
to make sure that we do is and
also the what what's gonna be
done with the recommendations
because Mr chairman and and
Representative Garrett I think
we kind of look at solutions
because of the answer after all
this is used to up to go to the
murder of thirteen they were
talking about a huge cost burden
for school districts and so I
just wanted to state that I do
think it's good I do appreciate
this and I can support this
memorial to study it
but I just have those questions
is to help guide the process
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair I think we all want
good air quality in our schools
I don't think there's a doubt
about it but I sat through a
bill last year to the roof would
require all the schools to.
change out their ventilation
systems and in the end it turned
out there were only two
contractors or work May met the
qualifications to do that
exchange and I was very
disappointed in that and I voted
against the bill and to me this
bill might feed into this very
similar circumstance you know
what what you get this
information will point resulting
gonna shut down some of our
little schools that might or
might not have the approved
ventilation system and and if if
for once their tag to what one
of those kids to and is there
going to be some.
Requirement of the state to fund
these much to contractors that
they can do the work to change
to make that change your
thoughts on that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative very well stated
that's why we're doing the study
to look at it this this may or
may not recommend specific
legislation I think when we
talked about certified
mechanical technicians that
expanded who
in the original bill that
expanded who could actually do
some of this work of but but we
duly noted what you just said
because that something that has
to be corporate in the study.
The of.
Certified qualified mechanical
contractor that had a print a
certain class of a print this
working for it and that was the
limiting factor and that cut it
down to a very minimal amount
and there in lies my concern Mr
chair representative that was a
concern and that was taken out
of the the house bill thirty
actually
so it would not be limited to
contractors her dad bill which
now we're replacing with the
study part of the study would be
workforce.
So the right in Austin yes Mr
but does writing all this down
as well for the state just so
you know Mr chair I think this
is the one really good idea but
I I think that cart before the
horse I'd like to see this the
solution before we tag certain
schools as identified as having
the problem we need to look at
the house bill thirty see what
it what the solution is who can
perform the work then we need to
see who needs to work.
Mr chair and representative
there's no more house bill
thirty but we were doing this
study.
Before we see who would do the
work so Mister chair my point
yes.
I've seen house bill thirty last
year was the last year.
When was the two years ago years
ago ma'am members better and I
thought it was.
so Mister chair of seeing that
and I and I know the problems it
it passed the house did pass the
Senate is it law it didn't pass
as soon okay so what I'm saying
we need Mr chair maybe we need
to work out the solution before
we identify exactly which
schools require this we need to
find out you know if we're going
to identify school state are you
in okay you have this problem
we're like what can I do about
it maybe we need to work through
that first and so you have this
problem this is what you can do
about it Mr chair that's Mr
chairman that's what the purpose
of the study is to do exactly
what you just said.
And the race house bill thirty
race the past two years ago.
Thank you Mr needs more
restrictive.
Right.
Thank you
I do want to say that that vice
chair you're right in that we
have a lot of leadership both in
our standing committees the
interim committees here this
past year I chaired the task
force public school capital
outlay for I'm slated to chair
the legislative education study
committee and then all of you
are obviously invited either
very is PO taking part as voting
members or the size three
members to come to these
meetings so that we can start.
Hearing from you and your
constituents and all the
different stakeholders as to
what to be able to do for our
ventilation systems some of the
issues there Representative
Ezzell Representative Baca raise
Representative Chatfield are all
things that we can really work
out on in the interim process to
come to some good inter standing
on big pieces of legislation
right so if we look at like some
of the factors bills that we
passed out of this committee
unanimously work through L. E.
S. C. graduation requirements
and other thing where we've come
through on a happy medium of
what people wanted
but I think as one of the
audience member mentions.
This is how I think in our
current process with our current
restraints time in preparation
through the interim is where a
lot of this work happens some
happy to see that we can come to
a solution around at least a
Joint Memorial and we're we're
going on an issue that
Representative Chatfield rightly
identifies as being contentious
over the past couple of years
So with that I'll entertain a
motion so will of the committee
Representative hi Representative
at a Depeche motion second by
Representative with one of the
any opposition to the past
motion.
All right see none given to pass
how tested Morial seven thank
you madam vice chair.
All right so we'll move on
Representative Lane leader lane
house bill four eighty one give
you a moment to transition.
This is.
Well really that's.
Give me
This
spans.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you for there you go.
All right Representative Lane
house bill four eighty one
please thank you Mr chair good
morning the committee house bill
forty one this bill will help
districts but the best
instructional materials
available from our earliest
learners helping them become
successful readers.
The fund to allow any L. E. A.
New Mexico to purchase high
quality literacy materials
aligned to the science of
reading off cycle and no cost to
local districts
I think we're all aware The New
Mexico's had reading proficiency
problems and so this this bill
would help build off the work
Senator Stewart in two thousand
nineteen with her structure
literacy bill and the work being
done by Penn over the last few
years.
Our out a new layer of support
for schools and districts to
implement structure literacy and
we know that when students
receive instruction aligned to
the science of reading it it
really does change the game for
our young students and it puts
students on a path to be
successful not just that
learning to read but reading to
learn and really.
If you can get that foundation
of being able to read well I
think that's what opens doors
really on a lifelong basically I
know for me as as a product of
the K. through twelve schools I
felt like I got a good education
but I've I've learned so much
more after high school and
college just through simply
being able to read critically
and and educate yourself that
way so give our kids the best
foot forward I think it's
critical Mr chair we do have a
committee sub.
I believe all right and I think
the committee said has been
distributed can have a motion.
The house education process to.
Your house bill eighty one.
All right so we have a motion to
discuss the committee says to a
second by Representative
Chatfield the opposition all
right we're on the committee
said thank you Mr chair Mister
chair so
the committee sub desert a
couple of things and this is in
response to feedback that we got
from
both of PED and LFC staff so
first that now requires that
core instruction materials
beyond the New Mexico K. through
eight English language arts
material Dr list that have been
received that have received the
structure literacy recognition
from the pad and second the
committee so requires that
supplemental and intervention
materials are on the visor list
of instructional programming
created by the collar Department
education just to know we didn't
use the New Mexico list for
supplemental list because the
pet notes in their FIR PED is
not review supplemental nor
inter invention material so and
with me I don't know if I
introduce a minute ago on this
with is my expert this morning
so.
With that Mr think ready for it
any questions all right thank
you all so we will go to support
for house bill forty one online
if you're online please raise
your hand we'll get you in a
moment those in my right hand
side and support alright
mistranslation of up to two
minutes welcome current members
the committee we stand in
support of this concept what was
going we still reservation by
using the call Representative
Liz and is this means long would
like to discuss with faster
moving that I thought that's
what I was going to hear in the
amendment but I haven't had a
chance to look at it I'm sorry
Mr chairman what we have to do
is to look at how we can move
into the structured literacy for
all that is the right solution
for students we also recommend
we might want to bring in
intensive tutoring is a part of
that landscape of support would
love to work for the Sanchez
generating that perhaps someone
language to even stricken points
sweet thank you to says please.
Thank you please have up to two
minutes ago Mr chair members of
the committee millimeters.
Yeah stand for legislation the
school board association is
continuing supporters additional
funding resources materials
support from dozens of school
boards and the.
The kind of interventions that
teachers in the classroom we do
have a concern with the language
it was going off the top of the
callers to over the status of
addresses that the.
What else talk about fusion.
The one.
More.
Enrollment for.
The.
Rep
that we hold.
For more money to the districts
that allows districts what
options to pursue.
We.
Thank you I thank you others
Moran said placement of a two
minute spoke.
Mr chairman members of the
committee committee my name is
Chelsea Canada and I'm the
director of public policy at the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
the chamber supports HB four
eighty one and thanks the
sponsors for bringing it forward
arm up members understand like
you all do the importance of
third grade reading readiness
and intervention we applaud the
legislature's work and
supporting teacher training base
in the sense of reading giving
teachers access to instructional
materials aligned with the
science of reading teachers the
tools to use the skills they
learned translated into the
classroom this is the next
necessary step to improve our
reading proficiency rates
ensuring that teachers and
students have the tools they
need to succeed our membership
is extremely concerned with the
twenty twenty to state and
national reading proficiency
rates coming out of two
different tests as you all know
at third grade students which
from learning to read to reading
to learn additionally studies
have shown that lack of third
grade proficiency and went to
high school graduation drop out
as employers in the state we
want to see our students and our
future workers succeed for these
reasons and more we support this
bill thank you right thank you
anybody else on the right hand
side alright please.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul the public
charter schools of New Mexico
the tools that we give our
teachers matter in this bill
incentivizes giving them the
best tools possible and so we
support the bill we think the
sponsor and thank you right
anybody else merry and Side.
My left hand side those and
support that we speak.
Right ma'am please the two
minutes of thank you chair.
My name is Bobby get tennis and
I represent the REC and our
state in sixty eight of your
world school districts and we
stand in support of this bill we
currently manage structured
literacy pieces for rural
education and there's a lot of
work to be done in this bill
truly helps to support some
thank you for your consideration
all right others on my left hand
side and support please Sir you
have up to two minutes walk.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce every dollar we
invest known literate literacy
materials that work is
investment in our future
workforce and an investment in
the fight against
intergenerational poverty
chamber applaud the state for
moving so decisively in the
direction of stronger literacy
instruction but we need to
finish the job by ensuring that
every school and every community
can quickly update their
curriculum to the very best
reading materials that we can
provide our kids the chamber
strongly urges your support for
this legislation thank you right
anybody else in the room that
would speak in support.
All right we'll go to.
Hope online.
Good morning hope you up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jose moralis I'm the
executive director for teach
plus New Mexico and a mother of
three my youngest daughter was
born prematurely and I struggled
academically the gap in our
understanding increased with
virtual learning during the
COVID we made the decision as a
family to move her to a private
school where she could access in
person learning.
During that time we also decided
to hold our daughter back to
give her access to more time to
develop professional skills my
meal is back at her local
neighborhood school and is in
second grade Mr chair my sweet
girl continues to struggle and
lacks confidence among her peers
these are there are many
students like me low across the
state they all deserve access to
quality curriculum resources and
educators this bill supports a
system focused on literacy and
we'll show moms like me that New
Mexico prioritizes literacy for
all students thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we will go to
opposition is our opposition
online if you please indicate by
raising her hand to house bill
forty one.
Hold it there on my right hand
side is our opposition to house
bill forty one.
All right over to my left hand
side is our opposition please
ma'am up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members.
My name is Ellen Burstyn the
president the Albuquerque
teachers federation before it
became the president of the
teachers hi.
Primary elementary school both
general and and specialist for
seventeen years and am proud to
say that for twenty years I was
in nationally board certified
teacher.
I think New Mexico has made
great investments in structured
literacy every elementary
teacher in New Mexico is now
required to go through letters
training this is something that
they have said is great training
although it's an extraordinary
time burden for them to finish
the training.
We have invested in that what
I'm worried about is that we
have not invested in the
conversation and support of the
balanced whole literacy program
that focuses are on our common
core standards which includes
reading writing speaking and
listening and the importance of
using the skills we're learning
about and letters in vetted and
a well rounded program where
students are able to read
interesting materials in
multiple content areas last
night I sat with over twenty
teachers and I asked them about
what they need in their
classrooms in terms of support
and materials and what they said
to a person with that they
really lack culturally relevant
and respectful materials for all
their readers and in multiple
contact us and while I support
structured literacy I think we
have focused on that and I'd
like to see more focus on all
the elements of rich literate
well rounded kids thank you.
Further the buzzer thank you any
other opposition.
All right I don't see any online
will come to committee
representative go to a please
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for the effort of
trying to have something to for
for the whole state I have a lot
of concerns and this bill and he
was just say actually
the research based forty
structurally that a see where
the US multi culture the cation
and cultural linguistic approach
is included in that that you
have that information.
Mr chair representative so what
we have seen in the evidence of
specifically states who have
implemented structured literacy
from the top down and from the
bottom up is that they're
successful with all groups of
students they're not just
growing and reading results for
middle class students they are
growing in reading results for
all students including English
learners we've seen this results
from Mississippi not only did
Mississippi have the lowest
decrease in reading through
COVID but they have the largest
growth for their English
learners throughout the last ten
years after their intensive
approach to making sure that
every district had well training
and structured literacy and to
the right instructional
materials in front of them the
reason that we believe that the
supplemental and intervention
materials or so it important and
also included in this bill is
because yes you need a core
instructional program but you
need a bunch of other stuff to
make sure that your students
have that well around in
cultural experience in their
classroom you need a diverse set
of books and experiences in
those books you need a diverse
set of characters in those books
so that students can see
themselves and what they're
learning structured literacy
doesn't prevent any of that it
simply says we must teach the
foundational skills that we know
that brand scientists have now
come to understand that children
need to learn in order to be
able to read and access language
what you surround them with to
help them on that journey is
outside of your quote unquote
structured literacy framework
and can be supplemented with
books and other materials.
Can I for one for the Mr
chairman and I have another.
So Mister chair and also just to
clarify the the committee so
that house The New Mexico.
approved reading list that
includes culturally and
linguistically relevant
materials on that list.
Thank you Mr chair thank
representative and I'm is good
that he has a promotion
wholistic approach but when you
say eight to you will a target
all students are going to have
the problem because you know
emerging bilinguals bring
something to the table that is
unique and is growing in every
place in country especially in
our state so
that I was reading an article
from National Committee for
effectively that is C. for
Charlie which each of these
opposing for this type of
research because he doesn't
include what if the student who
is sickening was medical
emergencies be tabled and
anybody who's because a common
which knows that you English as
someone on the most of them in
one way but I assign American
bilingual you bring so many
other factors that if they're
not including your listening the
Quinn the approach is going to
show deficiencies and that's
going to stay the found out
sometimes of fat the fusion so
many levels but is because we
are not including the
conversation really and when we
tried to put everybody one backs
that's going to have a problem
so
how is that one to cultural and
cultural linguistic included
specifically because we see
justice for everybody and is
hoping for everybody I I wanna
specifics in that if you don't
mind thank you Mr Mr Chairman
representative so as
Representative lane said on the
New Mexico list which is the
less that the committee some
uses and says if you want to use
these funds you have to choose
from the New Mexico last.
Both anything that has the
structured literacy designation
also has been reviewed by the
PED and has that C. L. R.
designation has been reviewed to
make sure that it is an
alignment with our cultural and
linguistically relevant
standards at the public
education department so there's
nothing on this list that
doesn't meet New Mexico CLR
standards for review
additionally I want to be very
clear about this had we seen in
any state that are in that
English learners across the
board we're not positively
impacted by structured literacy
we would not have brought a bill
forward to the state of New
Mexico it would not make sense
for students we have so many
English learners students who
are depending on our schools to
put them on a path to success
in and validate who they are as
a student as an English learner
because we have seen tremendous
progress with English learners
from the states that are ahead
of us and they're structured
literacy journey we are we don't
have concerns that this is not
helpful solution for a Centers
in fact we believe it's opposite
thank you I guess my last
comment or question will be I
don't think we have seen that
for this is we have adjusting
markings K. would actually Mr
chair representative sorry are
we actually chose Mexico behind
we are will I would and question
them behind bars but how the
multi cultured approach has not
been included in that approach
is feels like it is that this
the disruption literacy put kids
in the box and whatever you
applies to for this wait to
teach English and he will be the
same for fishing any other way
and and anyone who is an
indication of that is not true
so that's that's my concern so I
if it cannot support this bill
but thank you thank you for for
all that I missed it everything
they have done and and I
certainly this is going to help
the problem thank you thank you
Mr chair.
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you the
lane and found an expert I
appreciate the the the bill I do
have some questions so Mr chair
so what grades are going to be
covered on under this bill.
Ideally I'm sorry Mr chair
representative ideally if you
are getting your literacy
instruction right I'm this is
really primarily targeted here
K. three students and then
you're moving into your
hopefully aligned instructional
materials for grades four and
five.
Thank thank you for that Mr
chair so.
We I I'm curious as to the
timing of this bill because just
last school year we adopted
English language arts for
airport for the elementary
grades in the school district's
invested millions upon millions
of dollars in the materials that
they're currently using.
Even though I understand this is
optional.
So if the school district
decides to opt in and purchase
or L. opted into purchases
addition materials for example
we use a lot of consumable
materials so we knew we went to
a contract with a publisher that
we selected for six years for
them to produce materials so if
the school district goes and
decides to to use this optional.
And they've already purchased
those materials for the six year
cycle.
What's going to happen to all
those materials I keep on coming
in the renewals are going to be
used Mr chair.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee representative and.
I can't I don't have a solution
to the waste that may be created
from a district who may have
adopted a curriculum last year
that now wants to use those
funds to adopt something
different I would say though if
a district through the literacy
journey that the state has
incentivize them to be on over
the last two years has come to
realize in the last year or two
since the last adoption that
there curricular materials are
not aligned to the science of
reading and in fact that in our.
Causing confusion for their
teachers who have now gone to
letters training are coming back
into a classroom where the
materials aren't aligned to the
training they just received
although there would be waste
created in that situation we
have to make sure that we're
putting the best resources in
front of our students and that
shouldn't that for us is the
guiding star of this piece of
legislation which is if a
district has recognized that
their materials are subpar or
not as good as they could be and
they want to make that
progression let's not make them
wait till the next material an
option thank you for that thank
you for that and Mister chair I
think W. secretary because this.
But if you just.
Morning Mr chair Representative
Lara members of the committee so
I wanted to address that this
question in particular and I
think it actually goes back to
the prior question and some of
the conversation that has been
raised about
instructing the whole students
taking care of the
multicultural aspect.
Cation being responsive
culturally all of that as well
as what could what could look
like it could create potential
range so I'm I just want to put
on the table that the language
arts standards are bigger
compass more than just the
reading standards right this
letter is of speaking listening
and writing as well so districts
who purchased their language
arts materials those materials
would still be needed for those
other standards outside of the
reading standards and that is
actually the part of the
curriculum where the teachers
bring to life all of the pieces
around multiculturalism around
helping students to
to in their Garcia in both in
any language other than English
assessment anyway which that
they might be learning in class
the reason that this would be
helpful in teaching Mexico read
is cause for the parts of the
standards that are the reading.
It is fully compatible actually
I think eminent that teachers
will need materials where they
can explicitly teach reading
that are supplemental to look
for instructional materials and
that cost additional money so
from that perspective I think
that the supplement to the
support of supplemental literacy
materials would actually be of
value add for instructional
materials that cover the entire
staff of the language arts
social studies.
Thank you madam madam a deputy
of the secretary I I really
appreciate that answer because I
was going to my next question
was whether was course
deployment materials and so
I read Mr chair I really
appreciate that answer and you
pretty much W. secretary wanted
to be five point.
And I I I really liked I I
really like this initiative I
like the option of working the
school districts that they want
to participate they can and do
you have a support on the screen
thank you.
Thank you
Representative Ezzell please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
of some of the notes maybe and
and.
I know that.
Even though this is a committee
substitute some of the
significant issues are still
pertinent to the bill even
though it just addresses the
original bill but it says
Missy here.
Is stating that the PED supports
this extensively.
And I agree with that but my
question is Mr chairman and
representative.
Tell me what's so unique about
the Colorado department of
education advisory list.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee so originally
we went with the Colorado just
because I'm it is our
understanding they are the only
state in the country that
reviews not just core materials
but also supplemental and
intervention after discussion
with L. E. S. C. when we better
understand the New Mexico list
which is actually very extensive
but we had missed the fact that.
Those materials can qualify for
the structured literacy
designation and that is when we
made the committee substitute
state okay we will keep
supplemental and intervention
materials from the Colorado list
since New Mexico does not
evaluate cool at supplemental
and intervention materials we do
not evaluate those one so we'll
use Colorado just for that but
since we do evaluate the core
instructional materials for
alignment with structured
literacy programming then we
will switch to the New Mexico S.
which is what the committee sent
us for the core programming.
And Mr chairman and
representative I do appreciate
that response right there
because this committee subject
does point out in on page two
starting on line twenty two
about The New Mexico just picked
up so they can be
interchangeable there and I
think that's very important one
of the schools are.
invested.
And our children the way they
are Mr chairman that's all thank
you very much for your responses
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lane for bringing
this forward I just have a
couple of questions for
clarification what is a typical
adoption cycle how many years
between adoptions.
Of reading materials science or
math Mr chairman Mr chair
representative I believe it's
six years.
With up and thank you Mr
chairman and
Let me let me kind of state that
Mr chairman that.
One of the biggest complaints
I've heard from school districts
across state is a lack of money
for instructional materials they
do not have enough materials so
I think that any any funds that
can be directed toward schools
providing that especially when
we have six years in between
this
Mr chairman of the W. secretary
actually stole my thunder
because.
Actually you should actually
wanted to appear Mr chairman
because I want to be clear that
this is all about supplemental
as well okay
Educational leadership one on
one talks about data driven
decision decision making and Mr
chairman we talk about if we
have a reading program that we
could.
And we evaluated we realize the
standards are not present in our
court.
Program it doesn't mean that we
have to scrap the core program
that actually means that we can
go out to make we can identify
standers through these other
materials so that it's actually
it's supplements not necessarily
replaces a so Mr chairman I
wanted to wanted to point that
out as far as the
Currently in current practice if
the district chose to adopt
materials office cycle but my
distributed for years ago there
was about two point five million
dollars for math materials out
of the operational budget to do
that so which again affects cash
reserves so Mr chairman
Representative Lane I do think
that this is is is needed I do I
am the person of that it's also
for supplemental materials that
we can use big cat that can be
used to address reading
and reading programs at the
elementary level thank you Mr
chairman.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr Mr chair I think
the W. after a lot of the first
questions for but I still have a
COVID in when it when it
pertains to instructional
materials that have been
contracted with previously you
know I have several children
that read.
Really well I had one child that
was not doing too well in
reading twenty was in grade
school and and we change our
reading program and instantly
that year he which went to
reading if that proficiency the.
You know I could tell you about
the program but that doesn't
really matter the what matters
is we saw instant results not
only with my child but with the
other children in the school
they started reading when we
change the program so I think
the question is are is the
materials that you have
contracted with getting the job
done in the you know from all
the the results of the that I
see that we have for been to
speak about our rating in this
Committee
I think a lot of those programs
are not getting the job done so
do not get the job done we look
need to look at supplemental or
alternative ways of making it
happen so that our kids learn to
read if we implement a program
that works we ought to see the
difference in the children and
it shouldn't be you know I know
the ultimate differences might
be five years down the road when
a uniform it's something that
works you can tell it
immediately thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative an expert witness
I have to confess of whole
language reading learner I
started reading with three and
phonics actually tripped me up
so I think it's important for
that not every child we're
wholly buying into structured
literacy and I have studied and
taught it and coached in it but
there are readers out there that
actually get shipped out of it I
just have to say is one of them
of my questions about funding
right now there's the current
balance in this fund is zero.
And my question is this has to
go before House Appropriations
how we gonna pay for this.
Mr chair
so there there is money in house
bill two
at the look and FY are.
The.
So yeah there was a million from
the general fund and three half
million from the public
education reform Fund.
To to PED for this is my
understanding.
Yeah please Mr Chairman
representative also we're.
In conversations with the LFC to
continue to monitor the bills
are moving forward that will
pull from the public education
reform Fund as you'll see in the
original bill R. I'm now
stricken appropriation was
always intended to come from the
public education reform Fund so
as a bill makes its way through
the Senate side we're monitoring
those funds and saying if there
is flexibility to move money
from the Perth into this fund.
But thank you for that answer Mr
chair because.
I think the public.
Reading the FY are on page two
and I so much Representative
easel thank you for your.
Your shift in these forms I'm
looking at page two and it says
that the probation and for
anyone exceeds the balance in
the public education reform Fund
and then representative of you
refer to the other funds I'm
just concerned about that it's a
nonrecurring appropriation
there's not thirty five million
for this so how do we work if
districts want to draw on this
money how do we determine who
gets it and who doesn't get it.
Mr chair representative
the PED would have the honor and
privilege of creating a system
by which they would review the
applications from Ellie As who
want to access the fund to not
only ensure that it's in
alignment with the legislation
but also to figure out how to
not over try to fund.
Okay because Mr chair we have of
one hundred eighty nine
districts and charter schools I
wonder if our PED expert can
comment on that.
Mr chair and vice chair with.
as I sit here I think what we
would do is we would mobilize
through the years the plans that
are already required by the
districts and so if the they
wanted to.
If this were to come to for
wanted to apply and apply for
that money it would come through
the years I so I tie a would not
intend to have an additional
process be created.
if that makes sense.
Okay so thank you and so Mister
chair actually going back to
what Representative Baca said it
would also be a decision of the
district on how they spent
money.
Because there wouldn't be
adequate funding if people
wanted to draw on this specific
legislation should pass Mr chair
vice chair yes so are
For active policy around the
selection of instruction
materials is sort of that tool
two pronged approach that we've
discussed for other bills where
for our multiple state offices
list we do we have convene
educators from across the state
really intensive review there
and then that list is provided
along with the rubrics and
information for materials that
didn't make the list quite
frankly as well so that
districts can see everything at
the local level so we would not
necessarily change the process
at the local level where
educators and communities
parents and put their working
and and growing those children
and so they would be the best to
determine what which material
but and our job at PED would be
to say
according to the staff to this
is a lousy this would not be
allowed so we take direction
from you all in terms of what we
do with that I.
Okay thank you very much this to
my questions.
Great thank you
I know Representative Lane that
this was a point that I had
brought up last week as to the
Colorado list I appreciate this
move to advisory
but I guess and I'm sorry if
this may have been said but why
can't PED or why wouldn't you in
the bill include direct PED to
have an advisory list I guess
what I'm looking for is what so.
What's so special and what the
fixation is on having the
Colorado list I'm just saying
that if things change in
Colorado and they shift
direction in any sort of way
that we still have this in
statute where we may lose sight
of that.
And I guess that's my question.
Mr chair
so the previous language so this
fund exists currently and is now
being restructured through this
legislation to address structure
literacy in the early grades
when Senator Stewart originally
created the fund for reading
materials it reference to less
one from Florida and one from
Oregon so neither at that point
was in New Mexico list either so
both going off of that model of
where in the country should we
look to that may be further
ahead in their instructional
materials or any than we are we
begin that journey of trying to
figure that out and again to
reiterate we looked at Colorado
largely because they have one
last very easy to read and
understand court supplemental
intervention all one site just
very easy to use and locally
through as and your comment and
our conversations with the LFC
we came to better understand the
different designations of the
Public Education Department
Celeste and move to that I will
say it would be really really
wonderful if the public
education department has the
capacity in the future to begin
to evaluate intervention and
supplemental materials so that
our districts can have local
guidance on those as well and we
would be more than happy to if
and when that happens make
adjustments adjustments the
legislation to address that
thank you W. secretary Senator
wanted to wear actually really.
Happy that you asked this
question I do want to say that
we would probably in terms of
what it costs to run of the
committees that we talk about to
bring in our highly qualified
level two year two and three
teachers and administrators to
work on those selection list
that does have a cost to it and
right now we probably don't have
that capacity
that stretch materials bureau
does not get specific funding
for that so I'll just put that
on the table but we also have
the same earns about I need a
list for New Mexico so what we
did as a stop gap is we created
a New Mexico structured literacy
instructional material review
specific to the tenants of
structured literacy that has
been available districts over
districts that are purchasing
supplemental structure literacy
materials there's a rubric that
they can use that follows all of
the science of reading research
it's not the best approach but
it doesn't align with the
decision being made at the local
level and I would say that PED
would be happy to do a review
process legislation.
In the future if that something
that we can also figure out how
to support bush.
One of our recommendations in
the for was that it it should
probably save a list and or
books selected in alignment with
the New Mexico structured
literacy instructional material
overview rubric because that
with that again going back from
us following what the statute
says if the district could show
us their review process that
they follow the New Mexico
structured literacy rubric then
that could qualify that material
as well so said just something
for consideration it has the
potential tweet as well and then
we would have defending Mexico
process built into that.
Representative lane do you have
comment on the W. secretary to
she's suggesting that we amended
the bill so that it's not just
Colorado but materials that are
also.
Mr Chairman I mean it's up to
the will of committee I I think
her comments make sense to me
frankly.
Committee.
I think we're all familiar with
the process in our committee
here Representative Garrett Mr
chair I like that additional
thing because it makes it more
long lasting.
That suggested amendment.
All right.
Other comments from the
committee suggested amendment
Representative feel.
Mr chair can if we if no one
objects can we have set the
amendment now or do we have to
wait a day.
That to the committee typically
we waited a and that's been the
practice of this committee so
that we can all get it.
All look over at.
deputy secretary do you have
suggested language.
Share.
Just be.
Actually we have in our.
And.
Part.
And.
And or those that three of the
New Mexico structures every W.
secretary we're gonna have to
slow down a minute because we're
all we're all in school right
now we need something to look at
she can stand cross compare with
the bill that we have so we have
it.
And it's okay it's okay just
kind of slow things down because
we're all learning but I will
say if it is in the General
fiscal impact report or is it in
the public education department.
Bill analysis.
We don't have that okay we do
not have that for committee.
If we can small we have copies.
Okay so
the we have an issue can we
while we work out a potential
amendment Raul this for our
meeting we can come back to it
at a later point in our meeting
and look at the language and
bring it back how does that
sound for everybody at this and
see if we're going to adopt it
if there are any issues please
fly get for me committee but
will roll it for today we'll
bring it back at some point in
our state.
Today.
Once we get that.
All right.
We'll put it on pause for a
moment.
Representative okay yes.
A house bill for a one this.
Take.
The.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning committee
before you house bill four oh
one
before I get started with them
have my expert witness kind of
introduce herself and
I'll briefly talk about the
merits of of house bill four one
all make some brief remarks in
all of my expert witness also of
remark upon the intent of four
one so.
Good morning
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee I merry mon Toyo
I'm the public education
department chief information
officer.
I have here with me as well Dr
John Chadwick who is the E.
rate in education technology
coordinator for PED.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I'll
just like you guys all go
through very briefly about the
major components of this bill
the first goal of it is to
actually rename the
Technology for Education Act to
the digital equity and Education
Act that's goal number one.
go over to is really to defined
or it provides definitions or
guidance for new terms it also
takes out
Material or technology that is
obsolete I will say that looking
at the list of obsolete material
I kind of miss that floppy disks
that we used to have many more
to young for that but that was
missing for the list so we'll
make sure that we have to take
that out.
The other aspect of this bill is
actually the to stop to the
committee of thirteen members
and it talks about who will
consist of this council that
will be
You know as far as defining the
responsibilities and as far as
the qualifications of the
thirteen member council.
The other aspect of this bill as
it talks about the education
technology plant which will be
part of all districts and what
will they will have to submit
other plan has to address
certain issues like digital
citizenship talk about how the
the technology will be updated
health
As far as information will you
it'll be supported for students
and our stuff and finally
because I know that this is what
we ask is that it does not
currently contain an
appropriation that is not asking
for money as part of this house
bill
So with that I'll turn it over
for brief comments from my my
expert witness and then we will
stand for questions Mr chairman.
Thank thank you thank you.
Chairman.
Romero and members of the
committee I'd like to take a few
minutes to describe why it's
important to rename technology
for Education Act and to modify
the language in the fact there
are three basic reasons for this
our technologies changed
obviously in the last thirty
years and much of the
terminology needs updating we
all live and breathe easy in a
digital world these days access
to technology for educational
purposes is not optional all
students need to achieve
proficiency in the use of the
internet at home and at school.
Changing the language and name
of the act will ensure that our
progress toward digital equity
continues and is sustainable
over time.
The technology in Education Act
needs to be updated to focus and
to keep focus and priority a
closing the digital divide in
New Mexico and keeping it
closed.
We've made good progress in
addressing digital equity.
Districts were very quick to
provision students for remote
learning.
After the pandemic hit
approximately forty seven
percent of students did not have
a dedicated device at home.
Which equates to about a hundred
and forty four thousand students
were without computers in their
home.
Right now about five percent or
sixteen thousand do not have
dedicated devices to use at
home.
After the pandemic had about
sixty thousand students.
Or about twenty percent did not
have adequate internet access in
their homes now about forty
thousand or about thirteen
percent did not have adequate
internet access we still have a
lot of work to do.
The IT landscape that now
includes tech support for
students computers and remote
internet access is a big
challenge for districts.
Teachers also need training to
ensure students and families can
effectively.
Representative can effectively
use computers and the internet
for learning purposes.
This year PED is working with
ari C. nine to coordinate a
suite of IT supports for
districts to use for this
purpose.
R. E. C. nine engage the other
REC to deliver IT services such
as teacher scholarships.
A call center.
Device repaired those.
Starling deployments and other
supports to school districts our
partnership with the REC it's a
collaborative model for support
that we hope to continue.
The updated language in the
bill.
As a representative Baca
mentioned
Changes some of the requirements
for the membership the
membership will actively engage
in addressing the long term
sustainability.
For additional equity for all
students.
Federal funds will be gone this
year so we do have a financial
sustainability challenge.
The executive budget
recommendations did include
forty two million dollars for
this purpose which.
Provided for a five year
replacement plan.
For two weeks.
for devices which means twenty
percent of the devices will be
replaced each year that alone is
thirty one million dollars.
It also included support for
starling subscriptions and other
I. T. support assistance as I
mentioned with the REC.
This bill does not include an
appropriation these are examples
of how funds in the education
technology fund would be used if
that fund were replenished.
I thank you very much for your
time and consideration of the
digital equity for education
bill.
Thank you Mr all right thank you
all right so we're on house bill
four one those in support of
house bill four oh one if you
don't mind please indicate a
raise your hand.
Those in our audience for your
support please raise your hand
please.
from committee we support this
bill thank one of our leaders of
education in New Mexico
Representative Bakul bring this
forward we have always retool
was at the gate thing stated the
right way what's important here
is you have Advisory Council
about make only one suggestion
that is that while it's implicit
they could be there a genesis
point were the REC and I would
encourage us as we move along to
contemplate how we can assure
their voice because that's how
we get service to small
districts and this is very
thoughtful we we appreciated and
we ask you to support thank you
thank thank you others as part
of my right hand side.
For a one what else is for okay.
Go to my left hand side is in
support please ma'am part of up
to inform.
Thank you.
And members of the committee my
name is Bobby tennis and I am
the executive director of the
RAC ace meaning the association
all ten are you see ace in total
we've all
worked with this one twenty and
Mr Chadwick this year to deliver
the services some of which is
one twenty has already described
you also have a brochure
outlining those services that
have been provided and we
believe especially in rural
education it's really really
important to continue the
funding in support of house bill
four oh one we did have one
recommendation for the change
and I have provided the language
to miss one toria Representative
Baca and Mr frosted from PED as
well as Mr Chadwick to add one
member to the council from the
REC that has that knowledge
education and knowledge related
to technology and digital equity
as well as the learning needs of
our staff and our students in
rural education and with that we
thank you for your consideration
of this bill we believe the
changes or and I appreciate your
time thank you thank you thank
you others please good morning
Mr chairman members of the
committee just must be public
schools this is a priority
legislative agenda item for us
and we hope that this also
brings conversations some long
term sustained funding for those
one to one devices and that
we're struggling to balance our
bond R. E. rates and stuff to
make sure we have that it's it's
been a struggle even in our
in our community thank you great
thank you any others so we speak
in support please have a
tentative rate was three levels
on the operations manager for
the office broadband access
expansion one offers support
for.
in particular we really
appreciate the opportunity to
continue the conversation on
social equity and have close
relationships with relationships
with people.
Support that is lines very well
with our mission so with that we
ask that you a pass.
Thank you anybody else wish
because for.
All right we'll go online with
merry Parker morning a period of
up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is merry
par Sanchez a resident of the of
the national education
association in New Mexico and we
stand in support of house bill
four oh one I like the
terminology update to include
that includes digital
citizenship and digital equity
we like the addition of the
student voice in the bill and we
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward and
stands for thank you.
Thank you.
All right so good opposition is
our opposition to house bill for
a one.
Audience online.
All right in that case will come
to committee Representative
care.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Representative bahkan thank you
very John and everybody involved
a couple questions.
Excuse me.
obviously it's my first
technology plan was written in
nineteen ninety eight painted
that scale Menteri school so
that's needed
my question is.
How did you run this past the
office of broadband access
equity and I say that because I
happen to be sponsoring house
bill two sixty two where they've
updated definitions and it's
important to me that as we work
with broadband and internet that
the same definitions across the
legislative landscape are you
yes
and so that is a concern
that so I don't know if they
looked at this specifically
Kelly Schlegel's the director
she has some excellent people
did was that done.
Thank you madam vice chair
alternative expert was witness.
Witnesses.
I will say I was in college can
you talk to that might.
Thank you Mr.
If you chairman Romero and vice
chair R. Garrett.
Yes I have been in contact with
I am here with your loans from.
You over the you know
development of this so that she
knows what was going into this
and I really appreciated her
feedback she gave good advice
and here was very supportive
every step along the way but yes
we did you include them in the
loop and we're putting this
together the definitions that
you're referring to one equities
and technology are you know kind
of score underscore the
importance that we're dealing
with education and not you
specifically and not over all.
So we're looking at this through
education.
Representative kiss Mr chairman
as all of you know the statewide
education network
base stands for the office of
broadband excessively and and
equity excuse me expansion
it's just everybody is involved
actually I think of Kimball at
the Santa Fe Indian school who
sits on the connect New Mexico
board is an educator
so yes thank you and then
The other question I have is
this really talks about digital
citizen citizenship teaching and
learning the educational
environment increasingly with
career and technical education
and career pathways digital
citizenship is vital and I'm
debating to myself when we say
teaching and learning.
Do we need and I hate to add
bureaucracy to the reporting
thing but but when we talk about
teaching and learning how are
we.
Going to use this as we go into
the future when we are we don't
even know what digital
Skills are going to include I I
just ask myself and I ask you do
we need to put something in
there about the continuing
expansion.
Which is kind of a discussion
point I had as I read the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
vice chair
Begin with the the settlement by
try that there we talk but did
we talk about responsible use of
the technology and as we say you
know it's it's hard now to.
To look into the future and say
what technology may have because
as the technology evolves I
would say that the the guidance
the rules and how it is
monitored and reported will also
involved as well as we said
before madam vice chair chairman
Romero when we looked at about
the the needs one of the primary
is to take out the old
technology.
To to create a
A bill that encompasses all
future technology I think would
be somewhat difficult and so
just like of madam vice chair of
I think that we can dissension
you know it expands its going to
be expanding in in a couple
years if this may be obsolete
and we have to come back and we
would have to then find other
technical assistance and
guidance for that so madam vice
chair of I don't know if you
need anything merry to the
thank you very much I would like
to add a couple things I thank
you madam chair and vice chair
and
Mr chair I appreciate the the
question of one of the exciting
things working with the REC is
that they have developed a
scholarship program with
university in eastern New Mexico
university this year and over
two hundred teachers have
applied for that those
scholarships there's a lot of
enthusiasm and excitement around
bringing its digital citizenship
into the classroom.
It's you know so the so I feel
that it may naturally develop as
well through the council we have
a member of ovaj on the on the
council and also a member of the
education community well versed
in technology so I think that it
would be incumbent on that
council to push forward in terms
of ensuring that some of those
does is it digital citizenships
components are included.
Thank you and I was seen of
three D. printers have.
At.
Okay that that's all my
questions is there anybody else
I'm not sharing this with
questions.
Okay Representative medical
Maria.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I I really like
this idea because of one thing
that especially being a teacher
in the middle of COVID you
realize that we were not ready
for it and we're more prepared
now but my concern is I mean
even in my own district we we we
provided
computers but often they were
instantly kind of obsolete they
we that sometimes when I want my
kids to use them in class we
spend half of the class just
starting them up.
so they would like so is is
there going to be some kind of
consideration to make sure that
we have like a for providing
this kind of stuff as a district
that is actually something that
the kids are gonna use not just
giving them something to say Hey
we provided a computer and it
may not really function well for
our internet capabilities are
not enough when I have thirty
kids in my classroom all of the
internet at the same time is it
is it going to be able to do all
of that and then of course it
goes all across the board so is
there going to be provisions for
that to help these these these
districts provide the right kind
not just find the stuff but find
something they can actually use.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative me about
Boyle a page four of the bill he
talks about the requirements of
the technology plan some of
those B. as far as the
replacement repair process for
devices for students teachers
and families.
Internet connectivity support of
and also cybersecurity
protection because one of the
you know this is kind of what
the of one roll of the
technology plan this is what a
district based upon its own
resources and needs most put
together and be submitted as
part of that plan and the
Council actually have to provide
assistance and oversight and
make recommendations for this
plan so I don't know madam chair
and of Representative
Representative me about more at
that kind of addresses yeah I
just the madam chair and and
Representative I just want to
make sure that the and I think
as far as making recommendations
if they can let them know this
is where we're at is what we
have these are the issues that
we're having maybe recommend
mitigations in order to make it
better because I just don't see
the point I mean there's some I
I see it every day in my classes
and and there and and they bring
their computers and they're like
what's the point it's not gonna
start up
and and so they don't use them
they have them but they don't
use them and we want to give
them something that they will
use of and and use to you know
to further their education so
thank you madam chairman and
thank you Representative on what
I and I don't have the numbers
in front of me but I know the
technology was largely funded
here in the house bill two I
don't have the amount in front
of me as far as specially
educational technology but so I
I know that as we talk about is
the refresh and replacement of
computers after for five years
some of that will be larger
coming through the money is
going to flow through the
educational technology some of
the other funding either rich
for otherwise I will have to
provide funding for districts to
The dress to kind of concerns
you have thank you madam chair
thank you thank you thank you so
much Representative headed.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I know my
business practices we had to
replace computers every three
years that's just kinda how was
it that because the technology
outpace you know that
The practical choose a you just
have to do that so in doing that
I I hope within a can you
respond to that maybe with your
expert or Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative it up actually
defer to my experts.
Thank you very much
Representative Herrerra
chairman
We calculated thirty one million
dollars that would be a year of
for replacement and that would
be based on a five year
replacement plan and it so that
would be twenty percent of you
know three hundred thousand
students at five hundred dollars
a device so it's a very
conservative through thirty one
million dollars
Many of the districts did have
the opportunity to take
advantage of federal funding
that funding is coming to a
close so to the extent that this
Council and of you know group
can can work to
get a sustainable financial of
support in plan in place would
would would be excellent for the
for the districts.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative an expert
It.
I know that this council
hopefully when it's created will
also take a hard look at
training you know if if you just
put computers in the classroom
is not going to matter you have
to really train teachers and
bring them up to the standards
that we need to really implement
these programs without without
the money for training the work
force you know it's a it's just
not gonna happen technology will
always be at least three years
ahead of the schools we found
when we're implementing programs
at the local level and so I I I
assume that this is taken into
consideration with this bill
would you respond to that
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
yeah we talk about again part of
the responsibility as was said
was regarding the professional
development of other there has
to be on going professional
development to our staff in in
not just teaching staff as well
as we've seen and we've learned
anything from the pandemic is
that many more staff member
support staff also are providing
assistance for that so the
professional development
technology
Photo or for the the president
for teachers to support the
technology would have to be an
on going costs and so
madam chair and representative
at we did talk about the money
that's here but I think as a
legislature through our in room
and through our of next year's
funding we will have to take a
hard look on this are we
adequately funding of
educational technology to the
degree that that you've actually
inquired about but as we said Mr
madam chair and representative
at a there's not an
appropriation in this the and I
think that's was clear
But I do think you bring up a
good point is that we have to
put our money where our mouth is
in the future and we are gonna
have to fund this in a way that
it provides technology to all
parts of and all students in New
Mexico the special role
students.
Madam chair representative I
don't think I know that's not
this not this the answer is a
definite definitively this is
where it is but I think you
bring up a good point it's
saying we've we've find a lot of
funding a lot of areas.
Education is one of those that
we we also need to make a
priority in the next five years
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I I think
sustainable is the operative
word here system how do we
sustain the systems and do you
know what I it hit us in the
face in New Mexico would which
is why a group of legislators
worked on that
What was just pretend just
Fulton thank you are we really
tried to look
Particularly in rural schools
and I I just want to you know do
a shout out to the Kit Carson
electric co co up that was
really you know if the kid
didn't have technology they just
went out provided technology to
that house it was as simple as
that they took on the expense
they did it we passed we passed
a constitutional amendment
providing for change so that we
could give it we could take
internet to homes that needed in
rural areas and and that was the
purpose of HB ten but we've got
a long ways to go as a state to
estimation and providing the
technology that we need but I
think this is a great step
forward Representative and to
hopefully we can align them with
the the the are you know with do
it and I make this all work in
the future but we've got a long
way to go and I think this is a
step in the right direction so
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill before the committee
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair and
representative thank you so much
for these
It was very shocking for me the
funding for the coffee and and
and everything that was going on
line are we have I work with
teachers by so we have teachers
actually parking outside the
school in the rural areas areas
to be able to have connection
and to be able to receive
trainings and for with the kids
I just couldn't believe that
here he has states will have
that situation so I think that
like you say probably we took
for granted some of these
language and things that were
there forever and we over the
past that situation so I think
it's time I support you state we
need to put the money where
where our ideas out or where are
these are
eighteen we need to push towards
that information because he was
is not okay for a teacher to
have to teach.
Cool he made the students so
kind you only money how the
students will be if a teacher
wants to have the resources to
support their education so we
want to be prepare and this is
where the water is going so we
need to make sure that we have
all the resources so I just
wanted to share that because it
was a major conspiracy I don't
expect that that thank you so
much Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair of the do pass on
house bill four oh one.
Second is there anybody who
objects to to pass on this bill.
Okay with that Representative
you have a do pass on house bill
four oh one thank you madam
chair thank you committee
members.
And.
We have heard.
Of which second.
You can.
Okay our next of bills is
Senator pope welcome to the
health education US Senate bill
one twenty as amended open
enrollment for military
children.
Good morning everyone thank you
madam chair in my former
representative Representative
your.
On the west side Senate bill one
twenty amended is the open
enrollment for military children
basically this bill just allows
more for it flexibility for our
can you check can you just wait
one second it's in the Senate
section.
Everybody could.
Okay.
This bill allows more
flexibility for our
Children of our military that
get station here in New Mexico
or military installations
specifically it allows for those
that are in temporary housing to
register I'm up to enroll in
public school or play for the
lottery for charter school
within that district of the
temporary housing or into the
district of the housing that
they're going to actually have
their permanent residence and
and that's that's really the
basis of this bill and what
we're doing with that madam
chair I'm ready for public
comment or any questions for the
committee thank you senator
we're going to go on line if you
are in support of this bill.
and you are online I will call
on you and Bob Carroll you're on
please unmute yourself.
Yes Madam chairman members of
many of my name's Bob Carroll
and I'm a member of the
federation military families
office we support SB one twenty
the bill gives military families
more flexibility as to where
they send their children to
school as they move around from
base to base and from temporary
housing permanent housing.
And thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Carroll.
And our.
Next is very par Sanchez please.
I'm very self.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Matt
Parker Sanchez president of NEA
New Mexico we stand in support
of Senate bill one twenty
amended
for the reasons stated already
and would like to thank the
senator for bringing this stuff
bill forward thank you thank
you.
Sarah manning.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Serra
manning and I'm speaking for the
alliance for local economic
prosperity the alliance strong
supports this bill as amended we
find is that education and good
education is very important for
economic prosperity we hope that
this will encourage additional
military families to seek
posting in New Mexico thank you
very much thank you.
And Paul Cassidy.
Madam chair Paul Cassidy with
the current one partnership
committee we thank senator Paul
well for bringing this and we
strongly support encourage your
support as well thank you thank
you.
And our next speaker is of Kelly
made Douglas.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee behalf
of military families apart and
the department of defense I'm
writing in support of the policy
changes expressed in SB one
twenty which aims to increase
access to flexible and
enrollment options for military
families with school aged
children SB one twenty expands
on previous efforts of the state
to level the playing field for
military school age children by
allowing military families who
have already moved to the state
to attend a public school
outside the attendance area of
their current temporary
residents based on an
anticipated move to permanent
housing I would approximately
five thousand active duty
military school age children
attending school in the state
Mexico is in a unique position
to have a highly impactful
positive effect on the
educational experiences of our
military children and with that
I thank you madam chair and not
stand ready for questions thank
you thank you Kelly may our
committee has received your
letter of support as well.
Next is.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my thank you
for the opportunity to speak in
support of this bill my name is
that then and I am the first one
airforce base school liaison
program manager and the subject
matter expert New Mexico
military children education
compact State Council.
Children typically move six to
nine times during their case
through twelfth grade school
years and face many challenges
as a result our military members
volunteer to Sir however as
their children are drafted this
bill will help level the playing
field for the military children
also Sir I stand in support of
this bill and asked that you
supported as well thank you
thank you.
With that will move to the
audience anybody on this side in
support of the bill yes we'll go
from front to back madam chair
members of the committee will
inure to use of the New Mexico.
All forty eight for the facility
in this bill that a military
students total enroll in our
public schools we think the
sponsor for three minutes.
Thank you Amanda.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and as is our
policy priorities Mexicans can't
we always want to encourage ways
in which families can choose the
best school for their students
whether that's our military
families or any other family and
so we strongly support Senator
postal thank you thank you
anybody on the side like to
stand in support.
Okay will now go to opposition
is there anybody online that
opposes this bill.
No there's not is there anybody
in the room who opposes this
bill.
K. C. no opposition will go to
the committee.
Mr chair I moved to pass I
actually Mr Kevin Representative
Chatfield moved to do past two
in the second okay we have a
motion to
I move it to pass in the second
from Christine Trujillo of is
there anybody in opposition to
this bill.
No see no opposition senator you
have a do pass on Senate bill
one twenty thank you madam chair
and thank you committee members
thank you.
Kate.
Okay our next bill is college I
saw Senator Moores.
Yeah can you get a.
Senator Morris is going to be
presenting Senate bill two
nineteen as amended college
student athletes and our agency.
And that is also right behind
your this bill.
Sanchez.
She started.
What
what.
Okay.
Is a co sponsor of
Representative.
And for those online we're just
waiting for it Senator Moores to
join us.
Part of the measure.
No problem issues with cabinet
secretaries are run back and.
All these.
Okay and when you're ready
please start thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee this is a pretty
emotional this is one brand I
play this is how we lined up
when we were you know comes to
the left to me for all those
years so some of the bigger
picture of this and we can
compare.
Senate bill two to nineteen has
amended associate Education
Committee as a cleanup bill of a
bill that we passed two years
ago dealing with name image
likeness for student athletes we
were the first state to pass in
an ideal Bill but we were the
first state to actually
implement in an ideal Bill which
led to the NCAA changing their
rules and militancy is also lost
two major lawsuits about anti
trust issues dealing with
student athletes.
So after the Supreme Court ruled
in may of twenty twenty one
after we passed our bill that in
the CA committed is anti trust
lawsuit we have part provisions
in our bill that we're now mute
because the NCAA change their
rules about not allowing student
athletes to participate in an L.
yield if the coaches or the
institutions were involved in it
so this bill cleans it up I have
worked with their UNM and NMSU
only I could bring those two
institutions together so it's
like a bit better than
bipartisanship right there
and in the amendment in Senate
education both universities had
existing issue contracts apparel
contracts that are bill actually
infringed on so we removed that
language so would infringe upon
the contracts at both
universities already had in
existence so that's what this
bill is and I think we will see
more action on and I'll yield
our special with rational
actions within the next couple
years because quite frankly I
think we need some national
standards are we forcing CA and
along with twenty nine other
states to take action I think
Congress is going to take action
on this eventually.
Thank you madam chairman of just
give some brief comments
probably probably a first in
state legislatures across the
country right I'm sure there's
been college out these division
one athletes that serve the
legislature but I would
challenge any legislator to say
you have to athletes from the
same university there actually
were starters at the same time
so I think this is the first
probably I would question if
anyone else or so the fact that
we have experiences firsthand
also say the fact that we're
levels and I think he's also so
I think that we should.
I was playing.
But.
One of the one of the challenges
having having
having been there have an
experience what it's like to be
a is student athlete even a
scholarship athlete back in the
ninety one when we're there we
understand that things are
changing the fact is never been
poor then when I we were in
college and we're on a
scholarship and there were
certain activities or laws or
that actually did not allow for
us so the fact is that we the
four hundred dollar scholarship
that we got back in nineteen
ninety one didn't go a long ways
and so forth the time to change
college and also multi college
football is a multi billion
dollars for and all this does it
is it just that allows for for
university and outlines how the
deal with this so what kinds of
activities have been there so
thank you madam chair to multi
more.
And I think madam chair
Representative Baca I will tell
you was nicknamed college was
What up a you know a lot of the
attention of course go to
football men's basketball one of
the biggest things I've been
proud of it and I'll yield is
the end the risk opportunities
have for female in total money
issues the very first athlete to
ever get in and I'll deal was a
young volleyball player in
Michigan she during comment was
talking had started a handy up
mom mark Senator talk following
her she started renovating her
father's shed in the backyard
chair into a she shed nothing to
do with athletics she started
getting contracts from local
home improvement stores
everything else how to do home
improvement projects which got a
scholarship to play volleyball
at a small school Michigan.
If she was going to continue her
business she would have to give
up a scholarship she taken our
ships you have to continue to
discontinue our businesses which
is making money that's unfair
it's also very first person to
be able to take advantage of
this type of legislation and she
was able to continue and quite
frankly should on very
successful successfully incensed
and with her on both
academically and professionally
so those are great opportunities
are great excitement
opportunities for for how people
are using this ability to
advance their their their
careers thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you with that will go on
line is there anybody it online
who would like to support this
bill.
Okay there's nobody on line is
there anybody present who would
like to stand in support of this
bill K. will start on this side.
Morning madam chair members the
committee clay nephew in New
Mexico State University despite
being kicked forward down the.
The Aggies are very much in
support of this bill and thank
the sponsors Center Moores and
representative about.
Thank you.
And see no more on this side go
to the site.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
David Buss I'm with University
of New Mexico we appreciate.
Sanchez bring this bill forward
taking their strategy from the
field to the legislature for
alleged been illegitimately
important purpose for our
students and our athlete
populations of thank you very
much to the Sanchez and and for
your consideration.
Thank you very much is there
anybody online in opposition to
the bill.
Okay there's nobody online in
opposition is there anybody
present.
Among this athlete group who
stands in opposition to this
bill.
A case in opposition will go to
the committee Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair a sport the bill but I
just have a question did I
understand you to say that the
that the university that the
institution actually have a
contract with the shoe company
all for beating the athletes.
Mr madam chair of Ripper
Representative what they the
contracts you were calling to
contracts but the more peril
contracts I think an issue has a
contract with under armour in U.
N. M. is with.
Correct.
And so what that allows the Nike
and under armour to do is market
and that's pretty common amongst
a universities that they'll have
they provide a peril the price
right shoes deployed jerseys
you'll notice the passed ball
teams will have like a ninety
year under armor bass also as
part of the contract and part of
that is that there are exclusive
to the universities and that's
how universities action make
pretty good stuff charter change
the contracts or a place where
prior to us passing that
legislation and so when we pass
the legislation we're a
constitutional issue no voiding
contracts that were already
existed so put those contracts
in a up to.
Jeopardy so we can't as you all
know passed legislation that
nose and boards for our
contracts so madam chair now
that we have best is
Legislation is our sunset date
on those contracts.
I'm I'm sure Lara to defer to
the universities I believe those
are con those are all negotiate
every few years have for the
universities that they they can
answer that question.
There's no.
I I do know those are negotiated
from time to time and opened up
and so this is not uncommon for
schools to get a better and
representative Senator my office
is my co sponsor of the original
legislation two years going co
sponsor this legislation
news joined us but that's on a
common for them to negotiate
between under armor Nike adidas
whatever to get better deals as
they move forward so madam chair
I as I stated to at the
beginning I support the
legislation I just wonder if if
the university is taking the
money for the for this you
contracts and for prohibiting
the individual players from from
and using their name and
likeness to to the.
Receive funding measures
Representative we share that
concern actually that's why I
specifically put the language in
America special basketball it's
not uncommon for student
athletes the high school level
nowadays there's a there's a
theme phenomenon that's happened
where the AAU players we'll get
contracts when their high school
them to go to college the
problem we had with the language
in the bill is that we were the
lady make employed as existing
contract so you're absolutely
right that is that is the the.
The reason for that amendment
the reason I originally had that
clause in there.
Thank you madam chair.
Eight Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator we're Senators
representative for bringing this
forward I just have some some
questions regarding can I just I
I want to know some skin ask
questions so so the the the
students of.
When they make these
arrangements with with the with
these companies so is it for
product or is it for
compensation is it both how how
does that work
the madam chair Representative
Lara both can be anything it
could be just like you
if you were to.
I'm actually not familiar with
it profession you're in
but you have the ability to sign
a contract do things like for
instance women golfers on there
if they get they get golf clubs
or golf balls from Nike or
whatever they have contracts for
that the here products also
that's not an uncommon
occurrence and so those are
negotiated or they can get
Mike
there's you know.
They can be everything it could
be both and it could be product
it can be cash.
That thank you thank you madam
chair thank you for that center
so that is a to my next.
So then you know that that's
taxable income and when it comes
to our asserting also that's up
to them to figure that out right
correct and it's actually part
of a cottage industry that's
popped up on but with absent
things to track all that but
yeah it's a business manager
Representative this is a
business opportunity in in their
they are marketing themselves I
have to pay the taxes and
learning everything they have to
do to run that business thank
you madam chair thank you center
that was that's that's what I
wasn't sure it was that was
funny to me but thank you for
the appreciate it.
Atividade F..
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
as the mother of a former
student athlete it's a full time
job I mean make no doubt about
it you know if you're on the
that levels for fourteen it is a
full time job I will I was kind
of amazed I had no idea when my
son got there that the you know
it was forty fifty sixty hours a
week to to participate in the
sport so anything we can do to
help the students I'm all for I
had no idea I had no idea of
that of the at the workload and
what with these athletes were
expected to do and you know
anything we can do to help of
the student athletes I'm all in
favor of it so I think you for
bringing this bill forward I'm
sure thank you Representative.
Representative corolla thank you
madam chair chairman and thank
you sponsor for the field I have
one question and I'm pretty and
you don't know much about these
so I'm will that both the
students have any kind of a
support in case that somebody
wants to sponsor them and bring
so legislative kid cases and and
that will be easily it being you
points for all there so I I eat
bread here that that does this
institution has to be aware what
is happening but will anybody be
advising them helping them
making decisions Madam chair
representative fantastic
question in in the original
legislation we passed we
specifically included that
provision so that the student
athletes could get legal
representation they could get in
and they could get agents they
could get that and since this
legislation is commonplace
amount of.
Representative Maestas who is
Center my Estes who's the
attorney knows that's very
important for what you just said
to make sure that the student
athletes rights and business
interests are protected and one
of the cottage industry as we
talked about Representative Lara
is that apps and websites have
come up.
Your hand in a lot of the
business and of these
transactions in marketing and
the taxes and things like that
making sure that the student
athletes as protected as well as
to but that is a fantastic
question it and it Madam chair
representative was included in
the original legislation that we
did two years ago okay thank you
thank you Representative did you
have to and as a lawyer also if
you are.
Senator.
Add to that.
Just that thank you madam chair
gentleman Representative of the.
When we pass this bill.
In two thousand twenty one our
bill went into effect July first
California passed its bill in
two thousand nineteen it is
going to affect the twenty
twenty three.
So are for so New Mexico played
a key role in forcing the NC
double a to change its policies
the and Santa Fe after thirty
years of.
Ignoring this issue changes
policies June thirtieth the day
before our bill went into effect
this up this
Now the assembly has gone
further than our bill and so we
just got to catch up with the
times the
And so we we want to a.
And then the with regards to the
shoes it was a civil rights
issue as well we're maybe
student had issues with the shoe
companies policies or whatever
they would they would take over
the the swoosh or whatever and
get penalized by the coach I
think I think that won't happen
even if we take that provision
out but it is important for the
universities to.
Forget apparel contracts and
things like that not kind of
some of the companies out so I
think you Madam.
Thank you I don't know if we
should pass a bill when our
representative is no Senator.
Once we got no no
Representative.
The okay what's the will of the
committee Sir.
Thank you.
Okay do passed from senator say
river Lara Representative.
Who wants to take the second.
Okay Representative Chatfield is
there any opposition to a do
pass motion.
Area to.
Okay you have no opposition the
senators and representative you
have a do pass
in Senate Bill to nineteen as
amended thank you thank you
madam chair thank you Mr and I
caught it on film.
Thank you know the historical of
us.
K..
And to think that everyone.
Yes okay.
Representative Eli.
But.
Levin and think.
The.
Thank you Mr chair so what I
believe the committee has been
passed out there is being passed
out okay supposedly has been
passed out all right so we have
a little bit of procedural clean
up to abide by before we look
into this okay so we'll need to
adopt the committee sob.
So we set the committee subset
can have a motion to adopt the
committee so please don't move
all right so the
A motion by Representative
Chatfield second by
Representative there is any
opposition to adopting the
committees up see none you have
a committee set up all need
another motion Representative
pocket to discuss the amendment
alright.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I I move discussion of the
amendment do we need to suspend
the twenty four hour rule or do
we know no we're good I think
and then my my motion Mr
chairman is that we
We move discussion on the
amendment okay second and we
have a second any opposition to
sorry so we're on discussion of
the amendment.
Representative Eli thank you Mr
chair so I would direct the
committee's attention to page
three line sixteen so this is
where the the discussion came in
about the Colorado department
education and then I think there
is a great point added by the W.
secretary about also bringing
looping in here The New Mexico
structured literacy
instructional review rubric so
the proposed change would be
online sixteen after the word
education insert or meet the
criteria of the New Mexico
structure literacy instructional
review rubric over the.
borehole is there any discussion
of the proposed amendment.
Seeing none we have a motion by
Representative Chatfield to
adopted at the second.
Somebody in second half second
all Representative at a thank
you for the reminder all right.
Any opposition to adopting the
eminent see none you have an
amended committees of.
All right lastly.
Anymore discussion on our fresh
Committee sub with an amendment.
Alright then I need a motion on.
The original bill the committee
so as amended.
Just
one proper motion
Representative.
We need a do not pass.
On house bill four eighty one.
But a do pass on house education
Committee substitute for House
Bill for eighty one as amended.
That's a motion Representative I
agree okay second by
Representative Chatfield
secretary if you call the roll
on a do not pass house bill for
committee passed house Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill forty one is meant.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative is up.
Representative girl no.
Representative for yes
Representative Lane yes.
Send Lara yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative nearby Maya yes
Representative Roybal Caballero
Representative Trujillo yes.
Madam vice chair yes Mr Chairman
yes
for the vote of nine to have a
to pass on as education the
steps to as amended thank you
all so much all right so I
believe that concludes our
business we will reconvene on
Friday we'll get the agenda out
