He
Representative
The
Moya.
Representative Obano Caballero.
Representative Torres Val.
Velasquez
You got it. Thank you. I'm here.
to Vincent.
advice
Me advicece chair
here.
Here.
Alright, thank you folks. Good
morning. I hope everybody's
well. Um, we're going to start
off with introductions of
everybody, but we need to get to
the LESC staff so that they can
go on to Senate education. So
please director.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, members. Yeah, we're
gonna, we're gonna do our our
own version of The Sound of
Music, sort of goodnight song
here. Our members actually are
our, our staff has a couple of
folks have to get over to Senate
Education to present and the
others will back to the office.
So I'm just gonna ask them to
stand up and
their names who they, who they
are and what they do real fast.
And then they'll they'll make
their way out.
That's
Take 2 of that. Um, my name is
Jessica Hathaway. I'm our team's
deputy director, supporting our
director center, as well as our
analysts on our team.
Uh-huh, I'm Annie Armitage and
I'm a senior policy analyst
covering the educator workforce.
Good morning. My name is Mary
Andrews, and I'm our senior
policy analyst covering whole
child education.
The morning of Mark Motoya. I'm
a senior policy analyst. I cover
capitality governance, and
infrastructure.
Good morning. My name is Alonzo,
and I am the office
administrator.
Good morning. My name's Natasha
Davalos. I am apache and I cover
our equity.
Morning, my name's Connor Hicks.
I am the policy analyst covering
education support services,
including STEM education and
student nutrition.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of House Education. My
name is Tim Bado. I do all
things data for LESC including
our data dashboard that some of
you might use, and assessments,
accountability, uh, AI, all
sorts of stuff, so good to be
here.
Good morning. My name is Daniel
and I cover public school
finance for the LESC.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We've
heard about declining
enrollments in school. LESC is
doing its part to try to get
more kids.
In school we have a
couple,
right, and increase the
population as well so that's
good in our schools.
Mr. Chair, members, uh, our
staff is a resource to you. We
serve the LESC during the
interim, during the session
we'll stop both health education
and Senate education. So if any
of you have any questions uh
about
proposals that you're
considering or those that you're
looking at and wondering what it
all means. We're happy to help
with that. Our staff also
produces
Analysis for all education
related bills and so you should
be able to access those uh via
the legislative website.
And then I'll talk about a
couple other resources. Very
quickly, just wanted to
introduce myself to you all,
most, most of you know me
already. My name is John Senna.
I'm the staff director at LESC.
Prior to being your director. I
was the deputy director at LEST
for about 2.5 years prior to
that, I served as the policy
director for the public
education department for 3
years, and before that I was a
high school English teacher and
school administrator.
Uh, and way before that, I, I
wrote about schools as a
journalist. So I've been doing
this for about 20 years now.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, you have
a yellow folder in front of you.
This is going to be your
resource for the week.
Uh, did you want me to get
started to share anything else?
No,
I didn't you to hold off for a
little bit because we're going
to go through introductions of
the committee, of our staff, and
then I need to go over some of
the orientation rules for the
committee for um the session. So
we'll start off on my right hand
side. So represent Rogo
Caballero. Good morning.
and members of the committee,
the audience and those watching,
I'm Patricia Roybalcaballero,
and I represent House District
13, which is the far south.
quadrant of uh Albuquerque and
as many of you have heard, I
have a long history, um, in
education, particularly higher
education, and so I've been
happy for the past few years to
serve on this committee and I
look forward to all of the good
work we're gonna be doing, uh,
this session and appreciate your
time. Thank you.
The morning Representative
Vincent.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Thank
you guys for welcoming to your
committee on brand new on this
committee, and I'm excited to
learn.
Everything that education has to
offer and hopefully we can head
it in a good direction.
I serve uh District 56, which is
Lincoln and Otero counties.
And um we have been experiencing
quite a bit in our district, so
I look forward to participating
in this one. Thank you.
Right. Good morning,
Representative Goroda.
Buenos Diaz, thank you so much
for being here. I'm very, very
proud to be again and in this
committee and my name is Jaita
Gurola. I represent District 16
Westside Albuquerque.
Uh, West miss high school.
That's my area. Uh, my teacher,
my, my second profession but my
passion is education, being an
educator, uh, an educator for 22
years, I think, mostly teaching
math in a bilingual setting,
middle school math mostly and
now I work uh um uh for a
nonprofit uh training teachers
and consulting for districts.
Thank you.
Gonzalez.
Good morning. Welcome.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Welcome here. I'm, I'm
really happy to be here. Uh, my
name is Anita Gonzalez, and I do
represent San Miguel in Torrance
Counties. Um, my home is in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, so I'm, I'm
one of those up north, um,
Happy to be here, coming to you
with um 2021 years of experience
as a STEM educator, working
primarily in the out of school
time.
Education space.
So it just happy to be here.
Thanks.
And ranking member
Representative Baca.
Morning Mr. Chairman, good
morning. My name is Brian Baca.
I represent House District gate,
which is in Valeni County, um.
Been lossy farms, Peralta then
alata, um.
I, uh, 32 year educator.
Spent 12 years in the classroom,
all levels, and the last 20
years I've served.
And currently serve as a deputy
superintendent for Launa
schools, so, uh.
Happy to be here and uh thank
you for your interest in
education.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Morning.
audience, um.
It's an honor to be here on this
committee. I am, um.
House District 30
representative, which is the
Northeast heights of
Albuquerque, and that's the area
around the Arrodo Loso Golf
Course from Eubank to the
freeway and then from San
Antonio to Montgomery and
Comanche.
Um, I have 31 years of
experience at the University of
New Mexico as a nation before
that at San Jose State
University before that public
schools as a bilingual teacher
in a special education teacher.
And before that, um, well, that
was a long time ago.
Um
I, I think that's all I hear,
but
I'm really excited to be on this
committee education has been my
career all my life.
And what I dreamed of, um,
since.
The beginning of time
Alright, welcome.
Representative Lara
Good morning. Good morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is
Ray Lauder. I represent House
District 34 in uh Southern
Donana County. My district goes
to the Texas state line to the
border with uh with Mexico.
I have
been working for, I've worked
for guests in schools going on
24 years now. Uh, I've done a
multiple, I've done worked on
multiple projects supporting
multiple programs, but now I'm
currently running the
instructional materials
department.
Thank you, Mr.
Represent me. Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
audience and and committee
members. Um, my name is uh Tanya
Mirabal Moya. I am a district 7,
representative, and, uh, which
is the town of Berlin and all
the east, uh, mostly the east
side of the river, um, Blen is
my hometown. I'm born and raised
there, in fact, I live in the
back pasture where my parents
lived, so, um, so, um, I, I
bleed maroon, uh, I am also
Berlin High School's, uh,
physics teacher.
So, uh, the, uh, and that is my
passion. I already missed my, my
students and, and, and from all
the emails I'm getting, they're
already missing me, so.
But, um, but I'm probably the
newest as far as the the
educators as a thank God for
Facebook, or else I wouldn't
have known when I actually
started teaching. It was 10
years ago yesterday.
So, um, and it's probably the
best decision I made in my life
because, or one of them, first
one was Marry My Husband, but
the, but the second one was this
because I truly am um passionate
and, and I love what I do, and I
love the fact that I get to sit
on this um.
On this committee because not
only now, but uh during the
interim because I get to see
both sides of of education. I
get to see uh the the true
meaning of what the policy is,
is intending and how it filters
into my classroom, and, and I
think I'm, I'm, I'm a lucky
person to be able to get that,
so thank you.
A resume Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, my name is Jack Chatfield.
They rep for District 67.
I represent Colfax, Curry
Harding, Quay, Roosevelt, San
Miguel, and Union Counties.
Uh, just to make it easy, that's
everything from ratton to
Portalis.
And it's, uh, as you know, with
that many counties, it's a
fairly.
Rural area
I served 16 years on the school
board, on the smallest school in
the state of New Mexico.
Uh, you gotta fight whenever
you're that small, you gotta
fight to.
you get your kids all the things
that people get in bigger
schools.
Uh, we live in the land of the 4
day week school that we've had
such a battle over.
I think New Mexico did a did a
survey of the 12 schools in New
Mexico that.
We're making the grade on
reading and math.
6 of them were in my district.
That's a little bit of a brag
right there for the small
schools.
We appreciate you all. We
appreciate your interest in
education and
We're here to try our very, very
best to get do a good job for
our kids. Thank you for having
me today and I'm honored to be
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right, and our vice chair
representative Garrett. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I'm Joe Garrett.
I represent Northwest
Albuquerque.
Uh, where the volcanoes are.
And I um come from 28 years of
teaching, diversely, I taught in
Pasadena, California,
Bridgeport, Connecticut.
South Korea
And here
And um
Not everything, a lot of ESL
endorsing ESL, the instructional
coach.
Uh, taught university graduate
students and undergraduates in
South Korea, but probably my
most informative experience was
raising a difficult son who
wasn't interested in education.
He did charter school, regular
school, alternative high school,
homeschool, and he graduated
from YDI with his diploma and so
that informs you of the
diversity of what we deal with
as families.
Alright, and I'm representative
Andres Romero. um, I've had the
honor of serving as chair, I
think this is my 7th year as
chair of this committee. Um,
I've been teaching at Trisco
Heritage Academy High School for
the past 10 years, um, serving
servicing the community that I
was born and raised and raising
my
Family, my own family and um
public education is obviously
near near and dear to all of us.
Um, certainly for me as being a
public education teacher, my
kids are in public school. My
wife is a public school teacher
and my mom is a retired public
school teacher and is currently
in my classroom with my students
right now, so continuing that
along. I'm very fortunate to
have her there. Um, and we're
very fortunate to have our staff
here, so I'm gonna have our
staff.
Starting off with our committee
assistant Linda. Morning, Linda.
Uh, my name is Linda Fiera.
And I felt been working with
education for
Um
Maybe 12 years now. I've been
working with Andres since he was
uh named uh.
person with education, I worked
with Stephanie and I've worked
with representative as well.
And I really enjoyed working
with this committee.
We have uh
Ross.
Morning. My name is Ros.
legislature
During their sessions for 4
years, 3 years with
Representative Garrett and my
first year with as a committee
assistant, I'm really excited to
be here.
Thank you.
All right. And then we have our
committee analysts.
Rachel.
Good morning. Thank you,
Chairman and Madam Chair. My
name is Rachel Stefosse, and I'm
happy to be back.
Hello and good morning and thank
you, Chair. My name is Sam
Gonzalez and I'm working in
analyst for the House Education
Committee. I'm happy to be here.
Good morning, Doctor Susan
McConnell. Um, I'm a 33 year
educator pre-K through high
school, retired charter school
leader on the minority analyst.
And then we have our majority
analysts.
If your word.
You could probably come up to
the microphone, it might be.
Oh, you're all right
40 year retired educator.
Having been in the classroom for
10 years, founded two schools
here in Santa Fe, an educator as
well. Delighted to be an analyst
and education for the majority
and look forward to working with
all of you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair. My name is Kira
Jones, and this is my first year
as an analyst, I'm very excited.
It's something I've wanted to do
for, I think I told Tony 20
years, um, and it just
This is the year it worked out,
and I taught high school for
many years. I taught uh
community college back when CNM
was TI and I was a founding
teacher at Amy Beal High School
in Albuquerque, and I've been
working, I've been working as a,
as an education consultant for
for the past many years, and I'm
really thrilled to be working
with you all. Happy to be here.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you. And then we
have our attendance. If you all
would, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Angela
Solis, and I am a committee
attendant. I'm retired from New
Mexico state government, and
this is my 3rd year with the
house.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Representatives. My name is
Diana Thatcher, and this is my
first year doing this, so I'm
looking forward to seeing how
the committee works and what
happens with our education.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. My name
is Mariah Martinez. This is my
first year with the house, um,
I'm pleasure to meet you all.
All
right, welcome, and then we do
have Sunny, if you want to
introduce yourself.
I'll try it again. My name is
Sonny Liu. I'm the LFC analyst
for public schools. This is my
10th year, and before that I was
a high school math teacher, and
we've got uh Rachel who's new to
staff.
Hi Rachel Mabe, um, my first
year.
Doing public education with
Sunny at LLC and I have been a
teacher since. And if you're
wondering who writes your FIRs.
This is the team, so come find
us if you have questions about
this.
All right.
It seems like it's gonna be our
house education team. So thank
you and welcome to everybody
who's new and for the returning
champions as I call them,
welcome back. Um,
So I just wanted to talk a
little bit about um committee
and what to expect. Like I said,
the returning champions already
know um new members, um, it may
be helpful, but
In this committee, we abide by
the 24 hour rule, um, for
amendments. So there are
amendments to bills, they need
to be in 24 hours in advance
um of the bill being heard
because that gives all the folks
that we just heard from that
analyze our bills, uh, the
ability to look over the
amendments and inform us in turn
as to what those amendments are,
um, so please make sure if you
have an amendment for a bill
that may be scheduled to make
sure you get those in.
24 hours in advance, um,
otherwise, we just roll the bill
till the next meeting. Um,
Uh, the other thing that members
know a stickler for is decorum,
um, and audience members as well
um in the committee room is that
um we're not talking over one
another that we're respecting
one another. I think we've had a
reputation of um working really
well with one another in a cross
party lines to make sure that
the legislation we pass out of
here, um, is the best that it
can possibly be because we all
have um so many years of
experience in education. I think
we owe it to.
um the folks that we serve to
make sure that the bills get out
of here in the best form, um, as
possible, um, so please make
sure you go through the chair
that you recognized, um.
For audience members will do 2
minute um public comment on each
side of the bill, those in favor
of a bill, those who are opposed
to the bill, please stick to
those two minutes, um, obviously
for questions amongst committee
members, the audience that may
be watching us, please turn off
the cell phone. Um,
As I'm talking about decorum.
Um, how timely. So,
Um
Please make sure you stay within
that 2 minutes. I'll be sure to
give the reminder at that 2
minutes, um, also.
I appreciate shorter comments as
possible because we do have um
floor session, uh,
immediately following this
committee and we're usually so
busy and we have so much
interest, which is awesome, but
it still puts us under pressure
to get through the business that
we have scheduled for the day.
Um, so questions brief, concise
answers brief, concise, um, same
thing with public comment, but
we certainly appreciate
everybody's input. Um, also for
presenters and it's probably
something I'll have to announce
a little bit more, but no more
than 2 experts, um, on a
Um,
or committee, we have limited
space and honestly, as
legislators, we should be the
experts in our bills as well.
Um, so please no more than 2
experts, um, up at the panel at
a time for a particular bill.
Um,
We'll always go through the
agenda and we're going to start
promptly at 8 o'clock in the
morning. So you notice we've
already fallen a little bit
behind this morning. We have
Flora at 10, um, I'm not sure
what the plan is. It seems like
the floor schedule has been kind
of all over the place, um, but
to give us as much time as
possible, we'll start at 8
o'clock starting on Wednesday to
make sure we're able to go
through, um,
Our agenda and certainly
anything that may come up, um,
please let me, please let Vice
Chair Garrett no, um, if there
are any issues, certainly
ranking member BACA as well as
part of um that leadership here
in this committee, so um with
that being said, I certainly
look forward to this session
with you all. Welcome to the new
members again and to returning
members. It's great having you
here. I certainly look forward
to working with you all here in
the future and to staff.
as well. Um.
I think that about covers it.
Are there any questions from
committee members before we jump
to John.
I should mention one other thing
now that it's on my mind that I
remember, so.
There are two rules.
Pertaining to the scheduling of
bills.
Per the House rules that one
there to be scheduled in order
or if they're grouped together,
you all know as returning
champions, I like grouping
together into themes because we
have our LESC team here with us,
oftentimes Sunny is here with us
to talk to us about how the
Bills either work for or against
one another, how they could
complement one another. So I
think it's helpful to do
grouping, um, any other time
will default to the um house
rule on taking bills as they've
been referred to committee.
All right, but certainly any
questions, concerns about that,
please let me know. Um, I didn't
see any questions.
Did I inspire anybody?
OK.
Cool. So director Senna.
Please
Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning members again, again, I
just wanted to point you to
this, this folder. This is gonna
be your resource for the week.
There's going to be a number of
documents that will refer to
today, uh, but also that we'll
talk about a little bit on
Wednesday as well.
And Friday.
So the first thing is uh you
have this sheet. I won't talk
too much about it. It's a quick
overview of the LESC itself,
what staff does it's got a
number of links and resources on
the backside, as well as a
couple of QR codes that take us,
take you directly to our LESC
website.
Uh, as well as a dashboard that
uh Tim, who was sitting over
here, put together for us,
includes a lot of public school
data. So if you're interested in
some of that, that's an easy
resource on the front page, you
see this yellow.
block here. This is actually the
cover of our annual report, and
we'll have that for you later
this week. It's just finishing
over at app printing and we
should have that to you this
week.
Uh, the second piece of uh the
second document you have here is
a list of all the folks that you
just met.
Um, along with contact
information and policy blocks
again, they're there.
For you to use as a resource.
Our, our job is to support you
with anything going on during
the session and the interim, so
you'll know where to find us
here. The 3rd piece is this
document that says primer on
top.
And that's the one we're going
to spend some time on today.
In addition to the next one
here, uh, the next couple, but
this is the one I'm gonna start
with.
As a whole,
This document will run you
through the entire.
Public school funding formula.
And all the components of that
formula.
Right. And I'll talk a little
bit in a minute about sort of
the broad structure of it, but
this will actually walk you
through each of the components
and how those components work.
So it's a really handy resource
as you start to hear uh
legislative proposals that might
change pieces of this, um.
So I'll go ahead and get started
on the on the first page page
with a very quick overview. I
want to make sure I'm going to
run through this whole
presentation and then we'll have
questions at the end. And so,
The first piece of this is just
the overview of the funding
formula itself. I should say,
uh, as I said before, I was a
journalist, and when I started
teaching and, and, and working
as a journalist in schools,
there's often confusion about
what fund state, uh, what funds
pay for what things.
The school funding formula pays
for the operational pieces of
schools.
This is not capital.
Does not pay usually for
building schools, maintaining
schools, the state has other
systems to do that. So I wanted
to make that very clear.
Um, and there's actually
statutory language that
Prohibits, with some exceptions,
school districts using
operational funds to pay for
building schools and other
things. So I just wanted to make
sure that that was clear to
begin with.
This is the money that goes
directly to school districts and
charter schools to pay for the
things they do every day.
So the school funding formula in
New Mexico was actually created
the current version was created
in 1974.
very innovative for its time and
still is because some states are
still trying to make their
funding formula look more like
our funding formula.
And that's because we took um
what was then a mostly locally
funded.
A system
Right, which meant that wealthy
communities could fund a very
different public school system
then uh less wealthy
communities.
We decided as a state we wanted
to equalize.
How's how schools were funded in
the services that students
received.
And so your current funding
formula is actually based
primarily on the number of
students that districts and
charter schools serve and the
characteristics of those
students, and we'll talk about
how these, these different
components in the formula
actually account for those
different characteristics.
So the formula was designed to
equalize educational
opportunity, allocate the same
amount of funding for students
in the same circumstances,
starting with grade level with
additional funding for for
additional need, right?
The public school finance Act
allows the legislature to set a
single statewide amount for
public school funding, which is
then allocated to each school
district and charter school
based on the number of program
units, and you're going to see
in a second here that that's
actually what the formula does.
It takes real people.
and turns them into units.
Right? And that sounds very
mechanical, but there's a very
specific reason for that. So on
the right hand side of this
page.
You see, all the different units
that are formula generates. I'm
going to talk about a couple of
these in more specificity in a
minute, but just to go over all
of these, the first is
essentially called basic program
cost, and it says that for every
kid.
Every student in your school
district or charter school that
student generates a certain
number of units.
That is then used to calculate
funding.
So I'm gonna go over basic
programming in just a minute and
more more details so I won't
spend too much time there.
All of those kids in those units
are then multiplied by the
staffing cost multiplier. It's a
very fancy way of saying that
the system, the funding formula,
accounts for how much experience
your educators have.
New Mexico educators are broken
into level 12, and 3.
If you have a district with a
lot of level 3 teachers, which
are more expensive to pay.
Your, your factor goes up.
If you have more inexperienced
teachers, you don't generate as
many units because those
teachers earn less based on the
statutory minimums for those uh
salaries.
Once you've done that, you add a
bunch of other units, so special
education units, bilingual and
multicultural services,
elementary programs including
fine arts and physical
education.
K12.
I think that's still working,
maybe.
Uh, there are size factors
because we know that especially
as you get very small rural, uh,
districts that you lose
efficiencies of scale, economies
of scale associated with larger
school districts and so the
formula takes that into account.
Um, at risk. I'm gonna also talk
a lot about at risk today.
Enrollment, growth and save
harmless, which is very
complicated and I won't get into
today, but if you have questions
later, you can talk more about
it.
National board certification,
which essentially awards
additional units to a school
district that has national board
certified teachers.
Those units actually um
Generate funding that is
intended to be passed on to
those teachers. So if you have a
national board certified.
Teacher, they, they receive a
stipend associated with these
units.
And then some charter and
homeschool student add-ons.
Take all of that, that's your
total units.
You multiply that times your
unit value which is set by the
department based on the
appropriation that you all make.
And that equals your program
cost.
There's a small deduction for
energy credits.
And then what you have at the
bottom is your state
equalization guarantee or the
SEG.
Those of you who are, who
I deal a lot with education.
I've heard that term before. We
throw it around a lot, but for
folks who aren't used to hearing
it, they, they hear it but
aren't sure what it means.
So we'll turn to the next page.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about basic program.
In New Mexico, we fund.
Kindergarten through 12th
graders in what we call basic
program units. Every student
generates units, depending on
the, on the level at which
they're in in school.
Um
We're going to talk a little bit
about early childhood units.
They are called early childhood
units, but because what we now
consider early childhood pre-K
and earlier did not exist when
this formula was created, early
childhood actually accounts for
kindergarten.
And some 3 and 4 year olds who
are um
Developmentally delayed.
So the the the fun the formula
has always funded those students
identified when they're 3 and 4,
as well as kindergarten.
The most important piece about
this page, I think for you and
I'll, I'll let you read it at
your own leisure, is this box up
in the top right corner.
That describes the number of
units.
That every grade level produces,
every student in every grade
level produces. So for a full
day kindergarten.
Uh, a full day kindergarten
student generates 1.44 units.
You'll see that as you go down
the line from 1.4 to 1st grade
to 2nd and 3rd grade, that
number decreases.
The formula assumes that a
kindergarten student is more
expensive to serve because of
class load sizes and as, as well
as requirements that once class
loads exceed a certain amount.
You have to have an educational
assistant in those grades. And
so, uh.
A kindergarten class, for
instance, with 18 students has a
teacher.
And an educational assistant.
That's more expensive.
And so the formula takes that
into account.
As class sizes are allowed to
get a little bit bigger as you
don't have those requirements
for educational assistance in in
older grades.
Students generate less funding.
So for instance, in 4th through
6th grade, which is as close to
one as you're going to get in
our formula.
They actually generate 1.045
units. So a 4th through a 6th
grader currently essentially
generates about one unit.
There's sort of our baseline for
all other funding levels.
You'll see that 7 through 12
currently.
generates 1.25 units.
And again, that takes into
account the number of teachers
that you need in secondary, that
secondary is more expensive to
serve in general.
And so, um, I wanted to spend a
lot of time on this particular
page.
Because you're gonna, you're
gonna hear a little bit more on
Wednesday, and you'll hear a
bill in this committee later
this session, House Bill 63,
that is an LESC endorsed bill.
proposes um
Moses changing the funding
formula and increasing the
factor for 6th grade.
And 7 through 12th grade.
So right now that's 1.045 for
6th.
1.25 for 7 through 12.
That would
Under that proposal, it would
increase to 1.30.
That's based on work that our
committee has done over the last
couple of years. I'll talk a lot
more in detail about that,
probably on Wednesday. This is
sort of a preview of that.
Um
But again, because we've heard
in our study, uh, middle school
is for achievement starts to
drop off.
And chronic absenteeism starts
to take up.
It's a very critical transition
piece place for students.
And so in our work as a
committee and a staff.
we've proposed increasing that
factor so that those schools are
better able to serve those
students. Well, again, we'll
talk more about that.
detail later.
Uh, I'm not gonna go through
the, through all of these pages.
I'll just quickly go through
them just so that we can keep
track together. The next one, as
I said, talks about the staffing
multiplier and national board
certification units.
Learn what you need to about
that and that page.
Um, in New Mexico, special
education students generate
additional funding, as do some
employees who who serve special
education students.
So you can learn a little bit
more about that. Here, I won't
talk too much about that.
The next page, um.
Students who are in a PED public
education department approved
bilingual program generate
additional units as well, so
school districts and charter
schools receive additional
funding when they operate a
department approved program
because those programs are more
expensive to operate.
Elementary fine arts and
physical education on the next
page. I'm
We're as a state we're pretty
much at saturation when it comes
to funding elementary fine arts
and physical education. So it
used to be that not all school
districts received this funding,
only those in an approved
program, you all have increased
funding to both of those places
enough over the last.
56 years that the direction to
PED now is to provide funding to
all elementary eligible
elementary schools. So,
including 6th grade. So, um,
School districts and and charter
schools are already receiving
these these funds.
The next page is K12 plus
program units.
2 years ago you all passed House
Bill 130.
House House Bill 130 increased
the number of instructional
hours for all students.
To 1140 hours per school year.
Prior to that, it was 990 for 6.
And
1080 for secondary.
That bill increased
instructional hours and provided
funding to do so.
But it left to to districts and
charter schools the discretion
about how to fulfill those
requirements. So there were no
requirements about how many days
school districts needed as long
as they met those hourly
requirements. The bill also
carved out a few of those hours
for professional development for
teachers because as a committee
we did some research and, and
this is best practice, not just
in the in the country but
internationally providing
teachers with time to
collaborate and plan is super
important. Um.
And then finally, what that bill
did, House Bill 130, was create
the K-12 plus program.
It's essentially an incentive
for school districts that do
want to add more days to their
school year.
So for a 5 day school week, any
district that has more than 180
days.
Generates additional funding.
For a 4-day school district any
any district that has more than
155 days generates additional
funding.
You'll see in the budget when we
talk on Wednesday.
Um
That the number of schools and
charter schools and school
districts taking advantage of
this program or adding more days
to their calendar has actually
gone up.
And that means that the
legislature has to provide
funding to pay for those days,
OK?
And when you provide those fund
that funding.
Essentially what you're paying
for is people.
Right.
If you have more days, teachers
have to work more.
paid for those days. And so when
you fund K-12 plus, you're
essentially funding people.
If, if school districts go above
190.
They get a little bit sort of a
kicker on top of that additional
funding for innovation and other
and other pieces. So there is
additional funding on top of the
sort of the tier one is what we
call 180 to 190, and there's
this tier 2 funding.
OK
We're almost to the place where
I'm going to spend a little bit
more time.
Again, there's a page about
school and district size units
that accounts for some.
This economies of scale, if you
will, in those very small rural
districts.
And then I'm going to spend a
little bit of time talking about
at risk. I want to make sure,
Mr. Chair, we're OK on time. Get
there.
So currently,
the, the funding formula does
take into account or tries to
take into account.
Um, of student factors that that
research has shown
Contribute to, to student
performance.
In the current at-risk formula,
the state that actually includes
3 things.
socioeconomics and so low
economic students.
English learner status.
and mobility
And essentially mobility is
captured in the in when when
students uh withdraw and enroll
in schools. There's research
that shows that as students are
more mobile.
You can imagine they have to,
every time they get into a new
school, they've got to catch up
again. They may have missed some
things, right? Generally,
mobility is also tied to some
level of instability at home.
And so those things are
negatively impact student
performance and so traditionally
we have uh provided additional
funding because of that.
So you take those 3 factors.
take a 3-year average of those
factors and you actually add
them together, and that gets
multiplied times the the state's
current at risk formula, which
is a factor, which is 0.33.
So
A district with low factors in
all of those three areas.
are gonna, it's gonna generate
less funding.
Then a district that has um
Of a poorer population.
The only problem
With the at-risk factor
currently there's a couple of
different issues with it. One is
the the poverty indicator that
we use currently is the Title
one indicator from the federal
government.
School districts, charter
schools, public education
department don't have access to
the to the sort of um
route data, if you will, the raw
data that contributes to that
Title I. That's a, that's a
federal calculation that they
give to us and then we use that
number to calculate that risk.
English learners who are also
captured in the at-risk factor
we know require additional
services in our statutorily
federally required to receive
additional services if they're
identified as English learners.
Um
But school districts
Generally don't aren't aware of
how much money those students
are generating in the formula
because they're clumped together
with those other two factors.
And then the third one is that
mobility while we, we agree that
there's some um.
Negative impacts of high
mobility, the data that we use
to calculate mobility is, is,
um.
we have some questions about the
validity.
the consistency of that data,
um.
Generally that's left to school
districts and individual school
personnel.
To code students as they
withdraw, and that's not always
done on a on a consistent or
standardized basis, even though
there is guidance.
So the reason I spent time here
talking about at risk and how we
calculate it now goes back to
the bill I was mentioning
earlier, House Bill 63.
That proposal is going to change
the way that we identify or
would change the way that we
identify poverty.
For the purpose
of at-risk funding.
We would use what's called the
family income index, which is a
state.
Law that you all passed in 2021,
I believe, um.
And it uses state income tax
data, as well as state and
federal, um,
Benefits data.
And then finally census data to
create a match for every student
in the state so that we can
identify more accurately.
Where uh in terms of income
level they fall amongst the the
spectrum that's that's called
out in that law.
So we think that's going to
better identify poverty.
English learners would actually
get a standalone factor under
that proposal.
That's important because it
provides that transparency to
school districts about how much
money those districts will
generate.
that they should be using that
money to support those students.
They would call that out very
specifically, which doesn't
currently occur.
The proposal would actually do
away with um the mobility
factor.
Not because again that we
disagree with mobility as a, as
an indicator of, of uh.
You know, having potential
negative impacts on achievement,
but because the data that we
have currently and the way that
it's gathered is so inconsistent
that
a huge variations across the
state and mobility and it's hard
to tell whether or not that's
being done correctly.
The last thing that the proposal
would do that's not about that
risk, um but it goes back to
program cost is, is to increase
that secondary factor to 1.30.
We'll have more time to talk
about that later and I'll have
time for questions, hopefully.
Again, as we move on, enrollment
growth, and save harmless units.
And then finally home school and
charter school student add-ons.
Those were created at a time and
it still exists for for
homeschool primarily, but there
was a time when a lot of charter
schools, for instance, didn't
offer all the classes or they
didn't have all the
extracurricular activities. And
so there was a factor that would
actually be awarded to school
districts for providing services
to students that didn't actually
go to their schools. That still
happens in some cases for
homeschool students, especially
at the high school level, you'll
have a home.
school student who might want to
come in and take your calculus
class, right, or your physics
class or AP physics or something
like that. School districts
receive additional funding for
those students.
Because they're not technically
enrolled and will not generate
basic program, the traditional
way that everybody, every other
student generates funding. It's
pretty minimal in the large
scheme of things, but it, but it
exists there to provide a little
extra funding for school
districts.
So that's that she very quickly
I'm gonna take you to this.
This is the LESC version,
although it contains all the
different recommendations of
what we call the public school
support requests, you might hear
it called the side by side or
the high level.
And essentially what this
document does is it runs you
through.
Um
A numeric version of the of the
budget that's being considered
this year.
And when it's done.
You'll get a version of this in
our post.
report
That describes what you all as a
legislature funded for the for
the following fiscal year.
OK. The reason we're gonna talk
about it today, I'm not going to
get into all these numbers, but
keep it in your folder because
we are gonna talk about it on
Wednesday.
Um
I'm going to talk to you a
little bit about some, some
colloquialisms or some
nomenclature we use when it
comes to the school budget.
That people
Even after 20 or 30 years, I've
heard people still get this
wrong.
So I want to make sure that
after today,
You don't get it wrong.
And there will be a quiz on
Wednesday,
um, to make sure.
So
What this at a very high level.
I'm not going to talk through
all the specifics yet.
But this
This document actually outlines
how much money is flowing and
what is recommended for the
state equalization guarantee,
what we call above the line, and
I'll show you where to make
those designations in a minute.
categorical appropriations that
also flow to school districts
and charter schools, but can
only be used for specific
purposes like transportation.
And then those are called what
we call middle of the line and
I'll show you where to write
that.
And then
Recurring and non-recurring.
Special appropriations generally
to the department for specific
initiatives from the department
or things that you all think are
important based on the work that
you do.
So the first thing I want you to
do is I hope everybody I see
everybody with a pen or a
pencil, and again, I was a high
school teacher, so I'll wait
till you get one.
Put your phones away.
Um
The first thing I'm going to
have you do is I'm gonna have
you take your pen or pencil, go
all the way down to line 29.
And I would have you draw a
line.
Below line 29.
And literally draw it all the
way across even into the white
margin so that you can see them
clearly.
And then in the top, in the top
left or right margin, I would
have you write SEG.
Slash
Above the line.
Just like that.
Or whatever way you think is
appropriate. I'm not your
teacher, you can do whatever you
want.
You don't really have to write
it, but I think it's handy
because you will hear these
terms over and over and over
again.
Above the line represents the
state equalization guarantee.
And is the money that flows
directly to school districts and
charter schools.
He serves as a flow through and
distributes this on a monthly
basis.
But does not get their, get its
hands on any of this money. This
money flows directly to school
districts and charter schools.
Even though money is, is uh
generated through all the units
that we just talked about.
SCG is discretionary.
And it's left up to local school
districts and charter schools,
how to spend that money as long
as they're meeting the
requirements of the law.
So they don't necessarily have
to spend all the special
education money that they get on
special education services.
But they do have to provide all
the special education services
required by a student's
individualized education plan.
So it is discretionary, but
there are legal requirements
about how we serve students in
districts and charter schools.
use that money in the way they
see fit to do that.
The next thing I'm gonna have
you do is go down to line.
53.
And I'll have you do the same
thing.
Draw a line under line 53.
And on the side
You can write categorical.
Slash
middle of the line
If there is such a
OK.
Categorical categorical
appropriations can only be spent
on the things.
Uh, that are, that are, that
they're intended for.
Transportation is the biggest
example of a categorical
appropriation.
Indian, the Indian education
fund.
Also lives there. That money
does flow to the department.
And they have the authority to
administer that fund, but the
Indian Education fund is
specifically
Uh, intended to serve the
purposes of the Indian Education
Act. It was created as a
function of the Indian Education
Act and the funds in that.
pot of money can only be used to
fulfill the requirements of the
Indian Education Act.
The department is able to
distribute that money in various
ways close to school districts,
charter schools, tribal
entities, some BIE and BIA
entities as well. And so that
categorical piece has to go to
those purposes.
And then the last, the last line
I'll have you draw is uh.
Well, you don't need to draw
another line. Anything below
that.
is below the
fine.
Right? Both
Recurring and non-recurring.
Now, the reason that those that
those terms are important is not
because if you get them wrong,
like the world ends, people get
it wrong all the time.
But it is important to
understand what money flows to
school districts that you all
appropriate.
What money is specifically
designated for for for special
purposes.
And then what money is
essentially one time. There is a
non, there is a recurring
related recurring piece and
you'll see that some of these
pieces are things that go to the
department on a regular basis to
kind of fund the system
assessments is in there, I
think.
Now it's in the next line. Uh
teacher professional
development, school leader
professional development. These
are things that the department
has asked for.
continuously year over year and
we've, and you all have decided
to put them in as a related
recurring appropriation.
Sections 56, and 7 on the next
page. You'll see the, the, the
little gap there.
Those are your non-recurring
appropriations. And we'll talk
more about those individual
appropriations on Wednesday.
But these are one time
expenditures are intended as
one-time expenditures.
Um, Sonny tells the story all
the time. I'm gonna get it
wrong, but there was, there was
a time not very long ago when
there were
5
Non-recurring appropriation,
something like that. And uh that
was a lot.
The state didn't have a lot of
money and funding special
initiatives like that was pretty
rare.
You can see now, not just the
number of lines that exist.
Allah.
But the amounts associated with
those lines in the tens of
millions of dollars for each or
for very specific um
Initiatives, right?
So the state's been very
fortunate and has been able to
fund initiatives. I will say
these are the places where over
the next few years as revenue
starts to.
Plateau a little bit.
You all will have to make
decisions about what to continue
funding.
what to discontinue.
Because it's probably unlikely
that we would be able to
continue all things in
perpetuity.
Um, on page 3, very quickly. I'm
gonna talk about a section here,
well, a couple of sections, I
guess. Other state and federal
funds, um, that includes the
public education reform fund,
and you'll hear a little bit
more about that this week, as
well as section 9 at the bottom
of page 3, which um
Represents your grow
appropriations, government
results and opportunity
expendable trust fund. There are
some things that the legislature
approved last year and along
with some additional
considerations for next fiscal
year.
Mr. Chair, I know we're we're
running uh
A little tight on time.
The last sheet here in your
pocket.
Is a list of LESC endorsed
legislation.
Um
I'm happy to go through those
one by one. I've talked a little
bit about the state equalization
guarantee proposal.
But I also want to make sure
that there's time for questions
about the budget itself or or
the makeup or anything else that
I've talked about. So happy to
go through these or I can stop
for questions now.
Mr. Chair.
If you want to go through some
of them and then the nice thing
is, folks is that we'll have
John with us the rest of the
week on Wednesday and Friday, so
we'll have a hard stop at 10,
but if you still have questions,
uh, we're gonna have John here
the rest of the week.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that you think it's a
nice thing that I'll continue to
be here the rest of the week. I
hope everybody else feels that
way too you might get tired of
hearing my voice.
Um
So 1st, 1st bill here is House
Bill 63. It's the one I've
already mentioned, the public
school funding formula changes,
that's the sponsored by our
chairman and and Senate prote
Stewart.
I won't, I won't talk too much
about that cause I've already
done it.
HM 2, this is a, these are bills
that are already filed. You'll
see some more on the back that I
think we're gonna get uh this
week, hopefully, um.
It's a house memorial talking
about asking the LESC to study
more closely.
data governance.
Um, and artificial intelligence.
So data governance actually
makes up the biggest piece of
that particular memorial.
In order for you all to make a
decisions in order for us as
staff to do analysis of all the
programs that you're funding um
and to track whether or not
these programs are effective.
We need good data.
We've talked to the to our
committee during the interim
about the inconsistency in data
across agencies as well as um
just getting data over from the
state agencies is sometimes a
challenge.
So this discussion is about the
potential need for a statewide
data governance, um.
Structure.
Senate Bill 64 is the school
career development Success
Project, um, this particular
bill would actually uh
Create a
As to create an incentive for
school districts, um, for high
quality CTE career technical
education programs. It would
provide funding for students
after students receive an
industry recognized credential
or certificate. So it's a little
bit of a, of a carrot at the end
of that long process of how we
fund CTE and then award them
award school districts and
charter schools for providing
high quality programs.
Senate Bill 82, um, as I said,
Nothing I've talked about today
really has to do with public
school capital outlay, but that
bill does, um, this, this
extends some measures that you
all passed a couple of years
ago.
To make funding from the public
school capital outlay fund more
accessible to school districts.
It continues the lowering of the
local match. So it uh
Essentially means that school
districts have to pay a little
less uh from their part to fund
school projects and that the
state will cover uh the
difference.
Senate Bill 102.
is
a uh tangentially related to
education, but our vice chair
souls brought this bill provide
uh
Essentially a cash transfer to
pregnant and parenting.
Mothers
John, if you could switch the
microphone cause you're kind of
coming in and out sometimes.
We'll see if that's helpful.
Hopefully
Hopefully that's a little
better.
We'll see.
OK, um,
Senate Bill 107 creates a uh
STEM innovation Network, it's
called NMSU Stem Center of
Excellence, but it's actually
intended as a way to coordinate
STEM resources and programming,
both for K-12 as well as some
for higher ed, um, and the
workforce. So right now we have
a lot of STEM resources across
the state.
They're not sort of
Coordinated in any specific or
structured way and so hopefully
this would increase um
How people use those. I think
I'm still coming in and out, Mr.
Chair, but I'll do my best.
Uh, and the back, on the back
page.
Again, these bills are not yet
introduced or haven't been read
in but should be uh
Hopefully this week.
The first one is changes to
administrative preparation
programs.
And establishing separate
licenses for principals and
superintendents.
So, um
This is really to align the way
that we um prepare.
principles and superintendents
with best practice.
So, um, that's one piece of it
right now also principles and
superintendents have the same
license.
as well as every other
administrator. So if you're an
athletic director or a school
principal.
someone who works in a central
office. Everyone has the same
license, and so they all get the
same basic administrator
training for the most part.
This bill would create different
pathways for principle.
License as well as for a
superintendent license because
we feel those are different jobs
and require different kinds of
training.
A bill to address restraint and
seclusion.
And so this would this would
clarify some definitions around
restraint very clearly define
what kinds of restraint are
prohibited.
Uh, as well as prohibiting
seclusion, better defining what
seclusion is while still
allowing school districts and
charter schools to have the
tools they need to keep students
and staff safe.
Raising minimum teacher
salaries, which we'll talk about
on Wednesday. This is increasing
those minimums to 55, 65, and
$75,000 a year for levels 12 and
3 respectively.
Establishing a minimum annual
salary of 30,000 for all public
school personnel. That's pretty
self-explanatory.
And then the last one here is a
bill that would expand LESC's.
Purview to all public education.
Currently, LESC is statutorily
bound to study K-12 education,
with the exception of teacher
preparation programs at the
higher ed level. This would
expand LESC's purview to uh
early childhood as well as
higher education and all public
education.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I'll
stand for questions.
questions.
And then anytime during
presentations, just feel free to
try to get my attention,
represent Garrett's tension and
we can add you to the list and
then get to you when it's
appropriate. Representroa.
Thank you Mr. Chair, um, it's
not a question I just want to
thank you for this.
This is um beautiful. You are a
teacher, I understood everything
very clear, um, and it's true
after 2 years, it's still a lot
of confusion on my part, so
thank you, thank you so much for
this. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
representing me the way.
Really quick. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. um, more of a comment too
again, thank you, um, for the
new people on the committee,
this looks very scary in the
beginning.
Um, but believe me, um, it's
taken me 2 years, but I find it
finally makes sense. Um, after
you've heard it enough, uh,
especially when it comes to all
of the things that go into, I
never realized that it was so
entailed, uh, but it's, uh, but
I, I, I'm, I'm thankful that we
have excellent, um, LES, uh,
LESC staff that, that, uh, helps
you through that process. So
don't get overwhelmed with all
the numbers.
Other questions? Representative
Torres Velasquez.
Um, thank you for that excellent
presentation. These are great
resources, very clear.
And I have a question, um, in
the Martinez lawsuit, there was
an issue with um bilingual
students and schools one year
might not have bilingual
students and then the next year
would have 50 or 8, you know,
some incredible number. I'm
wondering if this enrollment
growth and harmless is that
connected to trying to resolve
that issue.
Because that affected funding
for the year and so bilingual
students had to English learners
had to wait.
A long period of time before
they could get services due to
the
Representative, it's a good
question. And one thing I didn't
mention about our formulas that
is based on, it is, it's what we
call prior year funding.
So all of this is based on
enrollment, um, and what we call
membership, which is the average
enrollment on the 80th and 120th
day of school. So we take
enrollment on those two days,
they get averaged, that turns
into what we call mem
membership.
Right. And so membership is the
basis for the rest of the
formula and to your point,
Representative Torres Velasquez.
If you have big swings in any
particular field uh area, it
might mean that you have to make
do with the funding based on
last year's enrollment for the
current fiscal year, Special
education is another example of
that where you might just have,
if you're a small district,
especially if you have a student
move in with severe needs.
Right, that is going to generate
a lot of funding for you.
Next year
You still have to serve that
student this year, right? So
save harmless and growth units
are are somewhat intended for
that. It probably primarily has
to do with whether or not school
districts are experiencing rapid
growth, so more than 1%. And so
it has less to do with
individuals as it as it does to
do with.
If you were, you know, real
Rancho was a really great
example of that for years and
years and years was experiencing
rapid growth, and so you never
had enough money if you were
only going to be based on prior
year, so they'd always get a
little bit extra based on that
uh on those growth units.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Other questions, folks?
I had a couple of questions,
John. Um,
Could you give, I know you're
going through because we're
close to the floor, but like a
little bit of history behind
some of them. So like uh the
public school funding formula
changes how long that's been
going about in the work that it
entailed. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members. So, um, we're very
proud of LESC and staff, and I
think the members are as well
that the proposals that you see
before you here are not.
Someone, you know, usually they
don't come from a particular
member, uh, this is, this is the
work of at least a year, if not
multiple years of study. I'll
use House Bill 171 from last
session, which was the school
graduation requirement change.
That was the result of 2 or 3
years' worth of conversations
with stakeholders study by
staff, conversations with the
public education department. So
um hospital 63 is another good
example of that. This is uh
This comes out of a
Working group
That was the request of house
memorial.
In 2022, I believe.
Uh, maybe 23.
23
Um
For us to study the school
funding formula and identify
places where maybe it wasn't
doing it, the job that we wanted
it to do. Did it need to be
modernized? Was it sufficiently
funding specific uh
Groups of students and so um the
summer of 2023.
Daniel, who was here earlier, uh
conducted a working group that
included again, the state
agency, legislative finance
committee, superintendents,
school boards, labor unions,
both in terms of formal
organizations as well as
individuals working in that in
those fields currently in the
school business officials.
Um
And this past interim we
finalized those recommendations.
The working group met to do, not
a formal vote but a sort of a
Informal approval of
those recommendations that
include changes to the way we
identify poverty, creating that
standalone factor for English
learners, um.
And increasing the, the funding
for secondary students.
again, that was a that was a
product of both the funding
formula working group, but also
the middle school.
working group that happened this
past interim and identified some
of those issues with middle
school and prompted
Representative Garrett, I think,
to say, why aren't we including
6th grade?
Because most of our 6th graders
in the state are actually served
in the middle school model. We
do have districts that have K6
schools, but in Albuquerque in
Las Cruces, for instance, most
6th graders go to a middle
school, so we
That that particular proposal.
is of the result of a lot of
work for the last couple of
years, um, I would say even the
memorial which calls for
additional study.
Is a is a product of study that
we've already done around data
governance and have presented to
our committee in the interim,
and again, um,
The annual report that you'll
get.
will highlight
Uh, from an overview standpoint.
All of the things I'm talking
about, and we in the electronic
version will also link you to
individual briefs and reports
that are, that our staff did and
presented to our committee about
those individual issues. So if
you're wondering or if someone
asks, why are they doing this?
That's not my idea.
That's not necessarily the
chairman's idea. That's the
product of a lot of work that
went into getting to this, to
this point and that's that'll be
a good resource for you.
Um, I'll call up public school
capital outlay changes as
another example of a perennial
issue.
That we that we discussed as we
have less and more money to fund
buildings.
We've had to, we've had to
negotiate how we fund that.
And house and what we ask of
school districts as a as a local
share.
To to take part in that building
and that's an ongoing study.
Um, and then, of course, on the
back of the bills that were not
yet introduced the administrator
preparation programs and the
changes to the licensure for
administrators.
Those are also the product of 2
years' worth of work that
actually started with a, that
was with a study that happened
in.
22, um, that culminated with the
bill we actually introduced that
you all did not hear because it
wasn't deemed er last session,
but it was a bill last session
and this interim we built on
that work with the licenser
pieces. Again that included
feedback from.
PED superintendents
Associations, colleges of
education, anyone that we felt
was, was relevant to those
conversations we tried to
include.
Restraint and seclusion is the
last one I'll mention. That was
the product of a of a memorial,
I believe maybe didn't pass, but
that people took up anyway.
involved um
Advocates both in special
education, superintendents, um
PED work very closely as well as
their office of special
education and their general
counsel there. So restraint and
seclusion is another example of
a bill that actually has a lot
of vetting and a lot of input
from a lot of stakeholders
across the state. So, I think,
Mr. Chair, those are, those are
some pretty good examples of how
These, these proposals are, are
Potentially years in the making.
Yeah, no, thank you for that,
John, because that's part of
the, the strength and we've
heard some of the members
mention it of the interim
processes that we're able to
meet, bring stakeholders
forward, um, our staff at LESC
is good about including those
stakeholders beforehand to hear
what they have to say um and
present various options to us as
a committee of where we could go
with particular piece of
legislation, I'm proud to say
that like I think this is a
model for um how good
legislation should be made,
especially with the time
constraints of
Even the 60 day seems like we're
here for a long time, but it
goes by really quickly,
especially to consider the
gravity of what we're doing with
our public education school
system, um.
So thank you for that, John.
Were there any other questions
from members.
Not seeing any,
um, and I'm, I did not bring
copies of this for everybody,
um.
But for those of you who aren't
familiar with this, this is your
houses 2 and 3.
Uh, this is your state budget.
And as we talk on Wednesday, um,
Most of the the things that
we're going to talk about are
some are somewhere captured in
here.
Right? And so I didn't, I
didn't.
I think we would have time to do
this, but I can also walk you
through individually or our
staff can help you, um, connect
all the things we talked about
and all of the sheets that you
might see.
Um, especially if you're
tracking the finance, uh, piece
of things.
To where to find those pieces.
In here
Because you can imagine that can
get a little complicated, but
we're, we're happy to support
you in that as you try to track
um those appropriations and and
where things sit in the budget
itself.
We appreciate that director. Um,
we did have an announcement, so
Lily May, I don't know if you
were prepared for the
announcement. I don't see Joe
here, but Lily May, if you would
come up to the microphone and
introduce yourself and then
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, it is
my pleasure to be here today,
Lily Mayorti. I'm the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico School Board Association.
I've been coming to you for over
16 years now in this capacity,
used to be a former DFA budget
analysts so I'm familiar with a
lot of this work and uh was a
former school board member for
12 years. I'm here to invite you
uh to a breakfast that the New
Mexico School Board Association
holds every year at the New
Mexico Board Institute.
conference which is held in
February, February 14th, and,
and the location is at the El
Dorado Hotel, and it is a
breakfast from 7 a.m. to 8 and
um it's our preconference
breakfast, we have a conference
for 2 days and we'd like to
honor you, uh, have you enjoy a
great meal and then allow you a
few minutes to speak to the
members. They'll be 300 to 400
school board members attending
the breakfast. So, um, you
should be getting a copy of the
invitation we have at the staff.
should be passing it out to you
and then we also have for you
the 2025 legislative program,
which has over 70 positions at
the school board association,
uh, and it's, uh, uh, annual
board meeting has approved, and
these are areas of legislation
that we will be tracking and
supporting and or recommending
approval or expressing our
concerns on, so please take a
look at this and whenever you
see Mr. Guille or I stand up
before this committee to speak
to the issues.
The issues are found in this
particular document, so we ask
you to please join us. February,
Friday, February 14th, 978 a.m.
for a delicious breakfast at the
El Dorado Hotel.
Great. Certainly look forward to
it.
All right, so members just as a
heads up for Wednesday and
Fridays. So we won't be hearing
any any legislation. I think
it's important that we all
situate ourselves and get our
input in on the budget as early
as possible. So if you notice on
the high level that John passed
out, there's obviously the
executive recommendation, the
LFC Legislative Finance
Committee and then the
legislative education Study
Committee recommendations. Um,
we're gonna have John back to
present the LESC budget, um,
we'll have.
The secretary designate to
present the PED executive
recommendations and then Sunny
will join us for the legislative
Finance Committee where we'll
kind of walk through some of the
differences, be able to talk
through it, um.
Wednesday is going to be
primarily focused on SCG and
categorical, and then Friday's
focus will be mostly the Perth
and the growth fund spending, um
so we'll spend a little bit of
time, um, quite a bit of time on
Wednesday and Friday delving
into the different
recommendations and being able
to answer questions. So, um,
I don't know what time the floor
will begin, but we'll start here
at 8 o'clock on
Wednesday and then again on
Friday. So I look forward to
