Representative for a ball cover
at all
vice chair garrett.
Chairman here
they do have a quote alright
thank you good morning everybody
one clean up item before we do
get started
is a reminder that on friday
in the morning at seven am we
have the school board
association breakfast think it's
at the elderado
please be in attendance they
always give a certain amount of
time for us house education
committee member senate
education committee members to
speak to our school board
members and school board members
around the state and we can
interact with them see what is
on their mind so will probably
on friday have a lighter agenda
in terms of committee while also
start later we'll start at nine
o'clock so we'll put that agenda
out
a little bit later today but
we'll have a lighter agenda and
will start later at nine o'clock
to give time for members to I
tend the breakfast to interact
with our school boards and we
also tend to have our
superintendence join their
school boards from around the
state senator souls and I also
get a presentation
after the breakfast to the group
asked you what's going on
in our committees and in the
legislature as a whole as it
affects.
Education so please be there
it's great to interact with our
school board members from around
the state and here what their
issues are and how we can work
on their behalf and in
conjunction with them to improve
our schools on elder on.
Represent result did you have a
question.
Necessarily didn't have a
question so we can finish up
this before we go on just point
the personal problem to after
what representative is the thank
you mister term point of
personal privilege
mister chairman I just want to
thank the people that helped
with our education dinner monday
night it was wonderful it was
fantastic and those that did
help sponsor that we appreciate
it very very much gave all of us
a chance to
get to know each other better
and the staff as well and it was
it was a wonderful wonderful
even I just want to say that
thank you very much great thank
you for that we always hope to
have it to where we can we know
each other in terms of our I
think political position and
standing certainly in education
and on the floor but to get to
be able to interact with one
another on a personal level is
really great so
with that we have represent
backer standing in for
representative of dunkin to
present house bill seventy so
please represent thank you for
standing in and pinshitting
thank you mister chairman that
and thank you too many for here
in this house bill seventy
attempts to address an issue
that we have in our schools and
our public schools in our middle
and high schools as we know
mental health is one of the
areas that is affecting
many areas of our students not
only in school safety self harm
but also instead an achievement.
This act attempts to to the fund
and appropriate thirty eight
million dollars.
From the general fund to float
through the state equalization
guarantee.
To provide mental health
counselors okay in in the public
schools.
It also does indicate that the
any expenditure on encovered
balance was remaining shower
verb to the general fund
this bill attempts also because
many of the
counsels that we have in our
middle schools and high schools
are doing other activities or
activities other than providing
mental health support whether be
in testing.
Whether it be and.
You know schedule making and so
we really do feel that we have
so many of our students affected
not only through the pandemic
but some of the other societal
stressers.
That we need to attempt and be
very intentional about providing
funding so that we can support
our kids in school because we we
cannot guarantee that they would
receive that same support
outside of the school so i'm
very straightforward very simple
bill and with that mister
chairman committee I stand for
questions
alright we have our response or
with us please if you would sit
at the table representative
don't be shy
welcome would you like to give
opening her market on your bill
mister tremon would be okay if
we allowed representative dunkin
to base could do a short intro
of what I covered of course we
don't we don't discriminate
against our thirty students
please representative thank
mister apologize for being late
we've got a great need in this
state as well in the united
states as well for a mental
health and less five years we've
seen that increase more and so
what this build uses try to get
help to those that are suffering
at an earlier age and hopefully
we can get them to help they
need an and
try to don't occur
later on in life.
Great thank you all so much so
we will go to our audience those
and support on zoom of house
bills seventy please into keep
by raising your hand
in a wait for that to populate
on a resume so are on house bill
seventy those in support of
household seventy please raise
your hand or hold off on those
members on my right hand side
those in support of house bill
seventy please near him.
Our answer will start off in the
front men please you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning mister chair
members of the community my my
name is bunny that if I am the
president of the mexico
coalition of educational leaders
and retired superintendent on
behalf of the super ten it's
association and stand rounds
let me just encourage a yes vote
on this I hate to be the one to
tell you we have superintendent
meetings monthly and as the past
superintendent association
president I can tell you it was
almost without fail every month
we would have to have a moment
of silence.
To be reflective about a loss of
a student at a district almost
monthly during my ten year as a
president of last year's
association so mental health is
important to interstate is move
on though we without without
hesitation encourags foot on
this bill thank you great thank
you others on my ray hand side
in sport that wish to speak
anybody else on my right hand
side wish to speak all right on
my left inside those who wish to
speak in sport of house bill
seven
sir so like you're the only one
already welcome you have up to
two minutes please thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee my name is larry
martinez i'm the director of
legislative affairs with
presbyterian medical services
and president medical services
has provided behavioral health
services through our school
based health centers since
nineteen ninety six and I want
to commend the representative
duncan for bringing forth this
legislation and of course
representative backer for
speaking in favor of it we stand
in support of it
we
recognize that prior to the
endemic the behavioural health
needs of the students were very
great and they've only been made
greater by the and demic because
many of the students are now
experiencing post dramatic
stresses order because they've
lost relatives and friends
in the pandemic in addition to
all the other stresses and
pressures that they are dealing
with
I will say that one of the great
challenges in implementing this
bill will be the availability of
behavioral how therapists
we are struggling as all other
providers of behavioral health
are struggling to get a
sufficient number of candidates
for jobs that are open and we
are particularly scrapped when
it comes to independently
license to behavior health
therapists who are the ones who
were qualified to do behavioral
health assessments and.
Develop comprehensive service
plans so we would also urge
members of the committee in the
legislature to support some of
the efforts that are being
handled in other pieces of
legislation designed to
encourage more behavioral health
therapists to work in this area
and to meet the needs of our
youth in the schools thank you
very much mister chairman great
thank you others and support
which become a lot
less member of up to two minutes
you'll need the microphone.
Welcome is to a chair and
members of the committee my name
is smaller secondly education
director and attorney for the
new mexico center online already
we stand in full support of this
bill we know that students who
receive mental and behavior
health support services and
school are more engaged in
learning and they do better in
their academics over all so we
urge i'd do pass on this bill
thank you great thank you
anybody else in the room that
was speaking sport.
Alright.
So on our zoom if you wish you
speak in support please and keep
ourselves handling house bill
seventies.
Lydia.
Good morning literally you're
with us you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you.
I'm sorry you're your voice is a
little bit fuzzy sounding.
Now.
Sorry i'll pay sorry but it's
nobody
children in the support thank
you great thank you so much
all right I don't have anybody
else on zoom so we'll go to
opposition is there any
opposition to house bills
seventy in our audience I
opposition of sir.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes please.
Thank you mister chairman
committee my name is draw for
looks on a retired citizen of
the state my opposition to this
village and it's largely
unstructured indicated.
How it is
how the money is spat where it
runs.
And where's the accountability.
And the other thing that I would
point out is there is a very
successful program as you know
it's also points out.
In the student counselor.
And this has been proven by
steady to be effective and I
suggest that maybe there's a
double doubling down on there.
The.
My main concern with this.
Is that you serve being a
parental right I don't see any
parental notification or
approval of this in the bill.
And I think it has a very.
My this is this money is to be
spent I suggest that it may be
spent.
And properly funding schools and
the teachers and holding them
accountability because there are
a myth there is a m.
The.
Thank you mister chairman.
Great thank you so much any
other opposition either on zoom
or in our audience.
Alright seeing none we'll come
to committee committee members
comments questions concerns
motions
home from our answer to
represent chat field with the
due pass motion second pay
represent me to all my I
understand representative please
questions are hold off on the
motion thank you mister chair
first of all I told a support
expanding these kind of
resources
currently many districts and
squares contract outside
agencies and the gentleman's
questions parents are always a
form when there's like suicide
idealistic apparent as
immediately informed in the
child is within adulted all
times no matter how serious it's
perceived a bit of my question
is I feel it needs a study to
say that we're changing a lot of
bills into studies the the facts
and biggers are contradicting
each other
the numbers one of the analysts
said that there are hundred and
sixty five middle schools two
hundred and twenty three high
schools pedi said there is a
hundred and sixty middle schools
two hundred and forty one
schools one study says it thirty
eight million would pay for five
hundred and forty two of these
positions another analysts says
four hundred and one so I feel
like how do we put it in the
state equalization guarantee
formula how are we equitable
you know public middle and high
schools to me does include
charters but were they counted k
eight schools care twelve
schools there's just a lot of
details in actually carrying out
and so i'm concerned that if we
just pass it we're not going to
actually.
Accurately identify what we need
and how we get the money out any
armaged family as he pointed out
there's not a definition of
middle school and statute who
knew we have all these middle
school bills and it's not
defined and it has multiple
meanings so so I totally support
us doing it but I just think we
need to be more accurate or else
if only for example of only four
hundred and one positions are
funded who gets them you know
what's our way of deciding
thirty eight million mr chair
and and representative dunkin is
it in the budget at this time
sorry a provisions member
thank you mister and the
representative
it is not in the budget at this
time this is an ask
when when I was you know
contemplating this and and
thinking about it
obviously all these schools and
i'm not sure on the charter
school I I don't know that one
and but they would that this
position would be funded with
that amount of money and.
I I don't even know what to say
when there's two different
studies and and and they both
come up differently
that's that's out of my control
but but this is a top as a
starting point and we need it to
do something to see if we
couldn't make this go forward
and be able to say okay at the
end of the day yes this is worth
doing and I do realize there are
some definitions that aren't
covered in here and and we're
going to go back and rework the
bill a little bit mended and
hopefully have similar things
taken care of.
Thank you mister chairs so again
totally we need it we just have
to do it and and has a teacher
it's like you get a kid
they need to talk right then and
there and you have twenty five
kids in your class and you can't
do it and there's no one
available to do it it's really
really needed but I just
hesitate personally.
To pass it if we can't do it
right so those are my concerns
thank mister representatives
would you be willing to work
with me and so we can come up
with an amendment amendment that
would.
The.
Yes
amendment or mr chair I don't
know if we need to do a study
first but i'm happy to work with
you and and I will say just
answer that question is it I
know represent and can you also
have a memorial that's on the
same issue so I figured we're
treating this bill as such
because this is certainly
something that's been on our
radar through elia c and i'll
just take that opportunity
this opportunity to say that I
think in principle it seems like
we're going to have agreement on
this is very much an issue in
our schools but I would
encourage you to take these
issues through the interim
process so that when we do have
issues around definitions when
we have issues around
funding that this goes through
the interim so that was my
suggestion that we're treating
this as the memorial
in order to fill it because we
know that there isn't the money
in the budget anyhow for this
initiative
can we roll this bill and go to
a joint memorial on this
that he could be and if that's
the wish of the sponsor we we
can I mean I had meant to treat
this as such but we can roll the
bill I mean I wouldn't accept
the motion that we can hear the
memorial at a later day I think
miss your chair I think that as
far as if we are going to we
understand that the need for the
study we understand that there
are.
Definitely errors that we need
to come back there in actually
work out the details and I I do
a hundred percent concur that is
a much needed area I also
concert can occur that it should
be through the less he so mister
chairman coach her if you're
saying that we treat this as a
memorial and it is a study then
we respectfully request that we
that we address it as such.
And by that representative you
mean address it is such like
we'll roll it in and hear the
memorial know that we will
actually treat this as a
memorial
and yeah that's that's the thing
that we would have to have a
memorial so that we know exactly
what we might be looking at in
what the areas of research are
and the focuses in there any
sort of timeline for maybe
reporting who's going to do the
reporting in that something that
if you would get together with
our elia see staff in order to
to work out on the details on
and then we can discuss that but
we do have further discussion
cause they think it's a good
pertinent discussion to to
why the memorial may be so with
that represent it reflected with
your questions but yes I yes I
am before I give the floor to
your representative please
thank you mister should I teach
you just see everything that I
wanted to say I was just
concerned that this is so
important that was going to get
stacked because of all that is
that you has mentioned and and
they really want something like
this seemed through but I I
don't think I need to say more
mister sheraton can see
everything that I had to say
thank you great thank you
representative.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I understand the importance of
this bill it's huge especially
whenever our state was shut down
due to orders from above
not all the web above above
I was shocked whenever I heard
what the right was for a tempted
suicide by teenage girls and
that was just blue my mind away
it's.
I mean that's
unbelievable.
Emergency department visits were
fifty point six percent higher
month girls during that same
period
unbelievable
mr chairman whenever what that
was going on I know I had
teachers getting in touch with
me because that the online
studies that were going on and
they were concerned about their
students being neglected being
abused
all sorts of stepped violence
it was unbelievable and I know
that this plate with the safety
aspect of these kids and.
There was no messed up more
often than not there was no
stability in the home and that
was very concerning to me and
why i'm trying to tell you these
things I think that needs to be
addressed in the memorial
category I think that we need to
point out what is going on with
our youth sometimes that they
can just talk to somebody to gip
as that state that's where we
need to be
but my other concern and
you know help
I always.
Look out for the rural part of
the state
and we don't have anything in
the mexican to deal with middle
issues as the dears were sadly
like in that whole aspect
but whenever it comes to our
rural areas i'm concerned that
this money that you were trying
to allocate for this particular
much needed purpose how is it
going to be distributed that's
another concern I have is it
going to be distributed
equitably is it going to be just
maybe one central location in
one particular county
I think that needs to be
addressed i'm not asking for an
answer right now because you
know about my rulers there's
just not very many providers out
there what a boils down to the
mike concern is for these kids
and.
It's it's got to be it's got to
be taken care of I don't want to
lose any more kids and we have
my particular area mr chairman
that's all thank you thank you
represent chapter
thank you mister I just want to
talk a little bit about process
you know sometimes if you have a
bill that you know it's not
funded
it's good to just let it go I
don't know if this bill has
other committees but sometimes
it's good a letter go through
the committees and all the
questions get asked them from
from the committee going to
focus on continued educational
uh issue does have any other
committees appropriate.
So we're always glad to kill it
in the inappropriations
we don't little my dad
so so you you don't if you had
another may you don't
necessarily always have to role
it you know it can go through in
that that shapes your bill it
helps the the continent to the
bill meet the need and then when
the day comes one of this funded
then it rolled right on through
appropriations thank you mister
great thank you I don't have
further common and I said my
piece so will roll the bill
and look forward to the memorial
since you do have a memorial
though I would recommend that
you check
our l c staff perhaps the left
sea staff to get their own put
before moving for a word in case
you do have any sort of
amendments for suggestions for
additions or subtraction
and the in this chair and think
it many thank you so much for
bringing forward such an
important bill thank you all
right so my understanding is
that how spill one hundred
represent because they know um
will be a rolling that over
at the sponsor's request
is my current understanding as
of nine o'clock this morning um
but we will move on to house
bill one thirty four and just as
the heads up is really bringing
representative to the two um the
presenters table is that we have
heard the bill last friday we
have heard public testimony so
we won't be having public
testimony as we already have for
the bill and we do have the many
man that was promised being
brought forward to us so we'll
give that a moment to be passed
out once it is representative if
you would thank you mister
chairman I moved there mim for
discussion purposes thank you
represent a bizalre second.
Okay represent it i'll take the
second
we go on in a moment
will give it a for some weight
time so that all of our students
have our paperwork
mister chairman because house
bill one hundred was rolled I
mean that the party still going
to happen
okay that I do not know I I plan
on going home with my family for
that time
do yeah we should have your way
yeah I don't worry well we'll
get we'll make sure everybody I
I would not be teacher at all if
I didn't make sure my students
got all the work they needed
before discussing
oh
well well double check all right
lots of questions about the
amendment but.
Chairman if you would read the
two o two numbers so for members
remember two o two is the number
on the bottom left hand corner
that's how we indicate we're all
on the same page we have the
same amendment so
chairman if you were the two or
two number thank you mister
chairman good morning good
morning members two or two
number I have is point two two
seven seven five seven point one
eight and that's the number all
of our members have we're good
okay so we did have a motion to
discuss the amendment by
representatives second by
represent garrett
chairman please thank you amen
in continuation of the
discussion of last week with
this amendment does it as two
main purposes the first of that
it corrects the annual
distribution to a consistent
five percent of fun value by
removing the minimum dollar
amount which was discussed here
in this committee so that's the
first change that it makes the
second one is that it revises
the task force provisions as
requested by some stakeholders
of the naba who nation.
Maybe let me exactly let me go
through the the build the men
and itself on page number two
lines twenty three twenty one
this change removes the minimum
dollar amount for the annual
distribution it means the
distribution will always be five
percent of the fun market value
measured over five year this
will ensure long term
sustainability of this
investment on page four nine
three lines line through ten.
With his change clarifies the
public education department's
role.
The public education department
is the implementary of the
dispersement formula not the
creator.
The formula would be developed
by the task force as I will
outline here in a minute.
On page number four lines twelve
through fourteen makes
grammatical improvements.
The third part and the most
substantial change in this
amendment to the bill are found
on pages six and seven.
Related to the task force.
Whose role it will be to develop
the disbursement formula.
Again as requested by some
stakeholders from the naba who
nation this amendment strikes
the subsection on task force
membership and instead inserts
another step in this process and
that process now is defined as.
I'll tribes will come together
to determine the membership
composition of the task force.
These tribal deliberations will
be convened and facilitated by
the director of the legislative
education study committee as a
as a independent third party one
that's not led by
the administration one that has
been led by and hired by members
of the legislative education
study committee both in the
house and the senate both
republican and democrat.
The indian affairs secretary may
participate may participate in
an advisory capacity if
necessary deliberations will be
based on and this is the I think
the heart of this amendment.
Deliberations would be based on
indigenous values.
For decision making according to
the principle for self
determination.
And tribes amongst themselves
know that process the best which
is why we afford that to them.
Tribal representatives will
develop a consensus proposal for
task force membership.
And report this to the
legislative education study
committee before september one
twenty twenty four
the public education department
will then accept appointments
the task force based on that
proposal once again prepared by.
The tribal leaders themselves.
Following this new step in this
process the task force will
convene as per the original
bill.
It will agree disbursement
formula for implementation by
again the public education
department with these changes
the bill gives maximum decision
making power to the sovereign
tribes themselves rather than
prescribing who
should be at the table when
funding decisions get made more
importantly we don't need a
bunch of bureaucrats in this
building deciding what should be
done and I and I I live myself
in the bureaucrats on that and
that note instead of the tribes
themselves and their tribal
leaders.
When funding decisions get made.
On page seven line fifteen again
improves language consistency on
page seven lines twenty two
through twenty three this change
clarifies that the task force
decides the formula not the
pitnet the budget education
department or any other state
parties
and with that mister chairman I
would stand for any questions
thank you chairman I just want
to clarify that we love our
bureaucrats because they're the
people that make our government
function
all right so we're on the
amendment questions from
committee on the amendment I
represent.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative lente
should I call you term in linda
okay
not going to do that magazine
that I am the better farmer and
rancher mister chairman
representative lent say you said
that through working with the
never home nation was their
interaction for many that the
tribes and drafting this
amendment that you have
mister german and representative
of his so the formulation of
this amendment was at the so
request of the naval nation
try will council and the office
of the president in meeting with
them directly face to face and
this amendment was based on and
afternoons worth the meetings
upon which there was concerned
about the make up of the initial
task force as was or as is in
the bill itself today
and so we went back to the
drawing board and to the best of
our abilities came back with a
compromise that I believe that
takes into account everything
and affording every single
possibility that this.
This fund would then be given
the four
power of the sovereign nations
to afford it then who was going
to be on the task force and then
allow them to want again create
that phone distribution formula
list chairman representative
thank you very much for that
explanation that my concern is
whenever you were talking in the
latter part of your amendment
let's see a consensus proposal.
For test port test force
membership developed by the
representatives of the twenty
three indian nations tribes and
pueblos so whenever you're
talking to one entity.
You think that maybe we might
need to visit with the others to
make sure that they are on board
with the changes that you have
posed in your in this amendment
mister chairman and
representative to get the full
endorsement by the twenty three
point nations and tribes of this
date has always been a goal of
mine and it continues to be and
will always will be and so at
this point in time of the
amendment was made public and at
this point in time I have not
heard personally by any tribe in
this state that finds it to be
anywhere near something that
they cannot support okay
trying to get that many people
together could be.
Hard to do it's hard for just a
few of us appeared from to come
up with the
same decision on lots of stuff
mister chairman and
representative lent I also
whenever you struck in your very
first amendment which was on
page two twenty twenty one you
struck the the greater of twelve
million five hundred thousand
dollars
whatever.
Okay it goes to appropriation
neck said the appropriation has
been taken out of my
understanding that correctly
mister chairman representative
is all yes ma'am that is gone
okay so whenever you want to
implement this without any sort
of appropriation what kind of
is this going to be distributed
equitably.
Mr chairman and representative
equitably I would afford that.
Definition to be done by the
tribes themselves and it is in
my full intent and this is this
is the manner that would be
pushed forward as as a
sobernations in this tribe is
that each one of them is
equitable amongst themselves
okay and how they move forward
is amongst how they can come
together collectively to
determine what needs based there
are in the particular publo's
nations and tribes and is
determined that's the point I
was get out in this committee
local control to me that's very
important somebody sitting at
the sand fair design know what
goes on down in like arthur vs
what's happening in safari to
river moscow for that account
but local control is the main
thing though
mr chairman I guess that does
answer all my questions at this
time I
good luck with this thank you mr
chairman thank you represent
chapter
thank you mister chairman thank
you representative for bringing
this bill you know and I I think
a replacement
result kinda asked the question
I as i'm I really don't know
twenty three tribes there's all
there's a lot of pointless or so
now hoster the element and
avail.
So
does the funding and the
planning for the funding
included the hiccular yes the
miscalls
all the tribes and all the
published all the sovereign
nations are included in this
bill in the planning and the
funding.
In the result in.
Distribution for all the
public's nations and tribes in
the sta.
Thank you mister chairman.
Thank you represent
your mister chair thank you
carolina really glad to see both
parts the five percent without
the twelve point five million
thanks for doing that and and
thanks for um having all twenty
three tribes and prevalo's
representative because I know
there's
there's inner tribal
disagreements and agreements
there's a lot going on so having
the twenty three representatives
deciding this who is going to
represent them is great
just one question I think it's
really important it's like
twenty one seven i'm glad that
you put the task for a shot
consider tribal needs and tribal
size including both a base and
student account the student
count as vital because we have
tribes with a couple of dozen
students and we have tribes like
the naval hole that obviously
have you know twenty seven
thousand or whatever it is and
i've just concerned that they
look at the base because
sometimes when we do funding
every tribal have look at the
same base despite the disparity
and sizes so i'm glad that you
included it as a thing to be
considered so I just thank you
for including it that's a mate
comments.
Thank you.
Reminder remembers we're on the
amendment in discussion of the
amendment solely or get to the
bill if there further questions
on the bill serve represent
around.
Thank you mister chair
I just want to commend
terminal there for bringing
forth this really great
amendment the the task force per
saving was a specially
because this amendment really to
me represents the highest
respect that we're ping in
accordance to the sober nations
allowing some relations to make
determined where the funding
will go and decide on the make
up of their their task force
that will determine where their
funding goes and will allow them
to develop that equitable
formula themselves
my question is
for for this amendment is would
it be possible that like a
student could be appointed also
to this task force
would it
and yeah we think you know
students are really important in
should have says and also where
their funding goes mister
chairman and represent bottom
yes absolutely that's the beauty
of affording the tribes the
authority in the autonomy to say
this is who we would like to sit
in the task force to represent.
Whatever the make it was going
to be and I don't even know what
that is at this point and so
absolutely they're the
possibilities are that we would
may have a student door or or
elders it so that the range is
there thank you thank you mr
chairman
i'm really excited by this
amendment and i'm really
grateful that you brought it
forward thank you thank you
representative is on the
amendment mr chairman thank you
very much for allowing me to do
this again a representative
literally on your amendment it's
with this is up for a
discussion.
On your first amendment on page
two line twenty three twenty one
use stricken the greater of
twelve million five hundred
thousand dollars okay
so mister chairman and
representative linte what
happens to section three on page
eight starting at line nine
going down through line fifteen.
Again the my concern is payed on
the bill
lines through fifteen because
there you're talking about an
appropriation.
And and and mister chairman and
represented device I apologize
to me then we get to where
you're at okay
very less patient your bill of
the bill yes sir the rings of
number eight is man so if you
may please repeat your question
at my concern is you have.
I'm page two
that's right
yes i'm page two in your first
amendment you have strict in the
twelve million five hundred
thousand dollars but over here
in the back or you leaving in
that appropriation sorry and and
and declare it by mister
chairman and representative as I
made mentioned before is that
the appropriation language on
page eight line section three
will infect the of that was
simply because of the lives the
wreck of fifty million dollars
and the fact that there's fifty
million dollars already in house
bill to for this for this
initiative and it is in house
bill to already list me so it
the twelve million five hundred
thousand was not in house bill
and that's what's stricken and
and mister chairman and
representative appointed
clarification is that there was
a concern that in this committee
and rightfully so that if we
attempted to do either five
percent or twelve point five
million whichever was the
greater that at those types of
spending ratios we would exhaust
this fun in a very quick period
of time so we elected to say
okay so what if we don't have
the capacity to spit off twelve
point five each year we'll see
that thing dwindle in a number
of years so the fact is that
instead of doing that we just
said five percent flat no dollar
figure at all associated to this
bill okay so mr chairman and my
understanding you correctly that
this is a new appropriation and
it is going to be in house bill
to the first time.
And appropriation bill
mister chairman representative
this is a brand new phone case
it's in the it's in the house
built two for the first time for
its for its creation okay and mr
determined since we are going to
be hearing that bill today I
know there will be discussion on
this my concern with all of
these bills we have but
especially on the new it's and
it's not like i'm not supporting
this I don't want that beat
misconstrued.
Is it going to be sustainable.
And that's that's always my
concern we know how volatile the
industry is that provides forty
eight percent of our states but
inside therefore I do have
concerns about this but mister
chairman and representative is
they'll you know this goes to
the heart of what are discusses
were in the legislative finance
committee this past summer and
that is instead of of creating
recurring spending projects or
programs the way we live in this
time by boost and and bust in
boom oil is that if you create
trust funds put that away and
let that feed that need for the
foreseeable future that's the
best way to move forward in that
night and i'll give you a an
example that the state's
permanent language trustword is
now fifty billion dollars right
here at the end of december it
would have doubled in the past
six years and it's now the
thirty first largest sobered
wealth fun in the world.
And so the service to the
severance tax permanent fund
same thing has nine point five
billion dollars the rainy day
phone has nearly two point four
billion dollars right so there's
no reason why we should not
expect these types of trust
funds to incur that same type of
success so that we're not back
in fourth increasing politics
over programming within
communities and mr determine I
want.
I won't go against that but the
other side of that is we have to
get an established first.
And we have to let him grow a
little bit whenever we see some
bills that come out that do try
to take all the money out of the
rainy day fund or let's take it
out of the permanent funderless
spent this through using this
money that we have saved
what is that leaving for a
grandchildren our great
grandchildren and the future of
the state whenever they at those
phones are continually under a
tact but if we're trying to set
up something that will
be able to maintain the pace
that it is being at
that does the direction we need
to go.
Adam assuming that whenever
we're talking at and when my
concerns is with the infant is
oversight on those and that is
spelled out if i'm reading this
right
starting up and going to the men
men or the well it's on the
amendment but it goes back to
the part of the bill.
Whenever the appropriation is
being guessed for mr german and
that's my concern I just want to
make sure that even though we
have taken out one part of the
money the other part stays in
and on what make sure that there
is oversight that's all mister
chairman that does answer my
question and that's all I have
right now
thank you represent
on the amendment move adoption
so we have a motion to adopt the
amendment the second by
representative it sell is
earning opposition to the
adoption of the amendment
all right seeing none we're back
on the bill you have an amended
bill mister chairman discussion
comments concerns motions.
Represent
mr chairman I moved to pass
alright so we have a due pass
motion on how spell one thirty
four as a mended second by
representative of chat feel
ma'am secretary colorado and to
do pest motion please.
Revson check field
representative is out yes
representative good
yes sorry
representative either.
Representative lane
representative latter yes
representative madrid
represent my repair moya yes yes
representative but of them.
Yes
representative for ball cavatal.
Vice chair giraffe.
Chairman
yes.
Alright by a vote of ten to zero
you have a due password house
bill one thirty four as amended
thank you many members thank you
all right so members they
mention we're rolling over house
bill one hundred
um
so again as a reminder of folks
before you all start packing up
is that we have the school board
association breakfast at seven
o'clock at the elderly
friday days so please go
interact with ours schoolboard
association
represent I think you have a
guest do you would you mind
introducing your guest please
yes thank you so much mr
chairman I had with me here
today the president of the
united democrats
working for so
stand all right welcome
really product
she's also really good friend
thank you so much and thank you
for joining us today all right
folks that is our agenda for
today I mention that will have a
light agenda will start at nine
o'clock on friday so you time
nine o'clock friday join our
school board association
members.
