Is there I see here and Grace
Kelly.
All right so would you all my
which you to mind raising your
hand on the attendees list
virtually so that you can get to
the top of the list and be
easier for me to see all right.
All right we have some awesome
attentive.
Audience members experts say I
appreciate that.
There you Mr ceiling.
It's getting dizzy good morning
sorry about that I will yeah no
worries.
In this.
So well we'll go ahead and get
started house bill twelve when
you are ready representative
please.
Thank you Mr chair house bill
twelve which is being introduced
by Representative Sarinana and
the House and senator who in the
Senate makes an approach
appropriation for a state wide
landscape assessment to
establish the America cures New
Mexico program this is a program
that addresses the needs of all
of our veterans of the various
military branches.
and this appropriation will
allow
C. N. M. a central New Mexico
community college to implement
the statewide landscape
assessment for the establishment
of the Americas servicing Mexico
program which would be the
nineteenth in the country and
before my expert witnesses speak
I want to remind everybody that
our military population and this
is five years ago so it's gone
up our veteran population is a
hundred forty two thousand a
hundred eighty seven people
that's nine percent of our
civilian population of those
eighteen years and older ninety
one percent are men and ninety
percent are women and as we all
know this kind of service would
help our military veterans
choose to stay in New Mexico so
I think it's really important
because with us today to share
more about the program is
Lynsey hot concerned she's from
the institute for veterans and
military families and Greg C.
Lee a New Mexico veterans
advocate so I would like to with
your permission Mister chairman
have Lindsey hot consent I'll
briefly explain the program and
have a few words from Greg silly
awesome please welcome.
Good morning and thank you for
getting rich she's speak.
Just.
What the us that.
To provide our military families
at Syracuse University here in
upstate New York we are.
We are.
We have a coordinated care after
at that we have lost across the
country healthcare concerns and
kind of the basis at that your
reserves the public outside
access to you and navigation of
Karen's.
Is a I'm and this year press
service on family at the time I
spent.
Not.
Through this we also send it
back to goal or if the.
To address this on top.
It's hard.
I'm sorry to interrupt you but
your connection is kind of going
in and out I'm and it's getting
a little bit progressively more
difficult to understand you I
don't know if it's a connection
issue if it would work better if
you maybe try to turn off your
camera but we can try different
things in order to try to
improve the connectivity I'm
sorry about that.
About that a little bit better
you.
Not really.
For.
That better and really sorry
about that yeah yeah now it's
better.
So excuse me.
It was really challenging.
Oh now that I'm cert I'm sorry
again now that now that you
started again it's it's
continuing.
How about how.
That sounds better but it
happens once you start speaking
in complete sentences okay I
really apologize for the issue
but no single organization can
attract the on their own great
thank you.
I'm so where we really feel that
pollution and it is a directly
in comprehensive needs through
adopting social sort of how and
having will community here be
interconnected you're the use of
technology and on tracking all
of that impact from start to
finish with measurement
evaluation.
A program launched in two
thousand and fifteen but we have
grounds have over eighteen
communities have search
collective where more than forty
five thousand military active
client with more than a hundred
and ten thousand and that you
need service request so really
being a lot of impacts across
our our program.
Right.
It's.
Thank you so much of.
Thank you so much.
Chair and
Committee thank you so much for
allowing us to join this morning
I.
Wanted to just real quickly give
it a quick background for the
New Mexico portion of this in my
previous role I I was honored to
serve on the and Representative
Deborah hall and staff I was her
military legislative aide
serving on Capitol Hill and
while I was in on Capitol Hill I
was able to attend and number of
a very high level briefings
where.
Programs for Veterans Services
and coordinating community care
models were being briefed and I
learned about America's service
and the mission of the institute
for better to military families
at Syracuse University when I
was out there and in DC And
since moving back here in New
Mexico I've been in my own time
as a volunteer advocating for
bringing in America service
program here to New Mexico New
Mexico service would be a
program that essentially is a
network that ties in together
different community
organizations essentially all
the veteran community serving
organizations that are called
providers within the program you
could think of a non profits in
New Mexico from organizations
like
the veterans integrations Center
to pausing stripes other
organizations to for example
here at the City of Albuquerque.
More Keller has a veteran in
military families a program I've
constituent services programs
what what New Mexico senator
would be would be a technology
and a community of practice
model that would essentially
tied all of those resources
together so let's say of that
and goes into a nonprofit
looking for assistance with with
one issue and that nonprofit is
tied into the service network
that would allow let's see that
veteran needs help with
something else that that
provider doesn't provide it
would allow them a no wrong door
option to be able to tie into
the other organizations within
the network here in New Mexico
in order to provide that veteran
and perhaps their family to
services that they need often
times it's made it more often
than not it's more than one
thing that is needed so this
this care model works very well
in other states Texas has three
service programs the one that
most closely Representative
matches the New Mexico
population would be the Rio
Grande Valley service model and
I think that this program would
be is exceptionally beneficial
to our state it would be a net
benefit for a number of
organizations and what it would
do is it would allow a
first of its kind demo prop
program here in the state for a
coordinated care model which
we're seeing more and more
throughout the country as being
the way that a community serving
organizations are moving forward
in the future so this bill H. B.
twelve is a an appropriation to
fund a landscape assessment of
where central New Mexico
community college would be the
recipient and they would
contract they would work with
the institute for veteran and
military families to conduct an
assessment essentially a study
of all those resources across
the state what are all.
All the organizations and
providers that that tie into
veteran community and what are
the needs of the veteran
community it would help identify
gaps in it would help identify
the best ways to tie them
together based on.
In the staff.
The institute prevented
militants are so I'll stop right
there I'm sorry Mr Seely you're
you're just cutting in and now
as well as final remarks there I
had an alarm goes off by okay.
so just to close out what what
this would do is this is a first
step this would do an
appropriation to fund landscape
assessment landscape assessment
will identify not just providers
but also needs from the veteran
community and it will help to
design a program that can tie
in services especially in the
rural parts of our state it
would allow for a more
comprehensive
services to be available to
veterans so that one stop gets
them in touch with all of the
right experts they need to talk
to.
Can I add one more comment.
I want to add that Senator pope
and Representative Sarinana have
each allocated fifty thousand
dollars of their junior money
towards funding this and with
that we stand for questions.
Great.
Thank you Representative and
experts so we'll go to be
attendees list those in support
of house bill twelve would you
please indicate I raise your
hand if you wish to speak.
Right.
So as customary you have up to
two minutes once I call upon you
so we'll go to Martine.
Good morning Martine welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Martine on that and then the
policy liaison for stand them I
just want to state that seeing
them fully supports this bill as
the landscape assessment is a
great step towards better
meeting the comprehensive needs
of our one thousand six hundred
thirty four student veterans and
veterans across the state thank
you.
Great thank you for joining us.
All right so they don't see
anybody else in support any
opposition to house bill Paul.
Whilst.
All right so we'll come back to
the committee the person is
representative of Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chair and the
presenters and committee members
I I'm
speaking on behalf of this of
this
piece of legislation Debbie
Sarinana Representative Debbie
Sarinana is a stalwart supporter
of veterans services and an
actual.
Herself.
She shares a lot of information
with me about the work that she
does and this is been one of the
up front top category
pieces of legislation that she
would like to see move forward
her heart is in the right place
with it and I know as a coming
from a family of a lot of
veterans this is a great piece
of legislation I think
accessible
process sees for education are
needed and what a great pool of
potential for for teachers from
this from this group if we move
this legislation forward so I
really appreciated and I thank
you and I support it.
Thank you representative
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative fox for for
presenting this I have just a
couple of logistical questions
so what tell what type of a dad
is in the B. collected for for
this program Mr chair
representative.
I would like if Ireland see if
you're on and great if you can
briefly review that.
I can address that thank you so
much.
The land then.
In.
Still not working.
That matter.
portion of the land the fact
that we let's start by working
with some of the patterns
everything officers after asking
I'm a past reach out to the
community and understanding that
conditions on the ground in each
particular region and it would
really be much more qualitative
in nature of understanding what
the needs are what the
challenges are different gap we
need that cost that their region
as well if there is any
collaborative effort RT this
team to be able to coordinate
out together.
The state.
Thank you thank you for that.
Structure of Representative.
Do we have
is there is there staff is there
is there are people out there in
the field I actually do this I
forgive my ignorance I I really
don't know and so is there is
our folks on in in in the
different parts of the state to
actually follow up and work with
veterans on a regular basis like
this.
Mr Chairman representative
that's a great question there's
a number of organizations on
campus of the veterans
integrations Centers.
Our veterans department for the
state.
The value of this is it's
connecting everything and making
sure that where for example
transportation excuse me to
veterans hospitals as an issue
it's something that can be
solved we collaborate on and I
believe that this really adds
that collaborative
communication networking piece
that goes beyond any one of our
entities I don't know just see
if you want to add anything to
that.
Thank you so much Mr chair Madam
representatives up
Representative Lara thank you so
much for the question there are
eight and an array of different
type of organizations and
services out there there are
veterans service officers which
is a very specific role that
helps veterans with their budget
and budget issues with the
veterans administration so they
serve a formal role in that
respect there are also an array
of non profits in this state
that help veterans in different
ways there's nonprofits that
take veterans hunting the
legislative assistant service
animals things like that so with
this would do is help tie
together both public and private
veteran serving organizations
together to be able to share a
networked and a community of
practice to be able to give
comprehensive services to
veterans wherever they may come
for it.
Thank you thank you for that
thank thank you for that they
get you answered my second
question and so I what the what
I what I have concerns about our
questions about was at the the
logistics and how this is gonna
work yeah come together because
you know as we know there are
many we have a lot of veterans
New Mexico and a lot of the more
rural areas and they may be
harder to track down this as as
as opposed to others in more
urbanized areas so I I think
this is a great idea I support
the bill I'm just so curious to
see what that what the data rich
reveals and what types of
services are our veterans are
asking for thank you for that
thank you Mr.
I thank you Representative
Roybal coming.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and and we think
Representative Sarinana for this
wonderful bill and nice to see a
break
I am I stand in full support of
this as the vice chair of the
labor veterans and military
affairs committee it is what
we've been talking about for
several years and that is taking
on more on coordinated.
Comprehensive approach to one
determine what is out there.
That will help us and determine
where the gaps are and where
better than to situate this bill
then and with community with
central community college in the
and we are higher education
field an area where are the
ability to do this kind of
research and collection of data
and and then to be able to hi
Jim the close the gaps and I
think that's that's really the
we're we're trying to go with
with this particular piece of
legislation and what we've been
saying Mr chair for several
years that we need to do R. in
order to be able to and as
Representative you're at
mentioned and others this is a
state with we're we're happy to
welcome so many our military
will then become veterans who
then sit state in New Mexico and
we've got to have the and I like
what our I'm gonna quote Greg's
words we'd like to have the
network and community of
practice in place so that we
could holistically and what
company can certainly address
their needs and not have them
face living in poverty and or
working in poverty and that's
ultimately the call so I really
appreciate this piece of
legislation on thank the Sanchez
very much four point thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser place.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and
representatives are not part of
bills I noticed in the FIR it
said that a report should be
prepared by the NM to help us
determine the feasibility of
starting American service in New
Mexico so I look forward to that
report and Mister chair ready to
make it to pass motion if you're
ready for.
All right so I A. will pocket it
for now Representative Sweetser
that representative and and
apple will come back to it.
Representative editor thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I to support this
program I used to be a
case worker years ago for a
congressman at the local level
and and often dealing with
patrons and helping them get
their budget that.
I also had a list of churches on
my desk right because there is
so many things that they needed
that really the government
wasn't going to find that I knew
what communities would help in
emergencies or or just stated it
living so so this network is
needed at as I understand it
you're gonna probably set up a a
series of nonprofit
organizations in places where
they're the most needed is that
is that true is that how this
works it is the Rio Grande a
nonprofit it is that we're
directly out of the many years
office with the funding from the
city.
If if I may.
Mr Chairman Representative have
a great to see you then I do the
way that the program works is it
it it offers both the software
at and training as well as the
community of practice that's
been built to organizations that
already exist so this
appropriation is not not
necessarily meant to start new
organizations one thing that the
landscape assessment may do is
help identify gaps where
organizations can look to fill
in those needs that would
absolutely be a benefit of this
study once it's completed it'll
identify areas of great need but
primarily this program is built
to empower and tie together
existing organizations.
Mr chair representative I've
I've worked with a lot of every
nonprofit in the north really as
to see the light on foundation
and and what I do know is that
you can't expect nonprofits to
take on another program without
additional staff I I I that's
just how it works I mean you
have to train somebody a person
to know that software to
implement that software to
answer calls to get this thing
so we have the habit of the
suggesting that nonprofits take
on more work so I I just want to
I'm I'm interested in seeing the
results of the study seeing that
how it's how it's gonna play out
but I can tell you our
nonprofits and in rural and
rural areas especially are
stretched to the limits I'm so
we're going to have to figure
out how we support these
nonprofits in carrying out this
program just to expect people to
take on more work more time
without compensation it's it's a
problem I mean there are a lot
of good volunteers out there but
you you need someone who's going
to stay here and help us help
organize a community and that
that's just simple work thank
you very much Mr chair thank all
of you for your work.
Thank you Representative so
before I go to our do passed
motion I'm I would like to say
and and think representative
Sarinana Representative Garrett
stepping and and both of our
experts for for working at some.
That that's going to be
desperately needed item mad Gen
anticipating what the what the
study would provide certainly
amongst my generation I have
several friends that are
multiple combat veterans simple
a rock into Afghanistan that
I've seen in in various phases
and some of it is like you all
mentioned difficulty
transitioning into higher
education in accessing the
benefits that they're very much
in need of and then we still
have certainly my father who is
a combat veteran of Vietnam on
that that the older but
certainly more recently and
because of storm veterans as
well so ensuring that our our
veteran population are are
taking care of that and
certainly our most recent
generation and way of of of
military veterans in particular
combat veterans.
Thank you for your work and that
some like all of our members
expressed certainly
and anxious to see the results
of the reports and and where
gaps may exist and how we can
continue to support the work
that you all are doing so thank
you all for the work that you
all do but with that
Representative it's okay Mr
ceiling do you have a closing
comment please.
Mr chair HB thank you so much I
wanted to just very briefly just
quickly addressed one final
piece from representatives had
at is question which is that
this program.
While voluntary for
organizations definitely not a
requirement would be it has
actually been the case for many
organizations that this
actually helps reduce costs for
many organizations and what I
can tell you is that there's
federal legislation that has
been passed called the John
Scott in an act and what that's
going to do is it's going to
bring a number of grant programs
for community care
organizations us folks within
the hub spoke model that having
a larger network for let's say a
nonprofit here locally that's
tied in for a has a larger
footprint allows them to be more
competitive for those requests
so I just wanted to point that
out thank you Mr chair.
Right thank you so much so we're
on a do pass motion from
Representative Sweetser you may
have a second.
Representative Trujillo I'm
sorry I'll give it to
Representative Trujillo
is there any opposition to the
past motion on house bill
twelve.
C. line you have in the past on
house bill twelve great thank
you everybody.
Thank you and thank you to our
experts thank you Mr chairman.
Definitely all right so.
We will move on and committee to
house bill thirty nine I think
it's our representative Gallegos
committee raising your hand on
the attendees side please.
Mr.
Sh.
The deck here.
Right.
Representative Gaydos joining us
all right good morning
Representative okay goes.
Good morning all right who
should I bring in as experts
I've got Mister Scott Beckner
and Clayton Abbey.
All right Mr secretary and Mr at
the.
I have a fill up Rowe bless that
has their hand up.
Might that be somebody that
needs to come in.
Thank you Mr Mr chair this is
going to be a that's a Phillip
robust is the correct person
he's sitting with right now
they're sitting together okay
excellent then we'll promote
them.
Thank you Mr Abbey.
So is that it.
That is all right so house bill
thirty nine when you're ready
and what please thank you Mr
chairman good morning at a two
year committee so good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill thirty nine
is a pretty simple bill it has a
huge impact on Diana in southern
New Mexico's economy house bill
thirty nine is a gross receipts
tax exemption for NMSU non
athletic events.
I'm.
It.
It excuse me House three line
extends the gross receipts tax
exemption for an issue non
athletic events that will sunset
on June thirtieth twenty twenty
two this exception exception is
specific to non athletic special
events events such as concerts
rodeos and wrestling
competitions this deduction was
established in two thousand
seven in order to minimize or
diminish the unfair financial
advantage you to have has
attracting special events
because they're located in a
state that does not charge taxes
being able to attract the
special events provides positive
economic impacts to the students
and business labor force local
hotels restaurants goods and
service gas stations and other
miscellaneous attractions in and
around done and county and
southern New Mexico Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
would like to ask my expert
witnesses Mr Scott Beckner and
the and who is a retired
director of events have
disabilities management for NMSU
and Strickling at the end of
this year director for state
government relations to be
allowed to provide expert
testimony to help respond to any
questions that you may have to
this bill.
And with that Mr chairman I
stand for questions.
All right and I'm sorry about
that you're experts are there to
answer questions only.
Is that true Madam what are your
experts are there to answer
questions only.
Thank you yes okay excellent
thank you so much so we'll go to
the attendees side those I
didn't even say anything Mr
current.
or anybody else those in
opposition those in opposition
to.
House bill thirty nine please
indicate there is here and.
Business opposition.
All right so go to support.
you.
All right.
So please wait for instructions
as I tell my students in class
before raising hands.
All right.
Sir you have up to two minutes.
Please Mr Ricardo.
Okay good morning article read
with the New Mexico state
university but we stand in full
support of this bill the
university of Texas at el Paso
has a similar tax deduction and
we believe that if this if we
end up losing the tax deduction
that all of our concerts and
everything else will end up
going to tell pasal we do have
some major impacts for example
with the Garth Brooks Klunk
concert that happened about five
years ago rooms are full and
Alamogordo Silver City tier C.
restaurants are completely full
so this does have a an
additional economic impact that
is not measured in the overall
analysis but the legislative
finance committee but again we
do stand in full support of the
a measure and it's been around
since two thousand seven thank
you thank you.
All right so we'll go to Lauren.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Larry heard and
register lobbyist for the city
of Los crucis I've never been
very good at following
instructions all confessed I was
when wrote raise my hand to
quickly the city of Los crucis
supports this legislation as
settlement with indicated and
also Mr rail at any time if we
have events at NMSU it has a
significant impact a positive
economic impact on the city of
Los crucis and the surrounding
areas as you see revenue coming
in to hotels restaurants bars
other other venues we in and it
tracks people the city of Los
crucis so we support legislation
hope you'll give it a do pass
thank you.
Excellent thank you Mr and.
All right so go to Mr Marquez.
We.
Morning Charlie welcome.
Good morning this is Chuck
McMahon I'm working with Charlie
Marcus and we represent Dona Ana
County and I will repeat what's
already been said but Dona Ana
County supports this legislation
we recommend to do past we see
the benefit to.
The induced tourism and activity
throughout the community and so
again we recommend support.
Thank you.
We'll go to Matthew.
You're welcome you have up to
two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee messenger it's
student body president for New
Mexico State University we stand
in full support of this
legislation and we think the
representative for bringing this
forward strictly speaking from
the state engagement standpoint
having events like this in the
city is incredibly important
both for getting students
excited about being on campus
but also.
Staying within the city of Los
crucis after graduation and
events like this is also really
important for recruitment and
retention so the more revenue
that we can keep in Dona ana and
the surrounding areas the better
so a SMS you or the state
government is in full support of
this legislation and we hope
that you will give a to pass
thank you very much.
Thank you.
All right so go to any a New
Mexico.
Morning two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm states human
is government relations director
for any New Mexico I'm you have
our members we support this bill
isn't aligns with our goals and
visions to secure adequate
funding for our public schools
and higher education
institutions I'm especially as
we heard you will have a
positive impact not only for our
students at the I had University
but also for communities so this
is a you know a great step.
A bill that will favor our
business community Los crucis.
We we agree with all the
comments in favor and and I as a
voice in support that we
respectfully request that you
consider this a bill and vote in
favor of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Right not seeing anybody else so
go to come back to committee
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam at for bringing this bill
forward I just wanted to make
the point it really is a
regional bill Los crucis hosts
concerts that affect dimming in
our businesses and and should
those concerts moved to el Paso
where we also go for
entertainment we go to dinner
and Phillip with gas and do
other things than in Texas
instead of in Los crucis so it
is of a five year extension of
the sense that I would like to
see the sun setting part
completely go away and have this
as a permanent exemption but I'm
definitely stand in support of
of that of extending that sunset
so thank you madam web and thank
you Mr chair.
Great thank you next miles
Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you are Representative I
was bringing this bill forward
this bill is I have a question
Mr chairman maybe just a comment
this bill is really important
and I think of the extension of
the some of this exemption is
budget so doing in accounting
very very much and just as I see
it as an overall part of the
economic prosperity of the of
the of the region and so I I I
fully support this bill thank
you Mr.
Great thank you representative
Representative chapel.
Mr chairman and chasing my on
mute but around the screen with
think I'll just deal with it
this way.
Mr chairman thank you you know
first time I lived in that area
with school against and I can
tell you that Las Cruces el Paso
chaparral at the is in both
Texas and New Mexico these are
basically one community and if
if you can cross the state line
down there and and be exempt
from taxes with leaves in New
Mexico folks at a great
disadvantage I think it's a good
idea to extend this exemption
and are fully supported.
You representative
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr chair I think we're
all in the same thing at this
point so in my simple mind as to
what these these dollars a
trickle down to Texas for New
Mexico and I I I assume we all
pay for New Mexico so thank you
Mr chair.
Great thank you Representative
Baca please thank you Mr chair I
gotta say is a proud global
alumni of it's hard to find a
Mexico state I get friends but I
will say this but I do think
this is a great job a great bill
I do us support this bill and I
make a motion for due process.
Representative Hawker I will put
it out there if anybody else has
I see a second by Representative
Chatfield the bales have
questions or comments from the
panel.
The only the only thing that I
would mention Representative
before I entertain that motion
is that I think we
Representative Lane mentioned
you know restore New Mexico over
Texas in this effort
I just.
I find myself
as we go into like financial
situations here we have a tax
instances where we as the
state's kind of played this game
against one another in this race
to try to drop business or in
this case events to our local
area in that we're in this
competition between each other
for dollars when there could be
a potential hit to revenue that
comes into the state so I think
it's that one of the
tough decisions I think we all
make as as legislators at the
state level in order to to make
these sorts of decisions and it
certainly it's something that I
hate that I very much struggle
with because I I I totally
understand the you know the
potential for for big draws ten
the revenue that it may bring
but also continually carving at
tax exemptions for various
things that's something that
that I think certainly we we
don't tread lightly and I don't
think any of us do but it's
certainly one of the one of the
more difficult decisions I think
we make as legislators when
we're competing state to state
and that could that could be
said I think for a lot like
Representative Baca mentioned as
that story UNM alum right
Albuquerque's kind of central
within the state I think in
parts of the northern New Mexico
could make always make the case
about Colorado what Colorado's
doing on to the west tends to be
Arizona on to the south intends
to be what South Main and east
what Texas is doing and we're
kind of in this competition
against one another which again
makes it makes it all the more
difficult Representative
Chatfield you had your hand up
again did you just put it down
chairman I I was just trying to
lower my hand I am unabashedly
in favor of New Mexico.
All right excellent I appreciate
your reiterating that so we did
have a due passed motion
Now I'm forgetting who had all
Representative Baca I think the
second was Representative
Chatfield so madam secretary if
you call the roll on to do
passed motion on house bill
thirty nine please.
Representative.
Hello yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Yes Representative Figueroa.
Yes okay.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Yes I'm sorry.
Yes.
Got it and that the motion
passes twelve to.
All right so you have been to
pass on house bill thirty nine
Madam what thank you all so much
thank you Mr chair thank you for
reading.
All right so we will move on
house bill fifty seven so the
two thousand twenty three
transportation distribution
calculations members should have
received a a an amendment kind
of the late yesterday we're
gonna roll that over to make
sure everything's good and walls
will schedule that for Friday
but again house bill fifty seven
the transportation distribution
calculation on members will
remember it it's practically the
same except for the amendment
from the transportation hold
harmless that we had all of last
year but will hold that until.
Friday again okay so we'll hear
that on Friday all right so with
that we'll move to house bill
one nineteen
I just certain school
distributions
this should also sound familiar
but madam vice chair you would
please school.
And this which positions here.
Mr chair I need to be made at co
host.
Worry.
Mr chair I'm not saying an FIR
in the Here file.
I'll be putting that in there to
this I can't I didn't do it
because.
Our insurance.
If they are on the left.
Website as well.
Now.
Okay thank you very.
Mr chair when you.
Mr chair Romero when you're
ready please start.
Mr chairman you are muted.
At the meeting my spacebar and I
changed screen sorry about that
good morning everybody it's nice
to be in front of you in a
different capacity presenting
first bill this session so house
bill one nineteen those of you
that are returning members from.
A few years ago I think it was
two thousand nineteen I
recognize this bill the sponsor
was Representative Chatfield
house side and Senator Stewart
on the Senate side
this state is amending our
public school capital outlay
capital improvements act this is
mostly known as SB nine funding
and it's re orienting be
calculation which would allow
for schools to increase the
amount of capital money that
they would receive particularly
Schools that
are.
Involved within the the zoning
lawsuit on as you know there's
any lawsuit is primarily related
to facility is one of the
reasons two thousand nineteen
legislature that we passed this
was to start remedying some of
those portions of the SUNY
lawsuit in terms of buildings
unfortunately we had a special
session that year where there
was sending involved in their
risk here that that the money
wouldn't exist in order to carry
this out at the time
fortunately I think the the
tables have turned and and there
should be plenty of money in
order to carry this out in both
are committee analysis to
believe it's the committee
analysis if not legislative
education study committee
fiscal impact and it's broken
down by school district to see
individual schools perhaps in
your district around the state
that would benefit from these as
P. line
Changes so
with that Mr Simon did you have
any additional comments.
About the bill.
No Mr chairman I'll just stand
for questions.
Excellent.
Thank you so will stand for
questions madam chair thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman we will now take
audience input I'm going to ask
for people who oppose the bill
to raise their hands and then I
will ask for people who support
the bill.
I'm to speak so if you were in
opposition to the bill.
Can you please raise your hand
we.
I see we also have somebody in
the committee room would like to
speak.
Are they in opposition or
support.
I do not know.
Can you check.
Good morning they are in support
of the bill okay I don't see
anybody in opposition so if you
were in support of the bill
please raise your hand.
I want to remind everybody that
we have a two minute.
Limit.
And we will start with the
person in the committee room
please identify yourself and
then you have two minutes.
New Mexico school
superintendents and the college
of education leaders as the
chairman indicated this is a
bill from the past one we
supported Benham one with now
unlike often the decisions you
make as legislators there are no
losers in this bill.
The good news is that it costs
more money on to the state
backed for public schools using
the process that's been in place
for quite a while in fact it
does respond as he has in the
lawsuit more more purposefully
it provides more.
Bility for all districts to
maintain our buildings and also
to do with the state capital
outlay with design within the
Senate bill money criteria we
strongly urge your approval this
bill let's move this along to
get along thank you.
Thank you Mr rounds our next
speaker will be lonely maybe
Ortiz.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the Education
Committee all really more TV's
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico school board association
and like the partner of the
superintendents association the
New Mexico school board
association has continued
funding funding supporting
funding for schools and
specifically that Bundy that
increases the capital outlay as
provided in house bill one
nineteen the additional
allotment that is outlined in
that bill that will be
distributed to all school
districts we believe will allow
school districts to be more self
sufficient that fifty four
percent increase in the funds in
the two mill levy match will
also provide districts with a
much much needed larger match
from the state of additional
value in house bill one ninety
nine team we believe is the fact
that there is a lack of
administrative requirements in
terms of making districts
applied for or compete to
receive the funds the money will
be out regard to and calculated
and sent out to the districts we
appreciate this legislation we
thank the sponsor for
introducing it again and we ask
you to
pass it forward and give it
favorable consideration thank
you so much thank you we make
our next speaker is Matt hall.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Matt Paul I'm the executive
director of public charter
schools of New Mexico I'm here
to further attests that there
are no losers in this bill
facility costs and maintenance
costs like everything else are
are continuing to increase and I
think this bill will really help
charter schools I'm in addition
to our traditional public school
partners maintain that burden
within funds that are directed
towards facilities rather than
using SCG dollars those
operational dollars that are
meant for the classroom so we
appreciate the current Sanchez
and passed Sanchez everyone
who's worked on this bill and
stranded strongly in support
thank you.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is from NEA New
Mexico.
Are you there.
Any in New Mexico.
Okay.
You're on okay thank you very
much the the you know examples
that might.
Chair and members of the
committee speaks yagna is
government relations director
for a need to Mexico.
More members we support this
bill as we struggle with another
nasty wave of the COVID virus in
because it makes perfect common
sense to make sure we continue
to deliver the adequate funding
our public schools and students.
Meetings and desert during these
very challenging times.
It goes without saying that we
agree with the comments in
support of H. B. one nineteen
and thank the sponsor for
bringing this critical bill
forward we believe he does very
well first how important this
bill is our students we
respectfully request that you
consider voting in favor of this
bill thank you.
Thank you Steve.
I don't see any more people
wishing to speak from the
audience so with that we'll go
to our channel with
Representative Chatfield being
first to speak.
Thank you madam chair I'm sure
there was Senator one minute ago
I did the sponsor this bill last
year I still support this year I
felt it was for program for Mr
Chairman to to carry the bill
but it's a good bill it's for
schools that already have an
existing mill levy increases yes
the line distribution to those
schools it does not raise taxes
and I think it's a winds are
within within for everybody
concerned thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield are there any other
representatives who wish to
speak or have questions
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative all.
Past Chatfield and current
Representative chair role metal
you know I sat on the public
school capital outlay committee
of from the very beginning of my
our ten year.
And through very very long time
during the the pre twenty twenty
or.
Whenever we started to
experience
Revenue additional revenue and I
heard story after story after
story about the inequities
around our state and I think
that what we but our hands are
tied because we have very little
the deal with and so now is the
new and you don and you day and
we now we're in a position to
bring our funding formulas as
well as all of our efforts in
addressing our historical
inequities back into the arena
of trying to
raise those inequities and
address
Funding that is now not only
meant Mr chair thanks equities
in the past to ensure that we
have a steady stream of
hi and Revenue that will take us
well into the future so I I'm
thankful that you practice for
the game and I appreciate your
efforts thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Any more questions or comments.
Mr chair do you want to make any
closing comments before we
harbor a motion.
Madam chair I think it's been
said pretty well by us and those
in the audience Representative
Chatfield Representative Roybal
Caballero on.
Representative Sweetser.
Madam chair I move a do pass.
We have.
Motion by Representative
Sweetser and seconded by
Representative Roybal Caballero
is there anybody opposed to the
motion.
I see no opposition to the
motion Mr chair you have a it
was a do pass thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Then I guess we'll.
We orient ourselves the house
memorial twenty one Solich you
reorient yourself
Representative Garrett madam
vice chair
and Representative Baca so
whenever you're ready House
memorial twenty one.
Thank you Mr chair thank you I
committee house memorial twenty
one it's called develop a plan
for school leaders and request
the LFC in collaboration with
the higher education department
the public education department
and the office of educational
accountability the department of
finance and administration to
develop a comprehensive plan to
enhance the recruitment the
preparation the license and the
license need training induction
and mentoring the professional
development the valuation school
leaders in our state so every
aspect of what it means to be
calm and maintain yourself rate
yourself as a principal it came
out of conversations and
collaborations among leaders
from those departments
university education and
educational leadership program
leaders yes I'm LFC members
elected and appointed officials
at every level you leadership
business leaders which I think
is very important a nonprofit
nonprofit foundations and
practicing administrators in
various venues sometimes
conferences sometimes for
example chamber of commerce
events over the last couple
years so this memorial it really
reflects those concerns and
conversations I think of
everybody on this committee
knows that many people in the
audience know that act school
leadership is second only to the
actual teaching for having the
greatest effect on a student's
constitutional human rights
social social emotional well
being and academic progress in
obtaining a quality and
sufficient education.
Principles are the foundational
aspect of improving education
New Mexico and I would say in
addition to addressing the needs
of our students there are.
Point.
Success key to teachers and all
the people that staff at school
as well as how families feel
treated.
it's in a row it's a role with
the enormous challenging and
constantly expect expanding
duties and expectations from the
public principles need that
support training and on going
development so that turnovers
don't occur so the principals
themselves emotional well being
and confidence in what they're
doing can increase also key
point is our principal workforce
has to reflect the diversity of
our New Mexico population the
last comprehensive study was
done in two thousand and eight
there's been meetings over the
last decade to look at this.
But I'm.
Over time we've had alternative
programs developed in addition
to the traditional university
based programs but at this time
what this memorial saying we
really need a comprehensive
approach with the rigorous
review for all of our programs
so with that
I will invite transponders and
the of our good to add a few
words.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Garrett's well as
a school administrator of
eighteen years I do have
extensive experience both at the
local school level the district
level at the state and national
level through my different
associations that are I work
with in a medically waited with.
And this is a Representative
Garrett said okay second only to
to to teachers we're we need
effective and well prepared
teachers never classrooms those
are the grant of.
Grassroots those are working
closely with students we needed
to.
There's been a lot of study
there's been a lot of looking
at.
Teacher preparation programs
but just like with the said the
current research resource from
Mars auto says leadership also
matters just like the just like
you can have a a tall to the
team if you have a you know we
may have all the talent in the
world without that effective
coach that harnesses and I was
able to find both the coaching
the feedback and support for
these teachers or the team they
don't is there not a successful
so we're talking about the role
of it a school administrator
it's not just you know to handle
the administrative parts fit but
they do act as a as rules to
coach to support these features
provide good feedback for the
purposes of improvement.
And so a lot of the research is
talking about this as and again
it's more it's just as
difficult.
To provide receiving more
difficult to find effective
school leaders as it is teachers
we have a recruitment issue we
have a retention issue think
quite honestly so many
administrators are coming to the
ministration they leave for
various reasons but many of them
are
overwhelmed by the
responsibilities and so I do not
want to impose further
responsibilities on them but I
do think that we need to take a
close look at is.
What.
but what supporters or trainings
can be provided can we be study
and if there's any way that we
can better prepared school
leaders.
It will eventually roll down to
the classroom and impacted
students by having an effective
teacher in the classroom so
I do thank you Mr chair and
representative of your sheet.
Mr chair there is one small
amendment that needs to be made.
Is it appropriate to present
now.
We will listen to the amendment
but I cannot guarantee anything
as.
The daily.
I know this this ammendment
submitted previously.
It was to to to to one point
one.
It's it's just an acronym was
incorrectly spelled out.
Okay let me see.
I I believe Linda sent out to
everybody.
It's it's Mr chair
representative there isn't
someone that's referencing and
school board association.
Yes okay okay those the New
Mexico school superintendents
association okay.
Yeah.
I I do not see it in our share
file I don't know if other
members were having an issue.
Right.
It was time okay excellent and
that's my fault
If I give members a moment to
search their their email if you
wish to pull it up.
Or a test when the mall each
upload it to our share file.
Mr chair and is also referenced
in our Ezzell L. E. S. C.
analysis so folks could at least
see the text of it there
excellent it's.
Excuse in their.
Yeah it's it's page seven lines
eight and nine it was and I'm
just as.
Eight and the national
monitoring study of student
achievement occurs in New
Zealand.
So it should read New Mexico
school superintendents
association.
It's I'll now as well excellent
excellent I just want to make
sure that we have the two oh two
number it's exactly in line with
what we're doing make sure
everything's great our committee
analyst Rachel is that what
you're gonna say.
Excellent thank you to all right
so can I have a motion on
discussing the amendment.
Well a second.
Right thank you so we're on
discussion of the amendment I
think Representative Garrett.
Preempted that with the
discussion just changing your
name Marasco no worries here
that that's awesome.
So we got it down so entertain
another motion to adopt the
amendment if there is no
discussion.
In our it will move adoption of
the amendment Representative
Roybal Caballero second by
Representative Figueroa any
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment.
Seeing none you have an amended
bill Representative Garrett.
Awesome thank you.
With that I stand for questions.
So we'll go to the audience
thank you all House memorial
twenty one there those that are
in support of house memorial.
Right hand.
All right so you have a two
minutes we'll go to.
Sherri.
Good morning you have a two
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Dr Sheri
Williams I'm an associate
professor emerita retired so
long and career focused on the
preparation and development of
strong equitable and ethical
school leaders I sanded very
strong support of the memorials
request to study and adapt the
lessons learned from high
quality national and
International Studies like the
Marzano studies referenced by
Representative Baca
all of these studies of point to
the improvement of effectiveness
of school leaders
as really dependent on skilled
and knowledgeable leaders who
are prepared to address all of
those critical issues in school
leadership and specifically the
diff deficiencies are identified
in the martinis of Martinez
Yazzie readiness assessment and
to fully comply with all the
statutes that are enacted in the
state's Hispanic Indian black in
bilingual multicultural acts
it's clear that diverse and well
prepared school leaders are
urgently needed to serve and
ever expanding portfolio student
and community needs and to
cement a brighter future for New
Mexico's children families who
have for too long been left for
this from justice and
opportunity thank you for
consideration and do pass on
house memorial twenty one.
Right thank you doctor Williams.
All right so we'll go to Russ.
Good morning rescue of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning everybody in the
thank you Mr chair
representative Mr members of the
committee my name is Dr Russ
Romans a lecturer in the
educational leadership program
at the university of New Mexico.
Speaking on behalf of house
memorial twenty ones
comprehensive plan for school
leader recruitment and retention
in New Mexico.
Memorial draws attention to the
need for a coordinated plan
approach to the recruitment.
Operation internship licensure
and evaluation of our school
principals with a comprehensive
state plan for addressing school
leadership investments in
education funding Representative
a piecemeal approach.
The complex demands of preparing
and supporting quality
educational leadership in New
Mexico's urban rural and tribal
schools.
House memorial twenty one
recognizes the need to invest in
pre service preparation and full
time paid internships for
aspiring school administrators
these investments are urgently
needed to offset the costs of
finding and compensating
substitutes for principle in
terms especially in our rural
and tribal areas where the need
for well prepared principles is
the highest thank you for your
consideration and your
recommendation for a pass on
house memorial twenty one thank
you.
Thank you doctor Roman we'll go
to any in New Mexico I think
it's the.
Good morning Mr.
Members of the committee yes the
state government relations
director bring a New Mexico
what members we support this
memorial because it is on one
very important point the bill
meet the memorial seeks to
create educational leaders and
not merely educational
administrators.
And because of the current
educator shortage prices we need
educational leaders that will
lead and motivate parents
teachers staff in our
communities.
Not only you Preciado
quantitative data but also
place importance on quality.
Please type of data from
incentive for just part of the
decision making process.
So the demonstrate respect for
teachers and staff and we know
that this will help riteaid
educators.
Sponsored program for this
memorial and ask for your
support thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
Make sure term memory is faulty
me but is there anybody in the
audience that is not position
house memorial.
Seeing none will come to
committees so first on my list
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward my only question is on
the bottom of page seven it says
be it further resolved
legislation legislative
education study committee will
be requested to provide a report
of about three dozen State to
whom the report will be provided
I wondered to whom the report
will be provided thank you Mr
chair.
Great question Representative
Sweetser
I think that needs to be added
there's an assumption that it
would be provided to all the
people listed in the study and
report would be given to all the
people listed as to who should
get the memorial it doesn't
explicitly say that so that
needs to be added.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr chairman my my five
years now going on six year
those assumptions are what I
always get me in trouble so I
thought I better ask thank you
Mr.
Thank you Representative
Representative doubt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you sponsors
You know one of the things that
stuck out to me during this
interim and last interim and
even the interim before was
superintendents school
administrators finance directors
principals teachers coming to
our interim committees and
talking about how much time
they're spending filling out
reports and doing short term
long term goals in writing all
these documents and reporting
them to us we mandated them and
may not even right.
I believe if you remember Mr
Chairman Representative Garrett
that at one point we heard a
presentation the interim
committee that are
administrators.
Certain administrators are
spending sixteen hundred hours
filling out forms that we
created for them and two
thousand eighty work hours in a
year if you're working forty
hours a week and so I mean we're
talking in the bill throughout
the documents
short term they have to have a
put comprehensive plans short
term long term goals action
steps Harding address
deficiencies identified in the
readiness assessment expand on
existing plans it and and
Recommendations developed by the
school principal valuations
tactical.
In addition through their
throughout this document I mean
I realize it's just a memorial
but they've made it really
really clear and I didn't hear
the school board association
fourth superintendents
association they were silent on
the deposed but they weren't
there supporting it and I'm I'm
reading through this.
And it
I I I I have concerns that we're
creating more work and even even
sense all I'm hearing from
teachers that they are now
filling out more forms that are
authentic assessment something
that we put in place.
Rather than at it taking more
time for the new student
assessments now and so I I do
have a concern about supporting
something that one gives PED the
authority to put the.
We're creating a framework
around formula E. would be
deciding what local school
districts and so I I I do have
concern right now maybe you can
convince being we can before but
I do have concerns about the
memorial even as memorial thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dow the memorial
is to study the role of the
prince of all it's not to give
more work to principles it's to
look at how we prepare them to
do everything so I I don't think
this memorial puts more work on
it and administrative stable I
think in studying what are
principal does needs to do it
might actually streamline that
and eight removing some of those
other things I'm so I I
understand what you're saying
and that's really a vital thing
I know some charter schools have
gone to a model where there's a
principal and there's
different they call they'll call
it executive director who takes
care of all that stuff well the
principal does more of the
leadership so I think in the
memorial is to really much at
training the principal it's the
short term and long term
objectives are for the principal
training to be reviewed by the
school you know the educational
leadership programs traditional
and nontraditional it's not to
put more work on our principles
to table.
I hope that answers your
question thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Garrett it does answer my
question and you know I any
especially in the last couple of
sessions we talk about well
maybe just maybe this will need
it is not quite ready for prime
time maybe we need to make some
changes you know we'll listen to
the feedback will make
amendments and yet oftentimes
amendments don't happen even
when you know we know that there
could be barriers that there
could be problems I just you
know I'm I'm.
I'm just not sold yet I just
wanted you to have some contacts
as to where I'm at on this
there's other language in the
bill that also presents a
concern and it just it just
seems like that that we have
qualified superintendents and we
qualify principles we have
qualified administrators we have
locally elected school board
members and these are things
that they can dress locally
there's nothing prohibiting them
from doing this now and so you
know that's that's where my
hesitation is thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr Chairman representative I
think this is a comprehensive
statewide situation people may
go to U. N. M. nay and up and
down maybe people may go to
highlands and I'll end up in
Hobbs so it's not something that
can be done simply because we're
talking about training
preparation and on going
professional development it it
includes local district but it
transcends that so this is a
comprehensive look at revisiting
it involves that Martinez Yazzie
suited it involves different
stakeholders I know that my
local chamber of commerce has
discussed this.
Some of the people that talked
about it from UNM they have met
with the chamber of commerce
also I want to mention that the
Senate Education Committee
started me and I got a number of
checks from people that
supported it that are longer
with this because they went to
the Senate education so just a
heads up for people.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Dow.
It was your question thank you
Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Garrett for for
bringing this for I think this
is really important because we
have to what
always look at the at
professional development how we
compare ourselves not only as
individuals but as professionals
as well one of the things that I
would like to mention is.
Maybe we can consider or or
speak with the the with the
school districts the
superintendents regarding the.
The three schools that that
that are that were recognized as
Blue Ribbon schools.
And I would like to it I mention
that because I would like to
know what those principles are
doing as far as leaders of their
school sites are it too soon to
bring to bring that recognized
on to their schools and so I
think that would be something
that's really important that we
you know we have three school
principals who were recognized
this was recognizes the economic
schools and so obviously they're
doing something right they're
doing something that includes
the parents the teachers and and
the school community as a whole
and I feel that if we include
these individuals in that
process as well and and they can
talk to us and tell us what
their experience out what their
experiences are what works for
them I think they are having
their voice in this would also
be very important so I just
wanted to make that point other
than that you know I think the
so this so this study is is a
good study and I think you know
there's a lot of talent out
there and we need to find out
what's working at the local
schools of the local school
districts in order for us
incorporated like dimensions are
Representative Garrett
statewide in a comprehensive
sense so that's all I have thank
you Mr.
Great thank you representative
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman you know I
read through this several times
and I think in in a way it could
set up wonderful framework for
training future leaders but it
could also serve as a filter as
selecting who makes it to the
top and I really appreciate what
Representative Lara had to say
about talking with some of the
superintendents at the Blue
Ribbon schools to see what's
working in in the throughout
this document I see some things
that go a little bit the other
way and it for for example on
page four it says that by
implementing recommendations
from natural convening such as
the Education Commission of
state and the Wallace foundation
who's the educational community
commissioner states who the
Wallace foundation I don't know
I know who the superintendents
are there are at least one of
them that had a Blue Ribbon
school last year and and that's
somebody I would be interested
in hearing what they have to say
and how we can improve our
school leadership I'm I'm a
little concerned that this thing
is not ready for prime time I'm
all for training I'm all for.
Helping develop leaders school
leaders but have some
reservations about this thank
you.
Mr chairman I could comment on
Representative Chatfield
comments.
Mr chairman and Representative
jacket you make a good point I
this.
This doesn't say those have to
be followed those are just
national things where they took
best practices and then many of
those best practices team from
Blue Ribbon schools around the
country so it's not saying
that's what we have to do it's
in the the toolbox of best
practices those are things that
could be considered I'm.
If you have when you have the
study group they're obviously
well not obviously but but part
of what they would study would
be the best practices right here
in our own state because we do
have blue referenced schools
where traditional public schools
and charter schools that have
done some very successful things
that need to be incorporated and
what we do so again those are
just examples of some of the
national things in twenty
seventeen we had deans of
colleges of education right here
in New Mexico come up with ideas
so we're incorporating the best
of our state and input from
other studies of effective
practices thank you for those
comments Representative
Chatfield.
Great thank you Representative
so we'll go to representative
Cadena.
Thank you Mr chair and
You know principles matter
I hate when I worked as CEO The
Little foundation you work with
thirteen rural school districts
in the north not overall Santa
Fe to.
Los Alamos I'm what we found in
in working with school districts
and we work closely with school
board school districts
superintendents and and we
implemented programs studies
how people in this comprehensive
study of how people were
improving and and what I want to
tell you is that principal
leadership is probably the most
important thing we saw and I
just wanna tell a short story
about the sewing she was a
principal at one of that really
poorest performing schools in
Santa Fe she came in.
it was very poor us student
population damage report hi
immigrant population there are
fifty kids waiting in the
principles line every day first
thing she did was started with
classroom management she took
her best to to teachers and
classroom management they put
together a plan for the school
they developed rules the
teachers did not for their own
school only these two gifted
teachers and classroom
management they had a set of
policies for classroom
management that was the same in
every classroom in the school
this lines went down to about
two or three kids in the in the
principles line they found out
that with the high immigrant
population nobody really
understood what it D. chair of
PTO was up they did something
and they wanted to involve
parents and and so these the
teachers got together sent with
the principal that's still a
family let's not and and let's
have a place where teachers can
talk positively about what their
kids are doing in school so they
did that so from getting like
six parents to come to a PTA
meeting they had about five
hundred people show up at
ammonite once much in those
classrooms with the kids and the
teacher would develop something
that they wanted to show their
parents which is really exciting
like maybe as simple as how they
would go check out a book School
Library what I'm saying is this
principle turned around that
school about three years to be
one of the highest performing
schools in Santa Fe
the more we can do to help
principal stake on really big
challenges.
Especially in our state.
With with with this much poverty
as we have in our state it's not
that it's not that these kids
aren't smart and these teachers
expect it's really how did you
how do you develop a school
system that's really gonna work
jester students and their
parents and and good principals
know how to cultivate leadership
you know how to train teachers
they bring the teachers who are
really struggling into kind of a
shared study system with the
with another teacher who's doing
everything right if you don't
have principles that know how to
do that and and this was working
seventeen years looking at lots
of different schools lots of
different superintendents and we
have enormous turnover our
biggest problem is turnover we
we implemented that assigned
secret program we thought after
three years after he trained
everybody you know we'd be done
with the training guess what
after three years we had a fifty
percent turnover of
superintendents teachers
principals and classroom sized
classroom changes so it is a
very volatile workforce so we
need to train principles how to
manage that and I I guess I just
said I don't have a lot of
questions I just think anything
we can do to strengthen
principal leadership is is
something we have to look at
closely in the state and I agree
with with representatives
Chatfield in doubt I I I don't
want to put a bunch of more
regulations on that site I don't
think this is what it's doing I
think it's really a chance to
look at best practices and and
help train these new principles
and that's a big it goes from
those for managing the classroom
to managing you know
Very independent smart adults
and that is a hard manage jobs
all in with that Mr chair and
Jack and representative and I
thank you for bringing this
legislation forward thank you.
Representative Trujillo please.
Thank you Mr chair.
You supported this bill as well
I read and re read the bill it
is not as
negative I think as as people
are are assuming I think it is
an opportunity for
Training for for supervisors I
think it it based on what I read
it doesn't give them any extra
work but what it does is it it
it helps people interact with
each other in a better in a
better way teachers need good
leaders I mean the whole I mean
there's a ton of scientific
information that states that if
you have if you teach in the
school with the leader is aware
and educated and supports their
staff.
They they will be successful and
to me this is a perfect
opportunity to move this forward
I don't think that it is.
Going to inhibit
or prohibit anyone from from
Getting outside supports or
anything it's simply pre
provides a venue for everyone to
interact positively teachers
really need good guidance and do
not need to know that they have
the support to their of the
leadership and providing a venue
of which they can collaborate
work together is a perfect
opportunity I support this bill
Mr chair.
Representative Roybal Correa.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative I can get
that I agree with all the
comments that were made by my
colleagues in support of this
piece of legislation just on one
note in the school of public
administration we emphasize
strongly across the board
whether you're an educator
professional public
administrator whatever
profession require first you we
stress leadership starts at the
top leadership is incredibly
important providing
I have a guiding principle
everything curves from the top
down the leadership is not
Appropriate for
we enhanced to me.
Hello past the possible.
And then we begin to see and
feel the breakdowns and in the
in the channels of
administration and so it's
incredibly important Mr chair
for us to always pursue your
ways in which to enhance
training and for our principles
in this case and offer the
broadest
One of the most comprehensive
but but most responsive way of
correcting our what we have seen
as being historically on.
I'm fortunate in terms of how
our students.
And administrators and teachers
have not been as properly
prepared to handle culturally
and language diverse populations
in our state and so it's really
important and leadership always
starts at and it had to be
transformative in all of our
coaches and I'm hoping and look
forward to this memorial passing
so that we can definitely with
all the parties involved and
have of what we've been given as
a charge to the hundred are
Martinez case on have them
implement the strongest possible
sustainable for the long term
leadership development thank you
for bringing this legislation
forward Representative thank
you.
Thank you Representative I'm so
I did want to address the issue
issues if we could
representative on with this is
that.
In any memorial we have the
where as portions of it and
that's basically things that
have been done are already there
so for me when I read these
memorials it's going to be it
resolved portion that I think is
most consequence because that's
where the emphasis that's where
the work is going to be done but
when we look at the be it
resolved I think was was
referenced
that.
We're looking at these very
absurd legislative education
study committee develop the land
the comprehensive plan and in
order for for had for
school leadership.
So I guess my question here
Representative is that the
legislative education study
committee that is going to be.
Developing this comprehensive
plan.
Yes my understanding is that
they will and I know that
Dr Roman center Dr Williams and
Dr Stein house of talked about
it.
with those departments but yet
the L. U. C. based on this would
develop a plan about how to go
about it including these
stakeholders.
Great thank you thank you for
that Representative so and then
in the second.
Be it further resolved the
comprehensive plan so we
established and we just see is
going to carry out the
comprehensive plan.
The requested to include so we
the legislature requesting short
and long term goals action steps
dot dot dot so that's incumbent
upon the legislative education
study committee is that correct.
Well yes the Legislative except
the plan they can bring together
stakeholders to do this and
they're responsible for making
sure that it happens I will add
that some of our philanthropic
foundations have expressed
interest in supporting this
work.
Thank you for that
Representative and and I'm I'm
using this to make the point
that you for bringing people
together I think it's it's
pretty clear in the be a result
portion that this work is going
to fall upon the legislative
education study committee in our
interim to carry this out and I
don't know and I don't see a
burden upon school
administration school districts
to provide additional resources
additional all materials are
provided additional work in
order to carry this work out
So it's a Representative Dow you
have your hand up as I'm talking
did you wish to interject.
Yes Mister chair if you'll give
me the opportunity please
please.
I was curious Mr Chairman
representative when you said
there are other nonprofit groups
that were interested in helping
could you tell us to those
nonprofit groups are.
I was told all of them I
understand the Thornburg
foundation was interested and
supporting it and and others but
that's the only one that was
named to me.
Okay thank you.
Okay.
Thank you for that club with
clarification Representative
Dow.
So so I mean it seems to me that
that the bulk of this work in in
in the body that that could say
we're adding to the plate of so
to speak would be the
legislative education study
committee in looking at this
plan and not all school
administration and school
districts to carry out on to be
a result portions of this bill
and that's the way that I that
I'm really
Seeing that since it'll be the
legislative education study
committee a lot of us are as
voting members added as by three
members in order to take up so I
I I I think we're all in
agreement that we do need a
comprehensive plan in order to
study our administration and I
think that that we're just
getting
we're we're losing sight of
where the burden of that work
will be it'll be upon us as the
Legislature us more capacity of
legislative education study
committee and certainly our our
wonderful staff at LAFC to carry
out this work on that we all the
super super important and and I
think that it's very warranted
for all the reasons that that
members have have mentioned one
the one thing that I would like
to flag that that certainly is
concerned for me in the
immediate even before studying
requests because we have looked
at this in the legislative
education study committee
certainly as we move forward
into into budget talks is the
issue of compaction.
Because we know how important
are school administration is
right along with our educators
and support staff
as within the legislative
education study committee
we had proposed and will hear
this on Friday and make
advancement about it I'm forty
nine million dollars
in addition to the increase in
pay for educators and
administrators on to for
districts in order to deal with
the compaction issue because
what I'm hearing from school
districts the is wall we're
increasing teacher principal pay
all be added responsibilities
that members have talked about
that administrative just take up
their pay especially in
elementary and middle schools is
going to be the same or very
comparable to.
Educators pay and that's the
sort of compaction that when
somebody who displays talent for
becoming an administrator for
taking up those responsibilities
for working with school staff
on for working with
students on disciplinary filling
out paperwork and.
It'll be a tough decision to
make where they could stay in
the classroom students maybe
have less of a workload and get
paid the same or very comparable
amounts as a teacher as opposed
to going to administration and I
think that's something that is
super super important my
understanding is is that even
the ten million dollars that LFC
have proposed for addressing
those compaction issues may not
be there but now we just see we
had put in forty nine million in
order to try to give districts
that ability that if they're
seeing compaction and it's
detrimental to
there educators and and there
there it administrative of staff
in order to increase
administrative pay to compensate
them for that added work that
would be incurred so I think
that's something in the
immediate that we L. E. S. C.
have sought to address and I
hope that it's something that we
continue to go forward with as
we move forward in these in
these budgetary talks but that's
something that would address
certainly what this house
memorial is seeking to address
in making sure that you know
nobody you I I think it's a it's
a tough thing to to talk about
and I appreciate that you all
are are are are brave enough to
be talking about this issue with
administrators because we on the
the educator size of course
always talk about going to the
dark side of administration on
the right but it's all very
necessary we're talking about
the educational eco system right
because as I mentioned one of
the number one reasons why
educators prepare school is
because of the leadership at the
school and we want to make sure
that our educators are well
prepared and support staff is
well prepared and our our it
administrative is are well
prepared and in this case well
compensated as well so I.
See this as certainly something
to add to the plate of L. E. S.
C. but something that certainly
welcome and certainly something
that that we've tried to deal
with nine that's comprehensive
local way that you're proposing
here well but certainly having
that as part of our educational
system that we have
so I applaud that so thank you
Representative Garrett thank you
Representative talk about thank
you Representative Lara for
bringing this forward
so with that I don't have
anybody else on this but I would
entertain a motion.
We.
Do it to pass on this piece of
legislation and all right so
thank you so we have a due pass
I do and it.
But I'm getting there thank you
on house memorial twenty one as
amended by Representative
Trujillo a second by
Representative Representative
Dow.
there was a okay Senator
Representative sorry mixing all
over I I thought I have taken it
but that's okay thank okay sorry
about that will give it to
Representative via an act when I
clarified her and go up sorry
about that Representative cover
every other local coming and
I'll get you next time I'm so
madam secretary call the roll on
a do pass rusher for House
memorial twenty one is meant.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield no.
Representative Dow now.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Herrerra.
Yes.
Representative Eli no.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative you yes.
Yes yes.
Yes.
Nine two three.
All right by a vote of nine to
three you have the need to pass
on the house memorial twenty one
as amended great thank you
committee if I think that was it
that'll be it for today like I
mentioned we roll over house
bill fifty seven will hear that
on Friday on please check with
on the golden wrong on Friday we
are going to be meeting in the
house chamber here's something
that may be welcome to you all
at eight thirty so we will be
meeting in the beginning at
eight thirty add in the house
chamber we're going to be joined
by Senate education each year we
have on budget presentations by
it will have the public
education department will have
the legislative education study
committee and will have the
legislative finance as well to
join us and present the various
budget report proposals as it
relates to Education so we'll
have about an hour we as members
of the house education may stay
till about ten pending on
questions I do know the Senate
has to go back they're going to
consider some some bills at nine
thirty on but will be back in
our zoom room at ten o'clock to
consider a few bills after that
session
because we have to give up that
the house chamber so that they
can set up for a floor session
but will come back into soon
after that will take about a ten
minute recess after we hear from
the the educational budgets and
will consider a couple of bills
one of them being the
transportation harmless
with that please technical not
all certainly make an
announcement for all the bills
in that meeting Representative
Roybal Correa thank you Mr chair
I have a question so it will be
joined on the for however will
it be operate B. as soon as
well.
Representative about having a
test thank you very much I
appreciate.
All right so make sure to get
those details updated and
clarified for members certainly
if you have any questions please
right reach out to me or staff.
Without any further do.
Have a nice rest of your day.
Well recessed on Friday eight
thirty everybody house chambers.
Take care.
The meat yes.
I
remember setting up what I'm.
You remember.
