Representative Lane.
Here.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lara.
Representative Dan.
Representative Lente.
Representative Madrid care.
Representative are bokoblins.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Spencer here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo care.
Vice chair Gerrans here.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum all
right it's good to see you all
again I hope you all are doing
well so we are back on house
bill two twelve so
If you all remember on Monday we
had heard from Representative
Brown we've heard from her
experts on house bill two twelve
and we ended up rolling the bill
due to finance and
Appropriations and losing
members so I thought it's just
best to complete the hearing
that we had scheduled so I had
promised Representative brown if
she could give a brief recap and
then we go to the audience and
then committees committee
members for questions all right
Representative Brown if you wish
to give a brief recap of of your
case on house bill two twelve we
would appreciate it.
Well thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee so.
this is I guess you could call
part B. of our presentation and
Mr chairman we actually were
sort we were feeling very rushed
and that one of my experts Wendy
Austin was was really not able
to finish your remarks and I'd
like her to have some time for
that and then I did have I do
have a third witness in the
queue and that's Craig Stevens
he is the co chair of the
Carlsbad higher education task
force along with Representative
John Heaton so if if the
committee will indulges I'd like
my witnesses to at least be able
to finish their remarks and then
we going to public comment but
Mr chair representative from
that'll that's that's totally in
order okay Sir thank you very
much Mr chair so just to recap
so this is the proposal it's
community driven to take the of
branch college of NMSU in
Carlsbad back to independence
status this call it started
seventy years ago as a first
community college in New Mexico
and there were a lot of
advantages to joining forces
with that I miss you some years
ago but a lot has happened since
then which makes it very clear
to the community the staff the
students and and the the faculty
that the time really is is right
now for the college to move back
into an independent status it
would still be a community
college it would be a two year
program getting people lined up
for all kinds of studies and
then for those who want to go on
they would transfer to a four
year institution
Mr chairman and members I think
I I did go over some of the
reasons for that for the desire
to separate and just let you
know that a poll of the faculty
and students seventy six point
three five percent of those
polled are in favor of this bill
so with that I'd like to
Go back when.
And let her
just maybe do a short recap and
then continue her remarks as
well thank you Mr chairman
please.
Thank you chairman Maryland
distinguished committee members
for allowing me to speak with
you once again today I would
like to go over a few of the
points that I covered on Monday
just because I think they're
very important and then some of
the points that I did not that I
wasn't able to get to and and
I'd also like to thank
Representative brown for caring
this important bill bill for
community of Carlsbad.
Again my name is Wendy Austin
and I'm the deputy city
administrator for the city of
Carlsbad I was born and raised
in Carlsbad and I know this
community very well I also have
a very strong accounting and
analytical background and I have
provided financial leadership
for more than twenty years
through collaboration with other
committee members I prepared a
detailed quote for my income
statement for an independent
college in Carlsbad and I'm
pleased to report to you an
independent college in Carlsbad
has very strong financials
their forms respectfully asking
for your support of house bill
two twelve the community of
Carlsbad deserves to have a
local college where we have
local control for the benefit of
our businesses and our local
students there is a very strong
support from our community for
this transition and I hope you
have had a chance or an
opportunity to review the
petition signatures which
continue to grow daily and the
resolutions of the letters of
support from our community the
city of Carlsbad has a three
mill levy to support the college
in Carlsbad by statute grants
colleges are required to have a
one mill levy an independent
community colleges are required
to have a to melody so not only
does Carlsbad have a three mill
levy already in place call has
very strong tax base related to
property tax because that's
three mill levy generated twelve
million dollars of revenue in
fiscal year nineteen and
fourteen million dollars of
revenue in fiscal year twenty
and chairman emeritus is very
significant because there will
be no additional cost to the
state.
Because stock Carlsbad strong
tax base again I just want to
reiterate there will be no
additional cost to the state
currently the city of Carlsbad
has an appropriation approximate
excuse me an approximate thirty
six million dollars in reserves
that would be included with the
transition this reserve can be
used for legal services and to
purchase any needed systems for
the independent college there
would be no additional cost to
the main campus during this
transition as well as this
thirty six million dollar
reserves could be used for any
costs associated with the
transition.
This thirty six million dollar
reserve belongs to this
community of Carlsbad and should
be used to pay for the education
of the students that live in our
community today you might hear
the leadership team of the main
campus promote consolidation and
centralization as a cost savings
call.
And and that is in the best
interest of Carlsbad to stay
within their system well this
cost saving method certainly
doesn't seem to translate to
cost savings for our local
college Andrew over the past two
fiscal years amount that are
grants college has paid to main
campus for branding and share
cost has increased more than
forty eight percent frankly
consolidation and centralization
of shared services is in the
best interest of the main campus
consolidation of centralization
as share service has only
increased our cost and at the
same time eliminated jobs in our
community yeah increased jobs at
the main campus our campus has
lost jobs and our campus has a
thirty six million dollar
reserve that year after year is
invested back in our community
and our students finally
businesses in our community
cannot get the support from the
main campus in evaluating and
developing vocational programs
we need to find both are
traditional and nontraditional
students with the training they
need to have meaningful
employment we have a very
dynamic economy in Carlsbad and
we're not training for these
jobs we hear story after story
about the main campus not
considering the needs of this
community this is not fair to
the taxpayers of Carlsbad and
its expansion on fair for our
local businesses and our local
students chairman Romero
Carlsbad local college should
not be forced to stay in the
system does not benefit the
community or the students that
it starts.
Consider the success of Clovis
Community College and San Juan
community college since they
became independent from NMU and
UNM respectfully Carlsbad
deserves the same opportunities.
Chairman Mao this isn't anything
against NMSU and misuse a great
college my daughter is currently
living in Los crucis and
finishing the last two semesters
part degree and she will be in
an MSU graduate and I'm very
proud of my daughter and I'm
proud that she's graduated from
an issue this is all about doing
what's best for our local
community and our local students
so again chairman Romero this
will conclude my comments and
thank you for allowing me to
speak with you once again this
morning.
Great thank you so much and
Craig you wish to make your
remarks please.
Yes Sir thank you chairman
Romero and members of the
committee I would also like to
thank Representative Brown
Representative Townsend for
carrying this bill our task
force has met every week since
the first of October we have
between thirty five and forty
members on every call at seven
AM this committee voted
unanimously to support going
independent seventy six percent
of the college faculty and staff
voted to go with it we have
submitted our preliminary
plantation the and are waiting
their approval to submit our
detailed plan with the
preliminary plan was submitted a
petition of over six hundred
signatures we now have over six
hundred fifty signatures on the
petition twenty five letters of
support from businesses and
resolutions of support from the
city of Carlsbad Carlsbad
municipal schools and the
Carlsbad department of
development.
We have met with the governor
her chief of staff and the
secretary of higher education.
You might ask why do we want our
independence we want our
independence for more control
with direction from a locally
elected board and a local
present we can offer more
competitive salaries or
practically it's staff currently
our nursing program is half
staff we should have nine people
are Garcia program we have for
our money can be brought to
Carlsbad banks internet address
for college we can do all the
things to Mexico state does for
us for less money we can offer
more degree programs.
From New Mexico state and from
other colleges.
We can effectively partner with
local industry in business or
Google more programs and
certifications.
And finally when we do go
independent stability for our
college I'm not be depended on
New Mexico state and their
leadership changes.
We ask that you pass this bill
as our journey has already
begun.
Are Canadian citizens of
Carlsbad and the surrounding
communities are committed to
making this dream a reality.
I would I would like to hear by
quality by not quality but where
phrasing what Senator Steven
bell said.
Senator Novell is from San Juan
and he commented on the
difference that becoming
independent percent more college
they were also branch of New
Mexico state and maybe take me
the credit back in the early
eighties and he basically said
that the college is the hub for
Farmington and the surrounding
communities that's what we want
to make our college that is the
reason that we seek to go in the
path with that thank you again
we appreciate your time.
Great thank you all so much
Representative Brown you all
stand for questions.
Yes Mr chairman we do stand for
questions and I believe we have
the more of Carlsbad deal Jan
way in the Q. and a few others
so if we could hear from him
yeah for sure that would be
great thank you.
Definitely we will go to public
comment and as usual on this
committee everybody is given two
minutes to address the committee
on on both sides so we will hear
from everybody Representative
Graham I hope.
We could lower hands let me give
the directions first everybody
in the attendees we will go to
attendees
And to get ready on my side
here.
But if you are here in support
of house bill two twelve support
and you wish to speak please
raise your hand.
You'll each be given two minutes
to the speaker.
And I do time everybody.
So what everybody raised their
hand who wishes to speak in
support.
Before I go okay so we'll start
off with more generally.
More good morning welcome you
have two minutes please hi
chairman Romero this is actually
when the Austin once again more
two way unfortunately couldn't
be here this morning he was
there Monday morning but he
asked me to read his comments so
I'm going to do a program please
okay thank you good morning
chairman Romero on members of
the house Education Committee my
name is don Gen Y. and I'm the
mayor of Carlsbad I strongly
support this bill and
independence for the college in
Carlsbad our community reach the
decision to percent of our
college after months of research
and study it was not an easy
decision it was only right after
speaking with current and four
former faculty staff and
students local business leaders
and other stakeholders and with
other colleges and universities
we also carefully evaluated
every financial consideration
well colleges become an
independent isn't something that
happens every year in New Mexico
we were fortunate to have a few
excellent past examples to
surface pro models in particular
San Juan college and Clovis
Community College we are only
asking for the same fair
treatment that they received.
When we met with the chief when
we met with chancellor our
reserve several months ago he
also pledged he would support
whatever decisions are made by
our community for our students
after we go has also told us he
would support that decision you
reach we know everyone here is
committed to improving
educational opportunities and
New Mexico we are prepared to
take bold actions such as this
which we believe will allow us
more opportunity to train and
diversify our workforce we have
had excellent conversations with
New Mexico tech and eastern New
Mexico university I would love
to develop partnerships M. as
well as an MSU we're also very
excited about a consortium of
colleague community colleges in
New Mexico and we look forward
to working with them well the
students are our top priority we
also want to do what's right for
the faculty and staff they have
struggled for many years to get
Los crucis to approve and handle
basic concerns in the meantime
about thirty six million dollars
of money belong to colleges
sitting in banks outside of
Carlsbad collecting interest
that overwhelmingly isn't being
used this cap this is a clear
case for local governments isn't
the right thing to do thank you
for your consideration.
Great thank you Wendy.
On behalf of the more.
All right so we'll go to trial.
Good morning Kyle you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Kyle you may be muted.
Bronze to not columns or.
The school board member for the
community of Carlsbad that let
me just give you a little bit
more information I've been here
for forty four are for sixty
five years or until school girls
that for forty three years not
been on school work with
thirteen now past president of
the New Mexico school boards
association so that's my
qualifications.
Chairman I'd like to just using
a little analogy here.
We had a partnership with New
Mexico state and they've been a
loving parent we we appreciate
that.
We've been in existence since
nineteen fifty.
And we're like a child is
finally reach that time we need
to be out on our own we need to
be self sufficient we need to be
making our own decisions and we
can do that we have the ability
to do that the community wants
to do it our students wanted to
our students scores will be
better and we have just all
sorts of opportunities if we can
just.
The marriage a little bit and
let us go out on our own and
grow up and be a great supporter
of the state Mr chairman I ran a
half mile in high school two
minutes so I think I beat your
time so I'm through thank you
for letting me speak.
Course thank you so much for
being with us.
All right so we'll go to the
Solomon R. Salamone.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes hello thank you for the
time today my name is Solomon
Soto I'm in the current student
and miss you see
I've actually been attending
classes and such on and also
since I was in the seventh grade
back two thousand four thousand
five I actually have had
multiple generations of my
family graduate from MSU State
I'm so I've been around quite a
awhile and I have been able to
see how much of a standstill
we've been at.
there's a lot of small changes
of the need to happen haven't
been able to the same problems
that we had back then we're
still having problems with
today.
And so I'm I'm speaking in
support of.
The independence of New Mexico
State University Carlsbad.
And in that regard I I was
ordered and I believe most my
family does as well
in with that I thank you guys
very much for your time no need
to much time today
thank you chairman thank yes
well for less the.
Thank you for being here.
All right so we'll go to trial.
Good morning Kyle you have up to
two minutes welcome.
I apologize I Ron singleton the
school board member was using
was using my computer to a
computer issue and he spoke okay
thank you okay.
If you don't wish to speak thank
you so much all right.
And.
We Rebecca.
Rebecca good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair thanks for
allowing me to speak good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Rebecca
so what and I've been an
employee at NMSU Carlsbad for
about six and a half years now
prior to that I worked at
another college in New Mexico an
independent college for about
eight years I was also a student
at NMSU so I want to iterate the
NMAA you is a great college I
have no negative feelings
against my education my feelings
for NMSU Carlsbad going
independent are very strong as I
said before I worked for eight
years at independent college in
northern New Mexico and when I
came to NMSU Carlsbad I was
astounded at the many groups we
had to jump through to hire
anyone to post our positions to
spend our money and to get our
vendors set up I agree that
there are some benefits of being
part of the system but at this
point in time the benefits of
being independent outweigh those
one on a daily basis I have to
fight battles to get our vendors
set up in a complex system that
we are not privy to or find out
why they have not been paid my
fire for being independent grow
stronger having the ability to
make our own justice own
decisions spend our own money as
we think it should be spent hire
our own faculty and staff
without the red tape and pay our
own bills are just a few
advantages of going independent
Mr chair and members of the
committee I urge you to support
House Bill to twelve for us to
go independent so we can build a
brighter future for our students
faculty and staff thank you
again for allowing me to speak
today.
Great thank you so much about.
All right Miro.
Good morning more on we don't.
If two minutes looking.
We can please write my name is
no the portal and I'm a student
and thirteen generation Mexican
on my mother's side ten
generation of my father's side
born and raised in Carlsbad New
Mexico for the majority of my
life I have a deep sense of
pride for my state and city and
if you're not from here it's
best to be described as not and
we are cut off from everybody a
few people ever go here if you
do usually come back so many
people I personally know in the
community need an education we
are suffering and economic
housing education crisis due to
the oil boom and create stress
on infrastructure I do business
owners on a daily basis
struggling to find employers
that are adequately educated in
modern business practices the
community college would focus on
the need for such criteria these
are the top ten examples of what
we need automotive technology
programs studio licensing
petroleum geology mechanical
civil engineering hotel
administration culinary school
carpentry construction small
business management certified ID
tech classes and GED programs.
The goals are G. NMAA you
currently do not made up the
goals of average Carlsbad
students graduating.
Or adults seeking to further
their education so many are
turning to work full time at
fast food rather than attempt to
get their education because
average minimum wage is fifteen
plus an hour they're able to for
the new Mustang without the need
for degree.
Creating an environment that is
community driven getting
education and traits that
benefit that same community is
vital for the locals so that we
have the ability to compete with
the current market that exist
here.
Where rents are equal to that of
Los Angeles in closing there are
no benefits for me to keeping
uninsured physical college in
Carlsbad as they focus their
education online to anybody that
wants to they can take their
classes online transfer out to
finish four degree four year
degree I any of us you campus of
their choice that is currently
how it is and nothing would
change for me.
Well we don't have is a college
that is benefiting the local
community or students that need
certificates degrees for the top
ten films that I mentioned we
are failing our future
generations and local citizens
by not providing them with the
lead up in our own community.
Thank you.
Great thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to John.
John good morning you have up to
two minutes good morning Mr
chairman it's my budget joining
this is John grant speaking I'm
the past present an image you
Carlsbad served in that capacity
until my retirement as of July
one two thousand twenty I want
to commend all the speakers that
have spoken in favor of
separation and going
independence I think they made a
great case my comment is more in
the line of looking at the role
of the president in the local
community that the president
always although the presence
have the sole responsibility of
that the president is the face
of the community college in the
local community and in that role
the president has played a key
role in terms of reaching out
and working with government the
school system but with local
business and industry
our economic development the
chamber of commerce I'm going on
a different rules the president
has to serve in the community in
order for the community college.
H. mission this move by NMSU and
I like to an issue I I work very
well with the people there I've
got some good friends there but
this move then issue is made to
remove the president in the
local community has hamstrung
the community college of
Carlsbad community college in
order to meet its mission they
there's that person is no longer
there that serves in these key
roles therefore I in in in
looking at this move to
independence I have to grant my
full support I hope the
community the committee excuse
me will support the move to
grant and makes you Carlsbad the
right to go independent thank
you Mr chairman appreciate your
time.
Right thank you thank you for
being here.
All right so we'll go to Terry.
Good morning Terry you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to.
I am Terry Dodson and I'm
employee and former student
having completed a certificate
and associate degree at New
Mexico state Carlstadt as well
as a bachelor's master's degree
at main campus.
But speaking as a private
citizen of Carlsbad I believe
our students and community would
have greater benefit from an
independent college I support
passage of house bill two twelve
thank you.
Great thank you so much Terry.
Right so next on my list is
Marty.
Good morning Marty you have up
to two minutes here with us good
morning Mr chair and committee
members my name is Marty banks
I'm a student and employee at in
this you Carlsbad I have lived
my whole life in Carlsbad I love
my community I worked for a
local pharmacy for over thirty
years and gritty now my
communities many struggles
education is one and I feel an
independent community college
would benefit Carlsbad at this
time thank you very much for
your time.
Great thank you for being here.
All
right so we'll go to mark.
Good morning mark you have up to
two minutes welcome good morning
Mr chair I'm doctor mark buckles
presently associate vice
president at the NMSU Carlsbad
campus where work for twenty
five years I'm a graduate
alumnus of and the NMAA you but
on this issue I speak in support
of the city's request
for campus independent CENIC
knowledge the financial due
diligence are superbly presented
by Wendy Austin and conducted by
the higher ed community task
force French president micro
spoke of the need for strategic
autonomy to benefit his country
I believe the Carlsbad caverns
needs an autonomy that will
allow it to pursue the
strategies that are most useful
to its growth and the
southeastern New Mexico
community that has supported for
seventy years strategic autonomy
means unimpeded ability to use
the wealth principal and
interest accumulated in over a
decade of taxpayer funding it
looks to respond most
effectively to budgetary and
resource procurement and
allocation to reconfigure areas
of responsibilities to adjust
salaries for the kinds of money
that it takes to live in
Carlsbad now and attract the
best people to our college in E.
R. Schumacher's famous books
small is beautiful subtitled a
study of economics as if people
mattered efficiency and
direction are best served by
organizations of just the right
side of course and if you will
be in the central point of
reference as a campus moves
forward toward independence and
I hope that Los crucis itself
will come to support independent
for the Carlsbad campus thank
you.
Great thank you so much.
All right so we'll go to
Tristan.
Good morning Tristan welcome you
have up to two minutes good
morning yes on I am a student
I've been a student at NMSU
State for the past two and a
half years and I.
Recently received my associates.
On this issue initially I was I
was on the fence you know I
could see the benefit of staying
in association with the main
campus but I've been following
this and I think my one of my
biggest concerns was how things
were going to work financially.
But at this point I can see that
there there's a lot of
The.
Financially that where this is
going to be very advantageous
the that that the.
everything is in line for the
school to move forward and very
interested to see.
How the situation with being
independent is going to allow
for a greater focus on the the
needs of the community and being
able to to we've all
so yes I am very much so in
support for.
Our college going independent
and embracing the future thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right so we don't see any
more hands and support is there
any more support that wish to
speak.
All right don't see anybody
okay.
One that keeps going up and
down.
Where.
You wish to speak in support.
You wish to speak in support
good morning you have up to two
minutes here with us.
Thank you Sir.
My district Mexico State
University goes back to meet the
following graduation.
I have attended six universities
the first was New Mexico State
University I hope three
associate degrees from New
Mexico State University about
first degree from eastern New
Mexico.
All university at excuse me from
the university of the southwest
where I served on the steering
committee they're steering
committee hold an MBA from
eastern New Mexico university
I've also attended Texas a and
M. Lange junior college New
Mexico tech.
I've had the privilege of
serving under two governors own
three commissions for seventeen
years at the state level I'm
very familiar with bureaucracy
and how it can affect the
success or slow the success of a
university finally I
served as an adjunct faculty
member under doctor that and one
of the president and what he
said in regard to the president
of the university is keen to its
success they are the I they are
the university in the community.
As an adjunct faculty member
what I observed as a student at
New Mexico State University in
Carlsbad was compounded and that
was the lack of support from
main campus the delays the
promises unkept promises.
And just the general dragging
down to bat your rocker C. as
well as holding the thirty six
million that should be free and
spent here in Carlsbad.
I've also been extremely active
in the community in a business
development since a former
president of the Carlsbad
department of development are
Economic department works and
many other activities and work
with the.
College presidents.
It on main campus for many many
years and the request that was
here two minutes support for the
bill and thank you Mr chair
thank you Sir.
All right so go to J..
J. and support you have up to
two minutes please good morning
Mr chairman and members the
committee my name is Jay Jenkins
I'm president and CEO of CMB
banking Carl's that.
And I'm voicing my support
individually not on behalf of
the company for the college to
become independent however I
will say our company has
submitted a letter of support
also for the college to become
independent.
This morning Mr chairman you've
heard a very.
Excellent grassroots effort by
many members of our community
which of included students.
Looted NMSU faculty other
business leaders you've heard
from our city there's also been
a.
Resolution for more chamber of
commerce are Department
development petitions with
individual of.
Individuals in the community
just an unbelievable grassroots
effort supporting the
independence of this college and
we appreciate you hearing us and
we hope that the committee will
vote in favor of us being able
to have local control it all
boils down to management.
NMSU's great college with the
management our local college has
been nothing short of terrible
and we appreciate.
Your consideration and helping
us to become independent thank
you.
Great thank you so much.
All right.
So we will go to opposition so
those in the attendees list that
wish to speak in opposition of
house bill two twelve please
indicate by raising your hand
get that a moment.
And.
So we will go with.
David good morning Danny up up
to two minutes please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Dan RBZ chance for New Mexico
State University system R. N. M.
S. U. position is that the NMSU
Carlsbad campus should remain
within the emission system
however we know that the
community feels the opposite we
have an obligation to the
students in the state that we
should thoroughly review all
aspects of what is in the best
interest for the students and
the taxpayer what we're asking
of you today is not to pick a
winner or loser in this
legislation I believe we can all
agree that decision of this
magnitude should be thoroughly
reviewed and studied to ensure
that students are the winners in
this process without
understanding the board of
regents pastor the resolution
asking us to perform a detailed
due diligence study to be
completed in the next couple of
months by independent third
party study will include input
from Carlsbad community always
students administration and will
be completed by the end of the
spring semester although the
call back community has
completed a review what you've
heard we believe that it it does
not contain all the facts and
information that is necessarily
a need to be considered and
there are number miss.
I believe that we should not
rush for the proposed
legislation but to allow a
thorough review and study the
entire process for independence
potential cost financial aid
accreditation and many other
aspects of this complex system
so that we can make an informed
decision results of the
independent study will be sure
to call back community and
higher ed department in Mr
strong advocate that an
integrated system consisting of
the top quality main research
campus including the
agricultural experiment stations
operate stages statements
throughout the state and a set
of branch colleges is stronger
and more effective efficient and
into and then independence
operating separately if it the
end of this process the merits
of the case dictate that
independence is in the best
interest of the students the
NMAA system the community of
Carlsbad and the citizens of New
Mexico then we will indeed abide
by those findings thank you Mr
chairman for the opportunity to
offer our state thank you.
Great thank you chancellor.
So we'll go to Darcy at.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes good morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is spacious and the L. and
I'm the registered for the and
rescue system.
Employees and I find many
services and support to all five
and miss U. campuses Services
which have to be completed
regardless of whether we will
three hundred or thirty thousand
students the staff and I are
continuing communication with
our colleagues on all campuses
and we take great pride in
serving all our colleagues and
students there is no duplication
of the services within the NMAA
you system since the main campus
office provides registry
services for on campus.
Responsibilities include the set
up and functional technical
support of several software
systems systems used by all five
campuses.
The functions of those systems
increase our and program
curriculum management
scheduling registration degree
progression graduation
transcription and academics
based scheduling we submit
external data and reports
required by the ATV national
clearing house and the national
student loan data base system
manager institutional compliance
with all applicable records and
data privacy laws and
regulations we respond to the
student records portion of
audits in the predication visits
the profits great Kathleen GPA
and academic standing and we
apply that information to every
individual students record
your credit credit equivalencies
the issue diplomas enrollment
and degree verification and we
process all the petitions for in
state and the district tuition
finally I want to point out that
students can obtain an
unofficial transcript document
from any campus and in there and
a misuse of service for.
It's it's on the other hand are
authenticated and certified
documents and are therefore
prepared only by my house okay
so an official transcripts can
be ordered online or in person
and since that recipient yet
mail or email.
Thank you.
Great thank you so much and
excuse me for mispronouncing
your name Datia.
All right so we'll go to mark.
Good morning mark talking you
have up to two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Dr mark
Allen on the associate campus
director and vice president for
academic affairs at NMSU
Alamogordo.
I'd like to clarify NMSU's
degree and certificate approval
process in detail how it is been
streamlined for the branch
campuses.
A few years ago I worked with
the NMC branch campuses main
campus leadership in the faculty
Senate Destry money our
community college degree and
certificate approval process.
Branch campuses manage their own
degree and certificate process
sees.
The process starts with program
faculty and then proceeds to
branch campus curriculum
committee degree and certificate
revisions as well as new
workforce certificates only
require approval by a majority
of vice president for academic
affairs at the university
branches.
During the approval process
degrees are reviewed for
consistency between branches and
we're applicables portability to
main campus bachelors programs
all new associates degrees also
require approval by the New
Mexico higher education
department and are crediting
body the higher learning
commission and the branch
campuses nearly all degrees and
certificates are proving the
academic year in which they are
proposed since the process was
developed I believe it is
working as intended and is
greatly reduce the time for
branch campus degree approvals
this concludes my statement
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you mark.
All right we will go to fan
dean.
Good morning bending.
Chairman.
And members of the committee I
am doctor Randy McKenzie the
director of financial aid at the
end of this system having worked
at both NMSU Alamogordo branch
and the main campus I am fully
aware of the differences in the
operations of the financial aid
offices at the branch campus
compared to the main campus the
financial aid office at the main
campus as always work
collaboratively with the
financial aid offices for all
that happens is we offer a wide
range of support all the branch
campuses and respond in a timely
manner any concern we have bi
weekly meetings to maintain open
lines of communication and
ensure information is shared and
concerns can be addressed.
At the main campus we're also
responsible for compliance
monitoring of federal and state
funds across MSU main campus and
branch campuses because NMAA you
must maintain its administrative
capability to participate in
federal student aid and ensure
that the entire animus you
system does not have penalties
or fines the main campus focuses
on many administrative and
compliance function that allows
the branch campuses to focus
more on their students needs
some of the processes and
responsibilities that the main
campus happens that the branch
campus does not have to be
concerned with is the
appropriate cash management and
no cash management or the rules
and better established by the
federal government and how we
requests maintain and disperse
funds we ensure that funds are
drawn down in a timely manner
we monitor and ensure the funds
are used and if they're not used
their return to the department
of education within a timely
manner we do the
reconciliations we ensure that
funds are returned for students
who might to withdraw we also
ensure that all the IT upgrades
get done we were in the thank
you so much that was here two
minutes thank you for being
here.
So we'll go to can that.
Good morning Kenneth you have up
to two minutes please thank you
chairman Romero and
distinguished Committee members
my name is Ken van Winkle and
I'm the branch executive
director for Alamogordo
Carlsbad.
Verify a couple of things that
if I can this morning I know
there's been some concerns about
the president's position at NMSU
Carlsbad as pointed out by my
good friend John Grattan and in
fact that was the catalyst for
this proposed change I
participated in a Carlsbad town
hall meeting on November twenty
fourth in which I proposed some
options for Carlsbad moving
forward just to be clear I
offered that we began a national
search for director of the
campus at that time that had the
authority and responsibility of
the previous president.
I also like to mention that it's
been it's been stated several
times that the independent
community colleges out perform
the branch campuses Mason lands
college was used as an example
compared to Carlsbad we must
compare apples to apples when
discussing performance our
community colleges when
comparing independent community
colleges to branch campus
completion rates it's important
to note how many certificates
associate degrees are offered on
each campus and eight or sixteen
weeks certificate is typically
current at a higher completion
rate than a two years associates
degree in nineteen twenty
nineteen twenty twenty Carlsbad
awarded a hundred thirty want to
associate degrees.
Excellence Committee college for
awarded thirty now the the
community college in Mason lands
order of awarded two hundred
certificates which are short
term as you know the credentials
and Carlsbad awarded less than
ten the point is this does not
equate to better performance it
simply shows the completion of
two very different credentials
lastly our breast branch
campuses provide important
access points into the system
they deliver real opportunity
for traditional students
underserved students and
training for technical work
force it is in this context that
are branch campuses operate with
the economy this supports
independent accreditation the
branches have the best of both
worlds the branches have the
best of both worlds they have
support of a highly regarded
research institution and the
recognition and value that
accompanies the degree or
certificate and that system and
yet they have the flexibility to
serve the needs of their local
community thank you very much.
Thank you.
So we don't have any more hands
up in the attendees list.
Okay.
There was one and then it
bounced back.
My son Andrew.
To speak.
Right hander good morning you
have up to two minutes.
And you may be muted.
Thank you Mr Mr chair members of
the committee my name sandy
Burke I am the senior vice
president for administration and
finance and miss you and
formerly the.
Interim president in a Cup a
couple of different occasions
and the vice president for
finance that in misuse Dona ana
community college.
I would like to clarify a few
things in terms of the financial
information provided by members
of the task force former
representative he can and and
Wendy Austin I I do want to you
know I've knowledge that those
funds as stated are available to
the Carlsbad industry Carlsbad
campus there reported to HEDT in
the financial reports
to the state and and that
information is available on the
H. E. D. website in.
Certainly the local mill levy
generates almost fourteen
million dollars as stated I I do
have a couple of questions that
that I think need to be posed
with respect to the requirement
for the two mill levy and
exactly how
the state will consider the
state appropriation amount for
a.
An independent community college
at Carlsbad and you know I just
want to.
Recognize that the property tax
assessment
could be you know fluctuate a
lot given the oil and gas
industry going forward.
In terms of the thirty six
million dollars in reserves of
those funds are are reported it
again on the HUD website to
available to NMSU Carlsbad and
interest income related to these
funds has not been spent in
could be transferred to the
Carlsbad campus and hopefully
I'll have a little bit of time
to to tell you about initially
Dona ana community college and
success that they enjoyed as a
branch community college of an
NMSU Diana community college
grew from a small ranch
Committee and I'm sorry that was
here two minutes the.
Thank you so much.
All right.
So we don't have anybody else
feel this time will come to
committee for some A. listers
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Brown for
bringing this measure I always
like to see local initiatives I
did have a question in the last
person was speaking kind of
addressing it but my my issue
goes to the FIR and and forgive
me Representative if you've
already covered it but the FIR
does say that there's no
appropriation but we have a
substantial fiscal impact and
then of course I heard the
thirty six million.
In reserve and all that but I
was hello Mr chair
representative that you could
just sort of address the FIR for
me yes thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Sweetser so it's
it's correct the bill does not
ask for an appropriation and
that's because we do not need an
appropriation we have more than
adequate funding to handle the
costs of the transition
as was mentioned the local mill
levy is a three now and it
produced about fourteen million
dollars and twenty twenty.
a lot of that money is not spent
and because of that it gets sent
into the reserve fund and that
is that is for the benefit of
the college so we can do a we
can transfer funds to cover the
cost of the transition we
believe that we will save some
money by doing some of the
functions in house in the bill
provides for the transfer of
functions personal property
contracts and references in law.
So
there's no no burden to the
state of doing this again the
tax base and in the taxing
district is is very good and yes
oil and gas fluctuates a little
bit but on the whole it's one of
the best
places in the state for funding
the the local
that the educational X.
It needs.
I will say that
we have members of the higher a
task force have had to file a
FOIA request freedom of
information act request to get
at some information that main
campus has not really been
forthcoming about and what
regardless of what's on the HD
website there been some serious
questions about where the
interest income is going from
this thirty six million dollar
reserve fund we finally got a
knowledge mints from the chances
are that that is the money
belongs to the local college but
it's there's so many layers of
bureaucracy for so we're not
really sure what all was there
and again that's why there for
over request so there's just a
lot there that that's not being
communicated well to the branch
campus and you've heard that
bills are not being timely rate
by main campus for that for the
branch they've been a lot of
issues or issues that you know
we're we're going to find out
more about but the study that
the chancellor has mentioned of
getting a sense of what's
involved I I I would just point
out as well Mr chair and
representative switcher that
there are examples already out
there of of how we transition
occurs and all the things that
have to be considered in
providing for that transfer in
funding is the least of our
worries in terms of how to
accomplish that it's it's a list
of things that need to be done
it's logistics the bill provides
over a year for these transfers
to be handled in the what I call
the closing date would not be
until April ten of twenty twenty
two so there's plenty of time
to.
We're two things and the higher
a task force is very familiar
with
accreditation I mentioned on
Monday morning that
accreditation is independently
held by the local college and
that would not be something that
needs to be investigated that
will continue as far as
financially goes we are we have
had many discussions in the task
force about that and all these
things none of these will be
dropped
if this becomes a southeast New
Mexico college all of these
things will continue which is
that who governs and who's doing
it will be more work it we don't
from the local basically rather
than from the main campus system
that's
quite a quite a distance away
Mr chair representative with
Representative Sweetser I hope I
answered your question I
as far as that fiscal impact for
goes we're not concerned that
this will be an issue the money
is there.
Thank you for that
Representative and Mr chair I
appreciate that I only have one
other question and that is going
to come in court number you
mentioned that that this would
be to your people could easily
transfer to any of our state
four year and intuitions or or
beyond that I I do I feel in my
in money
back in my brain that common
core is going to make that super
smooth this is that your
impression as well
Representative Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative so
the I know that higher ed in New
Mexico is really working on
trying to get this so it's it's
going to be smooth that hasn't
really gotten to that point yet
and a lot of cases so there's
there's an effort there to to
make that happen and there are a
lot of students to start off of
the crosspad branch to choose
not to go to MSU main campus to
complete their to to get to
their bachelor's degree they
maybe go to eastern UNM or
wherever else they might go so
our students are asking for
degree pathways maybe the taken
to New Mexico tech and if they
want to have more of a choice
than Justin invest you in when
The current but instructional
center back way back in nineteen
fifty.
Was was started you know the
pirate New Mexico was still
really under development and
since then
But you know that that I I would
say the workforce needs are
driving a lot of what people are
studying in college and it just
it just hasn't kept up well main
campus is is very difficult to
get anything approved by main
campus and we have had employers
speak out and say we need we
need students studying in these
areas because we have jobs
waiting for them and we've just
not been given the flexibility
to go into those areas where we
know employers need people and
students want to go.
Thank you for that and I
appreciate.
Share your answers and the and
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you.
Right thank you Representative
next on my list as
Representative Eli please.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
just speaker I gets perspective
having someone call would invite
district and that what what we
might my health district but I
get to consider part of my
community and having been a
student who actually took some
courses at San Juan college as
I'm sure the committee is well
aware Mr chair Senator colleges
independent community college
and was previously part of them
as you and there's been a lot of
talk about local autonomy and
control in those are all
through.
and I think those are important
points but the other thing I
would I would suggest to the
committee.
Consider in what I've seen with
San Juan college is local by and
and so different local economy
local funding is targeted more
towards control over curriculum
and admissions all those things.
We're just local fighting and
goes more that part of the
community and their desire to
have a college that represents
sort of the local community and
that's been one of the biggest
advantages to having independent
unit college of pharmacy and is
whether were aspect will build
partnership property bill like
this is our college
and what you find them is the
college agency support many many
community events are you have a
lot of students that that we'll
get someone college as a you
know a viable opportunity to
further education and so I you
know I just occurs the committee
went for I think a lot about the
financial that seem sound
there's there seems to be a lot
of any sport there seems to be
faculty support.
and so I think again just
checking having attended college
in my area.
It does make a difference for
that college to be independent
so are Kersal commitments for.
Great thank you Representative
Representative Lara please.
Morning thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill I I do have some
questions and I'd like to make a
comment versus one of the things
that that concerns me is when
people tell me not to worry
about the funding it makes me we
do the opposite and makes me
research and find out more about
it.
That said I would like to ask of
so it Mr call but and this was
this was in the FIR so
indisputable spat
has a very large carryover
balances to somebody mentioned
thirty six million dollars so
The voters recently approved a
tax levy for items to Carlsbad
if we were to changes over the
previous bill and it goes to the
governor's desk and it becomes
the the independent community
colleges that you that you would
like to see how what kind of
impact would that have on on on
that mill levy that was voted
for by the voters for any Mr
Carlstadt.
Yes thank you thank you very
much for that question I I
appreciate that and I I would
like to explore this a little
bit with the committee so Mr
chairman and members so it is
correct that the Carlsbad has a
three mill levy in place and it
is not sunset it and so what the
voters of basically said as they
support higher education it's
not so much that they're
supporting NMAA use the system
as they're supporting the
availability of higher education
opportunities in the local
community so if if this bill
passes in the governor signs it
that mill levy would continue
there's no difference there in
the past at their you know we
mentioned earlier few colleges
that did transition to
independence and some of them
had to actually go before the
voters to increase their ability
to get to the two male that's
required for an independent
college other community colleges
that are within a system over
here are required to have one
male so the fact that because
they have three has three mills
but the Senate's position of
really not having to do anything
at this point because that mill
will continue Mr chairman if
perhaps Mr Heebner ms Austin
want to amplify a little bit I
would I would just that they be
recognized to speak on that.
Please.
Mentor may wish to.
Mr Chairman this go ahead Wendy.
Chairman thank you yes so I
think that where we do need to
be clear at is our local tax
base here
It's very strong year after year
and this is even during the
downturn to the oil and gas
industry because we don't just
have oil and gas we have potash
we have with that we have a very
diverse economy here so those
state that those local
appropriations are anywhere from
nine to fourteen million dollars
and the nine million or almost
ten million during the downturn
so right now that we're gonna
downturn we're still budgeting
almost a ten million dollar
allocation to local taxes so
year after year this is the
reason that we have eight thirty
six million dollar reserve right
now because our local tax base
is so strong.
I hope that answers your
questions.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Lara they met the
mechanics of the mill levy are
that mill levy was voted to
support the community college so
the the money that is derived
from the mill levy goes to the
state and subsequently goes to
the campus for its operations
and so that would not change
and and we've had some opinions
about it and that would not
change because that's how the
the mill levy was designed it
was designed for the benefit of
our locals campus so that would
continue in that way if that
helps answer that source of your
question.
Sure thank you are
Representative around it are
your experts so that that that
that.
The speech another question is
could you take could use please
explain Mr chair representative
what can be used with those
funds that are that are that are
associated with them that come
from the mill levy what can be
used what what can be a purchase
what how can how can that how
can those funds be spent.
Yes Mr chairman and
Representative Lara so thank you
also for that question
the origin of those funds is the
local mill levy and it is
designed for operating and
whatever basically the needs of
the college are and that's
that's my understanding is so
I'm gonna turn again to
this Austin and and Mr Heaton if
they wish to amplify.
Mr chairman Representative Lara
again there are no restrictions
on the mill levy other than it
be used for the benefit of the
local campus.
Okay thank thank you for that Mr
chair I also it was mentioned
that there's a lot of
bureaucracy it at the at the
main campus in Los crucis and
and and that got me thinking
about you know if if if this
were to pass and in a Mr
Carlsbad were to become an
independent community college so
that in the in essence you would
also be creating a proxy at the
at the community college so
would you would you know or if
you have any idea how many
additional excuse you would have
to hire in order to maintain
those services for the students
Mr chair Senator yes
Representative Lara Mr chair so
miss Austin can give you she did
when she did the pro forma
analysis she she made very
conservative assumptions in
terms of finances to be sure we
were on the side of of goodness
with everything she also looked
at how many additional employees
with the trouble and all before
I turn it over to her I'll just
say that we heard some of those
speaking who were in the NMAA
you system just a few minutes
ago talk about responsibilities
and there's responsibility
whether the governance is local
or from afar.
But the realities of really did
and not where they need to be so
responsibility is one thing but
how it's working at the local
level is another so let me ask
Miss Austin issued and give us
more information about the FTEs.
Sh yes thank you chairman and
representative and
For allowing me to speak to you
again so as I mentioned in my
testimony we did prepare a very
detailed pro forma statement and
we were very conservative in our
estimates where we actually
either reduced our our last our
revenues flat but you're after
year increase our expenditures
and we were still very strong
financials another aspect of the
pro forma is that we added six
new positions six new support
positions to assist what those
shared services that you hear
NMAG talk about we don't know
that'll take six but we still at
its next in addition to that we
also added a contingency for
start up costs and we also added
two hundred thousand dollar
contingency year after year for
those costs that we might have
missed that we might not have
thought of and again what our
our I'm on a pro forma year
after year is very strong where
we continue to put money in
reserves.
Mr Chairman Representative Lara
if I may add this year we will
be paying New Mexico state main
campus nine hundred thousand
dollars plus on top of that
upgrades in computer systems
what have you will end up being
about a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars so that's over
a million dollars that we will
be paying the main campus on an
annual basis and so so the the
point the point being is that we
think we can hire those people
find the systems and still
probably save four hundred
thousand dollars out of the
mouth of money that we are
paying the main campus so I the
the other point is that all of
the information that you heard
the employees of the main campus
speak about that information all
comes from us the base the base
information that goes into their
systems is provided by our local
campus so there's and there's
really nothing that we think is
so burdensome that our own staff
cannot do themselves and
complete the reporting that
needs to be done so thank you
for.
But thank you thank you for
those answers thank you Mr chair
and I my apologies for for it or
asking a lot of questions I just
want to make the best informed
decision I can make your Mr
chair a I also would like to
know about the the the flow
through as far as the mill levy
so the mill levy does that go
directly to to the prospect
campus where does that go to the
main campus Mr chair and
representative then Mr Mr
chairman Representative Lara the
money is and you know it's
collected locally if you will
the the mill levy is applied to
the assets in the community and
then the money that is is is
collected actually at it moves
to the state level and then the
state moves that down to New
Mexico state and then they move
it into our budget.
And then any any remaining
amount that we cannot spend or
or there's
their their number purposes that
you have heard explained that we
need to spend some of that money
on but are have difficulty in
doing so getting their approval
so it goes into their reserve
fund and that creates the thirty
six million plus what we expect
to be interest me maybe another
million and a half dollars so
somewhere in the thirty eight
million dollar range.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative and I
and just read for that thank you
I appreciate that so Mr chair I
have another question so what
what happens to the current
students in the system here of
the community college for two.
Mr chairman and Representative
so the transfer would allow for
for them to not lose a beat
and so
As of July first of this year
should the bill pass basically
southeast New Mexico college
would be come a legal entity
however the studies would
continue finishing semesters and
so forth so the students would
and then the doors would not
actually vote on southeast
Mexico college until the
closings been completed and so
would be the fall semester of
twenty twenty two when students
at that point would be earning
their credits at at New Mexico
and Southeast New Mexico college
that so the transcript will
reflect
the compartments there of where
those credits and under which
institution they were earned so
Mr heating I know you know more
about this would you like to say
anything else sent thank you
Representative Brown Mr Chairman
Representative Lara the the
process would be and I I know it
may sound a little bit confusing
budget student as an example
starts this year in the fall at.
The branch of New Mexico state
and then the conversion occurs
next year at that the fall
semester which is what we think
appropriated be in a pot
impossible really to have
records that make any sense if
we changed if we change to the
in the state the student status
in the middle of the semester so
we think that probably the fault
of the fall semester of twenty
twenty two would be the
appropriate time for conversion
but the student will of had one
year under the branch college
medallion if you will and then
their next year would be under
the new community college so it
would have a different the
Tallman medallion if you will
and the community cut community
college would potentially could
for the associate degree upon
the student if if that helps in
the explanation so we're very
we're quite aware of the of the
issues associated with me break
in going from one school to
another school and the the
present campus the staff remains
the same so we will be it will
be the same in the respected
accreditation from the prior
prior New Mexico state branch
under their degree program it
will be recognized by the new
college and so the the degree
can conferring will occur by the
branch about the new branch
college they are not the branch
the independent college I'm
sorry.
Is that help I'm yes yes yes Mr
chair thank you Mr king the
representative but the idea if
it's infants are permissible
Mister chair I would like to
have a response from the folks
over at it and see if that's
okay.
Mr I gentleman I I don't think
that's an order to bring in
outside experts to have a
response if you have some sort
of communication committee that
offline thank you Mr graduates
wanted to up to get the whole
picture here are one one other
one one more question also so
these I'm trying to understand
once again I apologize for the
questions and try to make the
best informed decision that I
can't so what what is the it was
mentioned earlier by
Representative Brown that you
had mentioned that that was
already data up that you could
access that we regarding to what
the the study would entail that
intimacy is asking for so what
exactly one question is
Representative and Mister chair
is is what type of information
would with that report contain
the Ms used us for.
Mr Chairman
I'm going to pull out of all you
need here in to ask Mr heating
to start us off on that answer
please.
but thank you Mr chairman
Representative Lara I think they
will have a whole series of
questions that we like to.
The conversion that relate to
economics that relate to how the
process will work in terms of
records student records the
employee records all of that
sort of thing will be part of
the the report as well as
reasons why we would convert and
how it would affect the main
campus and whether it would be a
negative impact or not yeah we
we we cannot see any negative
impact on the main campus in
fact they probably be happy to
get rid of us just so they don't
have that additional workload
that we provide and we would be
that we require and we'd be able
to do that ourselves so I I
can't see any negative impact
impact on the main campus and
and conversely it would have a
tremendous positive impact on
the local campus in terms of us
having our own board of
directors at our board of
regents how whatever we decide
to call them trustees and they
they can not be elected till
November so there are some long
poles in the tent and that's why
we moved they they could
consummation date to April the
tenth and probably not the
conversion date would occur to
the fall semester but the the
point is things like
federal title for federal
approval for loans and grants
will probably take between six
and nine months to occur we will
have to go in for accreditation
from the higher learning
commission and we also have to
go and and for accreditation for
our nursing program which
incidently was named the best.
In the in the state in the fall
and we will have to go in for
credit a sure that those will
both take probably four to six
months to occur and by law we
can not have a board election
until November so those are some
of the long poles in the tent in
terms of are getting to
a position for conversion and
we're well aware of these time
frames involved so it's we've
we've investigated very
thoroughly if the if the study
by New Mexico state comes up
with any new
questions that we have not
considered we have a great deal
of time a year to work through
those questions we have sent
them a number of questions
already and of course they have
not responded to those things
about financial about records
about students all those sorts
of things scholarships that they
are in their foundation that are
that are for the students of
Carlsbad we've asked them to
delineate all of those issues
for us and of course there's
been no information forthcoming
and so part of the study will
reveal more of what some of
those questions might be but we
feel like we have.
Many of time to answer those
questions and prepare I hope
that helps.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representative Rhonda thank you
Mr Keating I I really appreciate
these answers and and I'm still
trying to make a decision on how
I'm gonna go with this bill but
I really do appreciate your
answers I thought I think they
were very thorough and and I I I
I just I want to thank you for
for bringing this bill forward
thank you thank you Mr.
Right thank you all and so I
have a few more people on my
list so if you could please we
still have two more bills to
here we need to be on the floor
hello and so if you keep
questions and answers brief
please Representative Baldonado
you're next on my list please
thank you Mr chairman not gonna
turn my video and with issues
over here and most of the
questions I have were were
answered but I just wanted to
touch real quickly
Representative Mr Chairman
representative brown does why
are we having to do this
provided the would would I guess
my question is in order to open
a branch campus that would be
part of the New Mexico state or
an agency to you or whatever it
may be our our view NM would we
have to do legislation in order
to establish this and then is
that we were having a new
legislation to unwind this thing
Mr Chairman representative
Graham as thank you for that
question Mr chairman and
Representative Baldonado so.
The state statute is the
community colleges act provides
for community colleges to be
able to go into an independence
and so we're looking at that
statute and we can.
We can certainly put up if you
wish but it says that and it's
it's it's an important word it
says that no new.
A community college college can
be created unless the
legislature approves of it we're
quite certain that this is not
going to be classified anyway as
a new college it's an existing
college has existed for seventy
years that
is is just getting a name change
and is basically converting to
local governments rather than
governments out of Los crucis
through through the university
there so there is some debate do
we really need to run
legislation to do this or or not
and the drafter at Legislative
Council Service suggested we go
ahead and run a bill on it and
so that's really why we're here
today you know just to make sure
that
you know we we do it in
accordance with that with law
and so that I think that's the
answer Mr heating you want to
add anything the
Madam Mr chair Representative
Baldonado the the other issues
in the bill as it makes clear
that the transfers of the
various items that are listed in
the bill will occur and I think
that's more or less as well the
power of the bill itself is that
it makes it clear that all of
those items will be transferred
to the new college so there's no
argument about that.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative brown and and
from Representative PM I
appreciate the answer that
question it's probably me a
little bit that we're going
through all this and whether we
need to do it or not maybe maybe
we do indeed
the the idea that that that the
campus in the the many college
wants to be self governing I
think that's renewable I think
that's a great idea
hopefully you can dial things
down and and and hopefully this
thing works out for you so I
will support your bill and
that's all the questions I have
Mister chairman.
Great thank you representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Brown it seems
like your whole team has done
its due diligence when when did
the formal process to establish
all the research and meetings
when did that start.
Thank you for the question
Representative Garrett Mr
chairman so I I do know the
answer to that.
There's a history behind this
this is been something that the
people been thinking about for a
very long time as main campus
would not approve certain things
at the local branch requests for
example wouldn't allow for
increasing salary so we could
draw in faculty and staff
there was a problem with
students not having books for
most of one semester because of
something that happened it at
through a range is that main
campus and yeah so they're just
that there's been a lot of
discontented yes for many years
but I think probably what the
the straw that broke the camel's
back may have been when main
campus decided to eliminate the
position of of the branch
president so I'm gonna let Mr
Heaton he's very familiar with
the history as well and I know
he'll add a little bit more.
Mr Chairman representative of.
I I I I'm not sure that I
understand the club question
completely it was about the
academic.
Changes.
Mr chairman Mr hate mistrust
you.
Great ground swell of support
there's been formal meetings at
seven o'clock in the morning I
just wondered when the formal
process I started.
To get this done when did that
start well it it actually
started.
Representative when the more
formed a task force back in
early October and because of the
numerous complaints and issues
that came forward and said
that's when the task force
started meeting on a weekly
basis and doing research related
to the issue but let me tell you
that over the past the.
This is not been the first time
we we have had ups and downs and
with the administration's
different administrations on the
main campus and I might point
out that over the last thirty
years there have been ten
administration changes and and I
miss you and promises that we've
received at directions that we
should receive that's a change
every three years on average so
when it's it's been very
difficult for the campus here to
work under these constant
changing conditions and I think
that us being independent and
having our own board of
directors and president the rest
of that the rest of the set up
in the organizational chart will
remain the same we just simply
are gonna have a board and we'll
have our own president and then
the three vice presidents will
be working under that president
but we think that it will be
much much superior more
streamlined we have you know we
have eighty nine school
districts in New Mexico why
because we think the best
government is the government
that's closest to the people and
so that's what we think as well
that is the most efficient way
for us to be responsive to the
students of our community and
that's that's what we're
interested in virtually a
hundred percent is what the the
outcome for students and we
think that that gives us a
better opportunity to interact
with the community and make sure
that we serve the students and
provide the curriculums and they
training that they need.
Mr chairman I just have one
other quick question
this focuses on Carlsbad
the Carlsbad school district
districts are the trustees would
be elected from what is the
outreach beyond Carlsbad I know
that there is an art teacher
vocational training center.
These other in serving the
people all of the school
districts are in the southeast
part of the state.
How have you reached out to
those others and you don't have
to give a lengthy response just
how do they play into this.
Yes thank you Mr chair
representative.
yeah the outreach is currently
mostly handled by main campus
and so whatever outreach they
deem they want to do is is is
what happened so you know
websites catalogs
some newspaper ads occasionally
things like that I think the
reach of the college will be
more regional if it becomes an
independent and I say that
because one of the requests that
we've had locally for at least
fifteen years is to let's build
some campus housing we have
people who would come and study
at our college if they had
campus housing the community
itself is very expensive to to
rent A. center by how sentence
campus housing would be a
solution
I'm pretty certain that Mr chair
that a lot of people would come
in for certificate programs and
and associates degree studies if
we have that so we kept getting
turned down the study was done a
few years ago we thought it was
no show the justification for
campus housing and a severe need
for it and main campus wouldn't
wouldn't agree to that and I
hear that I just there's a rumor
I heard that apparently someone
at main campus is saying okay go
ahead with housing but want to
study it some more so we think
that that local governments is
more nimble it's more able to
react to a changing needs in the
community and so again I'm I'm
quite confident we'll have a
more of a regional reach if we
are on our own.
You wish to add something please
briefly yes of Madam
Representative.
It's been somewhat reversed your
question we've had people from
surrounding communities.
Contact us and what would be
involved in the process so it's
been a little bit reversed they
are very interested in this
college and they're very
interested that'd be coming and
so I just wanted to insert that
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you our
representatives and Craig and I
would just suggest that you call
it S. C. N. M. U. instead of
just and I'm here thank you I do
support it.
Thank you Representative.
Is there anybody else that
wishes to speak.
All right.
What is the will of the
committee.
Asked Mr chairman.
Second.
All right so we have a due pass
by Representative Baldonado a
second by Representative
Figueroa I see Taylor has joined
us Taylor would you call the
roll on the do passed motion for
house bill two twelve.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes
Representative figura.
This.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
No.
Representative twenty.
No.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Now.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Yes.
Chairman.
No.
I have ninety four.
All right so by a vote of nine
to four Representative brown in
the past and house bill to
twelfth thank you all so much.
Thank you thank you.
All right so we will move on to.
House bill one forty two.
So remember we have floor eleven
we saw two more bills everybody.
So I'm gonna bring in
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan if you
could it here in the attendees
list would you raise your hand
please.
Right.
All right good morning
representative do you have an
expert that I need to promote.
Yeah.
Yes you chair it I have to I
have on my a significant New
Mexico we will see.
Colby if you would please raise
your hand.
All right.
Good morning everybody.
Please.
Mr chair morning members my
first time in health education.
Wonderful to see everybody this
morning and getting to work so
we'll get to the bill are get.
Get started
Representative I'm and I'm sorry
before you get started I'm sorry
to interrupt you it's two forty
seven my bad.
Two forty seven because this was
a rollover from Monday so excuse
me Representative Lujan place.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members for having us here this
morning we're here to discuss
and get your support for house
bill two forty seven with a two
million dollars appropriation
for after school and summer
learning programs in New Mexico.
HB two forty seven after school
from the purpose of it is that
appropriates million from the
general fund to the public
education department for the
purpose of expanding or enabling
after school and summer
enrichment programming and the
fiscal year twenty twenty two.
Currently the state of New
Mexico has no allocated funding
for after school programs you
want to change that.
Critical part this is a critical
time to invest in after school
and summer learning programs you
need to increase needs of our
children and families.
After school and summer learning
programs are central for COVID
nineteen recovery.
And after school plate sensual
as we know central and dresses
and learning loss accrued by
children and youth during the
the pandemic after school
programs are also uniquely
qualified to support students
who have experienced trauma and
social disconnected well as
providing an opportunity central
third meal for students.
After school programs also
provide a significant return on
investments with every one
dollar invested and saving at
least three dollars through
increased you earning potential
improving their performance at
school and reduce juvenile
delinquency.
Return to work on New Mexico's
economy is going to depend an
after school program has
continued to grapple with
finding childcare solution for
younger children and school age
children and.
Holding virtual or hybrid
learning.
Seventy one percent of New
Mexico parents agree that the
program the programs help them
keep their jobs and in eighty
six percent of New Mexico
parents say these programs
provide parents with peace of
mind and as a parent I can
attest to be two point.
After school learning is not
equitable for every child next
to school in New Mexico we are
waiting for the opportunity that
means that more than a hundred
and twenty four thousand youth
and children in the state would
roll in after school programs
they could.
Well extended learning time
program has received support and
funding from the education
reform Fund at the last two
years away they requirement for
schools but also after school
there is no line item in the
budget formula for schools to
make after school program
captain thank you.
Schools are left to find
alternative funding for after
school mandate to be implemented
To help ensure that all children
in New Mexico who want to
participate in after school
programs able to a great
investment Mexico programs
needed support for public
funding for after school
programs New Mexico with high
with ninety two percent of
parents favor of funding for
programs to provide us
opportunity despite strong
bipartisan support for greater
investment.
Many of you
have been left out as mentioned
before our children are shut out
of these critical opportunity to
prosper during recovery we need
to expand support for
afterschool and summer learning.
And ensure that all children and
youth have access to high
quality opportunities regardless
of the family income or their
zip code and as I mentioned
Mexico Mr chair mate at I think
you are deputy director of New
Mexico out of school time
network New Mexico we will see
with the boys and girls club.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
now stand for questions.
Great.
Thank you what did you all wish
to make brief comments or would
you all just be here for
support.
Yes Mr chairman I would like to
make a comment if you want my
all right.
Good morning.
Rest of the committee and Mr
chairman thank you for having us
here today my name is my son
back and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico out
of school time network and we
work statewide and nationally to
ensure that all children have
access to quality out of school
time programming meeting before
after school or summer learning
including teen centers and as
you heard Representative Lujan
as state currently we have about
a hundred and twenty four
thousand children waiting for a
spot in New Mexico and that was
before the pandemic and that
number is probably much more on
the rise as parents looking to
have a place for their children
when they will back into work as
part of the recovery after the
pandemic and the only state
funded actually federally funded
program that we have in New
Mexico through the PED is a
twenty first century community
learning center and one of every
two application is not funded
because of the high demands and
the mapping we have conducted
the last three years so that
most of the funding for YMCA
boys and girls.
And city and county programs
full in the Rio Grande corridors
so we really seeking to expand
access for rural communities and
tribal communities and two
million dollars.
Would ensure that we would get
thirty five to forty programs
and serving two thousand more
children which is a very small
step divorce Division of having
every child in New Mexico having
access and we would need a total
of a hundred and thirty four
million annually to support a
systemic after school program in
New Mexico for old for all kids
and that is based on eleven
hundred dollars per child times
hundred twenty four thousand so
two million is hello the
lightning and is a line item
they used to expense them PED
and it was eliminated when
extended learning time program
was implemented and approved and
and the extended learning time
program modeled does mandate
that the schools employment
after school however there's no
money in the budget form a lot
at least in the past year to the
to help schools make that happen
so this two million dollar bill
will help schools meet that goal
in addition to that K. five plus
as you know I'm only twenty five
days and during the summer does
not allow for after school and
summer learning for older use
this is in high demand and I'm
seriously lacking in our state.
I.
When does really critical to
acknowledgement after school is
that hunger issue in our state
we had before the pandemic about
a hundred and seventy thousand
children going home hungry every
day after school and serving
that's third meal in the after
school space Senator very
important strategy to reduce
hunger in New Mexico and also
the achievement gap I know he's
high on all.
By six or eight great.
There's a six thousand estimated
to gaps in access to enrichment
and extracurricular activities
between children and low income
families and highincome families
so many children for example can
go to hummingbird or exploratory
a dinosaur camp during the
summer but so many children and
families cannot afford those
opportunities so this two
million dollar bills will help
to make sure that so I'm which
one will have access to these
opportunities and reduce debt
chairman gap in our state.
Also for truancy dropout and
lowering crime rates we believe
that a fully funded after school
system will dramatically
increase student attendance at
school and also their academic
achievement.
I think you know that ninety two
percent of our parents strongly
support right.
Funding and we do as you now the
state is funding a lot of things
but for some reason the after
school agenda is falling off so
we have succeeded in getting
more funding for early childcare
the K. five plus extended
learning which is not after
school I have to make sure you
all know that that extended
learning some extension of the
school day is not an after
school program after school is
three to six PM everyday so that
parents have a state place for
their children extended learning
is not meeting that needs I it's
a compliment to extended
learning and K. five plus an is
a year round model to make sure
that children are safe and
in a creative different space
after school is different than
school and children learning a
different way to get to move
they physically active to learn
stem we have done extensive
research with young women and
have found that young women in
after school how unique access
to stem mentoring and role
modeling and as you know in New
Mexico we have a need for five
thousand and you work in the
stem fields and getting what
young women into that field is
critical and stand in the after
school space is filling a huge
gap that we have in our school
today so we encourage you all to
support business critical
smallest that there were some
big vision for a systemic after
school and a program model in
our state
and you will have all the
parents and the young people and
use behind your decision today's
hopefully supporting this to
happen and not only this year
but for every year moving
forward thank you.
Thank you Kobe would you wish to
make some brief remarks please.
Yes Sir Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the time
today thanks my for inviting me
I wanted to my name's Colby
Wilson chief encouragement
officer for the boys and girls
clubs of central New Mexico I
wanted to highlight a real
specific need here in central
New Mexico Rio Rancho
Albuquerque area of my talked
about the importance of after
school programs here in central
New Mexico virtually one hundred
percent of the one hundred and
twenty plus elementary schools
have an after school currently
have an after school program on
site at the school in addition
Albuquerque the City of
Albuquerque does a great job
with their community center
programs for elementary kids
providing free after school
program we are here in the city.
In contrast though none of the
thirty plus middle schools have
a daily after school program on
site and this is this is a
critical problem for a for a
couple reasons first as you look
if you look at the data on
achievement you'll see that the
achievement gap widens as as
kids move from fourth grade to
eighth grade and some of the
standardized testing that they
do and it's really critical to
provide the mentorship the
supervision of the access to
leadership development programs
career exploration workforce
readiness as kids.
Transition from elementary to
middle school middle school is a
time when when if not provided
those opportunities kids start
to disengage from from school
and of we know what that leads
to ultimately.
So why is it why is there this
gap will force these programs
cost money and most parents
while they want these programs
for their kids.
They either can't or don't want
to pay for them when they you
know the kids are old enough to
go home by themselves and and
supervise them selves to tell
parents get home at five or six
o'clock.
CYFD revenue or CYFD
funding runs out after kids move
past age eleven so there's a lot
of challenges to sustaining a
daily program for middle school
kids and teens when when do
different risky health revenue
sources are are limited in and
we know we can't charge for them
in addition to the to that
middle schoolers and teens are
tough they they many times don't
want to necessarily be in an
after school program they think
they can take care of themselves
so it requires expertise it
requires a level of training and
professionalism and and
knowledge of that age group that
of many organizations simply
can't invested.
I'm here to tell you that the
boys and girls club is ready to
step into this gap we have
examples all over the country of
teens that standalone teen
centers programs in middle
schools and high schools that
are successful in keeping kids
engaged in after school and out
of school programs providing
that sense of belonging we just
need some sustainable funding to
help do that we've got a great
partnership in place with APS
to expand into certain middle
schools across the system where
there's where there's a high
need and and again we're ready
to do that just wanted to touch
on a study done by the
university of Michigan in two
thousand fifteen on New Mexico
boys and girls clubs found that
for every one dollar invested in
the boys and girls clubs ten
dollars is returned to the
individual and society in the
form of increase earning power
both by parents who are working
and the use that we're serving
the earning their earning power
in the future and saved societal
costs around health care public
assistance and incarceration.
So wanted to.
Just a yes I think you
Representative Lujan for for a
dancing that supporting this
bill.
Representative Trujillo who is
been very support of the boys
and girls club in our teen
center project appreciate your
support and we hope that you
will support this bill as well
thank you.
Great thank you all.
Do you all stand for questions.
Yes.
All all right thank you so we
will go to the attendees list
goes in support of house bill
two forty seven that would wish
to speak.
Please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right.
So you'll have up to two
minutes.
Pamela good morning welcome you
have two minutes.
Mr Chairman yes Mr chairman and
committee members my name is Pam
Roy and I am here representing
farm to table and the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
council New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council
council stands in absolute full
support of this bill and the
idea that we can actually put
more resources and after school
and summer summer programs we
focus a lot on the nutrition
side of it we are very much part
of and partner to the New Mexico
grown for school meals and that
means getting local produce into
fresh and fresh fruits and
vegetables and into these
programs so we really look
forward to seeing our students
being able to access more these
programs and also this meal
programs is we know that seventy
percent of our students
and their families are able to
sign up for free and reduced
meals regular meals we also know
that those the students that
would most likely benefit from
these after school and summer
programs so we are in full
support and look forward to
working with miss Lujan
Representative Lujan and
partners into the future thanks
a lot.
Thank thank you.
Jan.
Morning Jenny of up to two
minutes please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Jennifer Billig
with girls Inc of Santa Fe and
we stand in support of this bill
are we have a strong presence
serving girls in both Santa Fe
public schools and Espanola
public schools as well as at the
Santa Fe Indian school and
increasingly in surrounding
Pablo's and the demand for our
programs in our schools is
always increasing because when
we go in and set up a program
there's always requests from the
school to add more groups and
more grades because of the
success of our programs our
programs are can be particularly
important as we come out of this
pandemic because so many kids
have been isolated and you know
we're supporting them around
stress management healthy
sexuality physical nutrition
education media literacy
economic literacy and all of
those programs as well as the
work around stem and girls
coming together for that social
emotional support along with our
teachers and facilitators is
going to be even more important
after the pandemic and when we
go into the schools are to
deliver programs we have to
raise seven dollars
for every dollar that we take an
intuition.
Most of the girls in our school
based programs do not pay any
tuition at all so the need for
more more more funding is
significant and we hope that the
members of this committee will
pass this bill and frontier on
this program not only for Santa
Fe and surrounding communities
but for students across the
state as other people who
testified said there's huge
demand for these programs and
they're super important for the
well being of our kids thank
you.
Thank thank you.
All right we we may.
Morning really more you have two
minutes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee it's
pleasure to be with you again I
am the only more tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
and as you know listen to German
the New Mexico scored
Association supports greater
school local board decision
making and flexibility and
variety in the implementation of
student centered extended
learning programs we appreciate
the two million dollar per
creation contained in this bill
that will fund extended learning
programs and will allow for
after school and summer
enrichment programs in our
school districts that will also
assist in providing our students
with additional learning
opportunities and experiences so
we support the bill for that
reason and personal Mr chairman
as a working mother working
twenty seven years at the
department of finance and
administration I have two
beautiful children benefited
from the after school program as
part of my local school district
and they went on to be
productive individuals as an
engineer and administrator and
they thoroughly enjoyed the
experiences after school and I
appreciated their being safe and
learning and I I on a personal
note also support this bill
thank you Mr chairman.
Great thank you.
All right is there opposition to
house bill two forty seven that
wishes to speak.
Okay we will come to committee
first to more or less
Representative Lara please.
Representative your thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill as we all know after school
programs are are great and there
they are on the central part of
the of the overall growth and
development of our kids
especially if they're a paired
with the with the community
schools will community schools
are doing but I do have a
technical question
Representative Mr chair is a.
What is there any limit on this
funding your is is there a
certain school that that the
funding would have to fall under
as far as programs we know would
be an academic program is it a
physical activity program I'm
just wondering what the you know
what I want the what if there's
any restrictions or if there's
any purpose.
That PED would have to implement
for the school districts to
apply for these funds was I'm
assuming this will be a grant
program Mr Chairman
representative and that they
would have to apply for this
money some wonder if there's any
limits right or or or
restrictions to this money.
Chair and Representative that's
a really good question and there
would be an application type
process with this and I'm going
to the first in line to get some
further explanation on that
thank you.
Yes Representative and committee
I'm based on my previous
experience with screening this
applications in PED the funding
categories were between thirty
thousand and fifty thousand
depending on the amount of
children a number children
start at all schools who had a
free lunch would
would qualify will get more
points and also they were
criteria has to include physical
activity or spam and there were
numerous choices the schools
could make it will be like about
this particular form online is
that it does define after school
what it needs to be how many
hours and also the content so
that the quality remains high.
And the it's screening process
was pretty stringent and last
round we had forty applications
and PED can only fund ten and
that was three years ago so then
did two million dollars is based
on that last round of interest
and would meet the need for
thirty to forty schools like.
Thank you for that thank you
Mister chair thank you
Representative and insert would
just want one other question and
a comment Mr chair
representative is up with this
coincided or be partnered up
with the twenty first century
auto twenty first century was
mentioned earlier so I I want to
make sure that or asked if
there's any any overlap or
supplanting of twenty first
century programs that at the
schools in the with the with the
money's Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr chair
I will I'll ask expert witness
on that one as well thank you.
Yes I would assume that they
would be.
Then also funding and as we
speak the RP for twenty first
century is out I'm on this year
so there's gonna be a lot of
that schools looking to get
twenty first century
I just think this is this money
is meant to fill a gap Debbie no
excess we do know that the
twenty first century learning
centers serve about ten thousand
children in our state and the
school sustainable long term
investment that's being made
that federal funding this
particular funding is for
schools and it does allow
schools to partner with
nonprofits and which also makes
this a little bit different and
twenty first century tends to be
a bit more academic oriented but
is still at the top of the line
after school program but we
assume that this is not going to
be S. implants opportunity for
the schools but feel like gap
that we do not excess.
But thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you for
your expert witness on that
answer I think this is a good
opportunity and to help local
support on this bill thank you
Mr.
Thank you representative
representative Lente that
please.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning good morning
Representative Lujan I have a
couple of questions for you if
you if you may Mr chairman and
and Representative is the
million dollars already in H. B.
two I may have missed that part.
Mr chair Representative question
I don't I don't believe so and
again I'll double check and I'll
ask my on that as well.
So if I can clarification my
question Representative Lujan.
I was asking
Mr chair
Representative please would you
ask the question again Sir.
Absolutely Mr Chairman
representative is the two
million dollars in the in the
bill in house bill two.
I would not know that
Representative lands that Mr
chairman so I would refer back
to Holland I didn't know that
there's a Senate bill that has a
similar scope that was gonna
pass you know do passed but I do
not know about House Bill to you
Mr.
Representative in may I guess to
clarify is the market the two
million dollars our in our
state's budget for this year
that we're gonna be looking at
later on today.
Mr chair Representative not that
I'm aware of no I think that
this is that's what we're
representing this appropriation
because this is the missing
funding that that we need to at
that we're looking to enhance in
each each year.
Mr Mr representative Lente and
Mr chairman we do know that the
line item excess in the bill as
a below the line a line item but
it there I don't think there's
any and dollar amounts allocated
to the line item but that is it
is in that budget as an empty
line item as far as I know okay
thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative and and just one
follow up question I I think a
new anyone of us on this
committee agrees that extend
students services in the
learning aspects of that are
super important my question is
for Mr Representative and Mr
Chairman representative the what
part of of this do you see
focusing on rural New Mexico
students.
That in percentages I mean if
it's two million dollars will
maybe a million be spent and and
more urbanized areas that may
have the boys and girls club
restraint on the corner what
about those kids I guess like in
in Representative Chatfield area
that this kinda more rural New
Mexico and and and my areas and
in Cuba New Mexico there's not a
whole lot going on.
Mr chair and representative had
such an important question and
and I think with what we are
trusting we've talked about
today is to really address those
those needs in those high is
high need areas and I fully
support that and I I.
I think that this is what we are
trying to accomplish with this
however with just a two million
dollar I'm out food that we're
asking for eight it will be
spread and we like we said
in the PED
Had mentioned approximately
thirty eight to forty aside from
New Mexico would would be able
to be
You should get the funding to
this this appropriation and that
is the intent of what we're
trying to do here and I'm gonna
let my at any any other comment
she like you on that as well
nine yes thank you
Representative Lujan and
representative Lente and
chairmen Mr chairman on our
website and models dot org we
have a live maps and showing
where old existing after school
programs currently are located
including boys and girls club
YMCA for age twenty first
century community schools and we
have we have a map of the
previous ten funded sites and
they were all in rural New
Mexico with this particular
funding I'm and I know PED got
an awakening after we did our
mapping three years ago and they
making a concerted effort to
make sure that funding is widely
distributed beyond that we are
ranked quarter after learning
that most of the funding is
falling in the Rio Grande order
I think there's an awareness
right now all they need to make
sure that it's impacting more in
the rural areas and including
tribal communities.
That includes my questions thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Yes thank the chairman and
members of the committee and
the.
Representative Lujan and may I
am carried this bill several
years ago and I was able to get
some funding and is always been
a struggle after to get funding
because
You know we knew this we've
known these kids as latch key
kids in the in my boy am I old
but these kids a time to and
they need these programs and I
had come many times in the past
to try to get some funding and
appropriations and we haven't
always been successful however.
This year's budget.
It was my understanding that
there was money in the form jet
the firm I'm and items that
there was supposed to be money
available for this type of a
program I know that LFC Mr
chairman has a representative on
the line and may I ask that
person to clarify if it's still
there because I was looking at
the budget we're going to hear
today.
And it's on page one hundred and
sixty eight between nine
seventeen and twenty five and
maybe that LFC representative
can speak to that because I
don't see Rachel got a job on
here that'll.
It's a male and then so LFC
staff could you identify which
staff member you are please and
if you heard the question needed
repeated.
We can hi Mr chairman my name is
Martha etcetera and I am to
twenty analyst for the
legislative finance committee
and I didn't grasp of the most
of that question but if I could
please have a repeated because I
did notice that Representative
noticed some line items I would
like to just here one more time.
Sure.
Page one sixty eight of the
budget Mr chairman between line
six twenty five there were
important money that was
supposed to be included and that
this was supposed to be.
This kind of legislation was
supposed to be embedded in that.
Yes Representative and the
Mr chair Mr chair and
representative that is correct
he.
We the LFC you budget recommends
these funds to be used as kind
of as an umbrella an umbrella
appropriation for.
Programs such as of these we
also included funding for K.
five plus extended learning
which are supposed to all fall
under the umbrella of after
school programs and extending
the school day I can look into
that a little bit more if you
give me a couple of minutes and
I can get back to you either
online or offline Representative
and Mr chair.
Mr Chairman if she if we can get
for a few minutes as people ask
questions because we need to
really be clear that that money
is there at with all due respect
to
the conversations I've had with
Mr Abbey I I wanna make sure
that when we say the money isn't
there that it is there and I
don't want
Encouraged to go back and talk
to the Senate.
To find out if they have
something madam I wanted with
all due so we can wait do you
think Mr chair.
We can we can certainly keep her
online we have another member
with questions but during that
time if she's not able to and
will have to work that offline
thank you Representative
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chairman I had just
texted here don't call on me
Representative trails are going
my exact question.
Really exactly where I was going
so I appreciate that thank you.
I think what an exclamation
point Representative Trujillo is
coming thank you Representative
I'm so I I I do want to take a
minute to thank you
Representative Lujan and and
your two witnesses today for
bringing this forward I think
it's super important and I think
one thing I I want to say is I
heard in a couple bits of the
discussion that K. five plus
extended learning is to extend
the school day it isn't in
statute it's to extend the
school year so adding days on to
the calendar on if you remember
last week house bill one eighty
five that there is an open
invite and several of you signed
on to the bill is to extend the
school day for K. five plus
extended learning it we heard on
broad support from unions from
superintendents from school
boards school districts large
and small in support of doing
this and and really I think it's
it's for this particular reason
that if we're extending the
school day then we can bring in
outside partners to support
enrichment activities so
in in Albuquerque public schools
they did this with a couple of
the and more a few of the M. R.
I. schools so they were slated
for potential closing a few
years ago and they instituted a
a genius hour one is in the the
district that I represent the
school that I went to as an
elementary school student school
that my mom taught at for twenty
years on the list for the SLO
memory screen and they were able
to they're able to bring in
outside partners and have that
sort of funding to be able to do
that and that's something we
hope to be able to open up K.
five plus an extended learning
time programs in order to do
because when we talk about
funding in the budget that will
be hearing on the floor today
there is no.
Funding to fully fund K. five
plus an extended learning
throughout the state all the so
if we if we are able to get
house bill one eighty five
through that would mean that.
All schools rural urban would be
able to extend their school day
to include in reaching programs
and and and after school
programs and and I think that's
really the broad appeal in the
and it speaks to all the issues
that that we mentioned
I think the one other issue too
Representative Lujan said we
have an appropriation bill we
had a couple members ask about
the appropriation one thing that
that we know happens and I think
Representative Trujillo is right
on to you know try to see if
this is a line item in the
budget is is because when we
have appropriation bills go
through the process but then
because we don't have control of
House Bill to anymore that these
these bills end up getting table
it's an unfortunate part of our
process but I think all of us
have been there at some point
In our legislative careers but
just as a heads up this is
something to to really work on
certainly through L. E. S. C.
and LESC but I think that one of
the mechanisms now is to really
push for K. five plus extended
learning in extending the school
day eight not just the calendar
year moving forward
but with that
I will entertain a motion from
committee.
Mr chair I move it to pass on
this.
Bill all right so we have a due
pass on house bill two forty
seven all seconded it
is there any opposition to the
do pass.
Seeing none.
Then we hung you have a do pass
on house bill two forty seven
thank you so much for bringing
this forward and and and really
sounding the alarm on this
issue.
Thank you.
Committee.
Thank you and miss the center
I'm did you have an answer or or
will you get back to us on.
Mr chair yes I do apologize for
not being able to find a
satisfactory answer but I did to
defer to my senior fiscal
analyst in a loop was the ask
for public schools who should be
on the call now and then on
ready to provide you with more
details for that.
We have.
Another LFC staff so I'm
assuming sunny good morning
you're with us morning Mr chair
thank you for having me
my understanding is the question
was is there currently a line
item in the budget for after
school programming that correct.
It is.
There's not a specific line item
dedicated for after school
programming but the budget
includes funding for extended
learning time programs which I
believe you also mentioned and
statute does allow school
districts that are providing.
Both K. five plus an extended
learning time programs to
convert that extended learning
time component into ours and so
for elementary schools they
would be able to extend the
school day specifically as far
as a two million dollar
appropriation for after school
specifically there's not
individual line item for that I
hope that answers your question.
Mister chairman Senator.
Yes sunny but that there is some
creation now obviously because
the bill hasn't gone through but
in the past we've been able to
figure out at least once in the
past we were able to figure out
that funding is available so if
this bill just that was just a
pass goes through.
There should be some something
available for this program
right.
Mr chair representative I
understand your question
correctly there used to be about
three hundred thousand dollars
and twenty five thousand dollars
for.
after school programming that
was a below the line
appropriations for B. PED.
That was incorporated into the
extended learning time
appropriation within the SCG
back in FY twenty and so the
appropriation for after school
are baked into the student
learning time program component
which requires schools to
provide after school
programming.
If they participate in extended
learning time.
Representative Sweetser.
I'm sorry Representative
Trujillo if you follow it's just
going to say I was just going to
say that so the goal is to get
into appropriations and the
fight for that funding.
Right thank you Representative
Sweetser and thank you for that
Mr chair sunny so I just want to
get this cleared my my my brain
schools are not eligible for.
The extended learning time
Availability at you know or or
and variability in less they are
also in K. five plus is that
correct.
Mr chairman no Representative a
school district can participate
in K. five plus or extended
learning currently the that the
discretionary program for them
so.
Mr chair Senator thought I heard
you say the flexibility was
available to schools for
extended learning time if they
were in K. five plus did I not
hear that correctly.
Mr chair representative so you
are correct if they do K. five
plus an extended learning time.
rather than having at thirty
five days right because you have
twenty five for K. five plus and
then you have ten for extended
learning they can use that ten
days and converted into hours
instead as long as they're doing
both K. five plus an extended
learning together that's
currently in statute so that's
the provision that provides that
flexibility should they choose
to participate in both programs
simultaneously.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you sent.
Thank you Representative
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr chairman I have one
more question for study the my
my.
I guess the way I would think of
these programs is different is
that K. five plus extended
learning may of.
Apply to the entire school our
kids a certain grade school and
after school activities I just
applied to those that.
With that need you know they may
be the.
I was referred to you before the
last year yes and so for our
show my question is how does how
was really shaken out you know.
Mr chair representative I.
I'm not sure I understand your
question but I'll try to answer
I think your concern was how
does this differ from lots.
An after school initiative
verses participation in extended
learning time programs how those
might be different.
Yes sure.
And so I think you know what you
might see with.
Operation like an after school.
Two million dollar line item is
this would most likely be
administered by the Public
Education Department and so the
department would send out a
request to districts and they
would have to essentially apply
for this specific funding source
and the department would have to
develop guidelines of what
constitutes after school.
As opposed extended learning
time program which is written
into statute there's specific
guidelines on.
You know the they must add a
certain number of days and they
must provide X..
After school programming and
they must provide eighty hours
of professional development for
teachers so.
Those are some of the
differences the.
Idea of having a two million
dollars appropriation to PED
would mean that they would have
more flexibility to design those
programs
How are the department would see
fit I would add that in the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit the
court date indicate that having
very small pots of funding for
blowing programs wasn't exactly
moving the needle for the state
and so there is a concern about
whether appropriations
administered by the department
especially small ones would.
Actually helped the state remedy
the systemic issues for student
outcomes.
So I guess my question is a
little more specific
development.
An optional after school
program.
Jordan and rollers in it maybe
not all of them at one eight
created a K. five plus.
Mr Chairman representative
currently in statute in my
understanding is how the
department is running this.
They are essentially as long as
you had the required number of
days
the department will give will
let you generate funding in your
formula based on how many
students are participating so
you may have a program that
doesn't exactly include every
single student in the school but
you'll be generating funding
through those components
involvement for those specific
students that are participating.
Thank you.
We answered my question.
Right thank you and then Sunday
I appreciate it and I I just
wanted to come to demystify
something so you're talking
about stacking the purpose right
is when you can do
Increased hours in the day if
you're doing K. five plus and
extended learning is that
correct.
Yes Mr chair that's correct so
and and then just to break that
down if you're doing K. five
plus currently if the school is
awarded for K. five plus that
means adding the twenty five
days prior to the school year is
that correct.
Mr chair that's how the statue
reads currently yes.
And and so extended learning is
that ten days added to the
calendar that's also correct.
Mr chair yes but I believe it is
written as one hundred ninety
days for a five day school week
and a hundred fifty days for
under sixty days for a four day
school week but the department
has authorized schools to simply
add ten days if.
They were significantly below.
The typical average one fifty
one eighty school school year
that we with normal okay.
Cool no no I definitely
appreciate that and and so just
if you're doing one or the other
you can you currently are not
doing extended school day so K.
five plus or extended learning
in.
if the school district is doing
one or school is doing one you
can not use it to extend the
date currently that's correct Mr
chair that is correct you have
to be doing both to convert
those towers.
Great we would certainly
appreciate that clarification
sunny and and that was exactly
what I was speaking to earlier
it's allowing in house bill one
eighty four is allowing
equitable in ours whether you're
doing one or both of the
programs but thank you all we
really appreciate you being
being available to answer
questions thank you Sonny thank
you Mr Senator.
All right we have any other
questions.
All right well.
I'm again thank you all for your
presentation house bill two
forty seven passed unanimously
thank you so much.
All right so committee we will
move on to our next Gen the item
on gonna bring in.
Representative Thomson something
happened and you came in that's
awesome.
House bill one forty two so did
you have an expert that I need
to promote or demote.
I stayed at thank you Mr chair
I'm it's Jeff Clark.
Right just if you could raise
your hand our family Wilkes and
Elena Rubin felt.
Morning already.
All are very good listeners I
appreciate that makes things a
lot easier.
And promote okay so
Representative I I know we're in
a little bit of a pinch we have
floor here in committee you're
here with us
Thank you so much.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I will try to be
brief so this house bill one
forty two we brought up in two
thousand nineteen and made it
all the way to the Senate floor
and then.
There were there was a lot of
misinformation out there and it
did get narrowly defeated so we
we've we've been working on it
Mr chair for two years well for
for those two years that we have
worked on it about a year before
that and here's let me tell you
quickly what the bill does it
it's a creates a task force on
sexual misconduct it requires
public schools and public and
private their private
postsecondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures procedures
addressing affirmative consent
and prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence harassment and stalking
it requires of those
institutions to conduct by and
by any all sexual misconduct
climate surveys and it amends
the public school code to
include a requirement to set
affirmative consent as that
standards for sexual activity
and just very quickly Mr chair
and members affirmative consent
basically can be boiled down to
only yes means yes in a sexual
context not saying no not being
silent not saying maybe not not
having dated or none of that
gives you permission in a sexual
way the only thing that gives
you permission is a arm yes.
And so we want to we want to
teach our kids that because we
hear a lot about camp on campus
rapes and sexual assaults and
sexual harassment in I would
just say the way I was brought
up Mr chair and admittedly I'm a
dinosaur on old was kind of be
nice you always have to be nice
and it wasn't about you know I
would be I I I'd love to go
dancing and then would put their
hands where they didn't belong
and rather than slapping them or
need them and the growing like
they deserve I would be very
gentle and move their hand or I
would not dance with them again
and and I don't think that you
need anyone needs to be that way
anymore so this is this Mr chair
is to teach our children that
their bodies belong to them and
no one has any right to a hug to
anything else and just real
quickly Mr chair I will tell you
some of the organizations that
we have been working with over
these two years The New Mexico
sexual assault providers eek UNM
Planned Parenthood girls Inc of
Santa Fe southwest women's Law
Center every voice New Mexico
strong families New Mexico bowl
features progress now New Mexico
Santa Fe now together for
brothers indigenous women rising
associated students of New
Mexico State University have
also written a letter of support
and we also have that Santa Fe
girls school and with that Mr
speaker I will allow my experts
to what to give a brief
introduction thank you.
Is there anybody that wishes to.
Go first.
Mr chair I'd be comfortable
going first.
Emily.
Wonderful thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for having me my name is
Emily wells and I'm very pleased
to be speaking with you this
morning I'm here to give you a
brief glimpse into some of the
life changing experiences I had
as a UNM student to help you
understand what our college
campuses are like.
I was in two more stories that
brought me to tears in the past
five years than any young person
should listen to in their
lifetime.
Whether you have children or
grandchildren currently in
attending university I do not
know but what I do now is that
it can be mentally and
emotionally exhausting to be a
young person on a college
campus.
I do know is that this is a
topic that people often avoid
discussing because it's
uncomfortable and truthfully
because it can be scary.
It's scary to imagine the impact
that sexually violent acts can
have and it's scary to imagine
the possibility that one day it
could happen to someone in your
life what scares me the most is
continuing on without providing
resources to survivors all
across our state to support
families events occur.
During my time at UNM I served
as a mentor to many groups of
students and as a result many of
my peers confided in me I've
heard dozens of stories that I
can share with you today but in
the interest of time I've
narrowed them down and before I
continue I'd like to give a
quick warning as I'll be
describing some sexually violent
situations.
My fellow those have been
tackled on campus she's by
strangers when walking to their
cars after class and coerced
into sexual acts in fear of
their safety the pandemic salted
by their classmates their
friends even their significant
others and there have been far
more brutal attacks.
A friend of mine was once choked
unconscious and raped by a
prominent student leader.
The speech experiences are not
unique these experiences happen
to our most vulnerable
demographic it rates we
currently have no way of knowing
I don't share these stories with
you to scare you ask for your
sympathy but to help you
understand that just because you
aren't hearing about these
brutal attacks does not mean
they are occurring on our
campuses.
I myself am a survivor last fall
I was a witness in criminal
court and that experience was a
psychological battle ground to
say the least I wanted to see
the man held accountable but
instead the system said not
guilty.
Speaking from my own experience
these situations can be
suffocating I was overly
involved when I was a student I
was well informed of the
resources that were available to
me and I utilized every tool
from counseling to academic
extensions and still my last
year at a university I toward
was plagued with anxiety attacks
sleepless nights and an
overwhelming feeling of
hopelessness.
I do not expect my legislators
to be able to instantaneously
halt sexual violence and right
the wrongs I've experienced but
I do hope you listen to me when
I say but I was well supported
during the fallout of my
incident and it was still the
hardest year of my life
hundreds of students across our
state are not afforded the same
opportunity if it were not for
the lovers back advocacy center
and other resources provided by
my university I truly do not
believe I would have graduated
last spring I feel extremely
lucky that UNM has resources
available for students when it
comes to sexual violence in
education but might I remind
everyone that the reason these
resources exist is due to gross
negligence that led to an
investigation and the
implementation of additional
requirements our department of
justice in two thousand sixteen
these resources are not equally
available at our rural schools
and in my opinion it is critical
that we have appropriate
resources for all students
across our state every student
is our support regardless of the
size of their city.
House bill one forty two
addresses these inequities it
provides a more holistic
approach to educating young
students on affirmative consent
to prevent potentially violent
situations from happening in the
future.
It provides higher education
institutions of more ways to
support students by implementing
an amnesty policy that removes
barriers for students who are
afraid of seeking help because
they're afraid they may get in
trouble memorandums of
understanding to provide
additional resources to students
you medical or legal assistance
which would be especially
impactful at smaller schools
that don't already have these
programs in place I'm a task
force to create a campus survey
will collect data so we can
identify gaps and track the
progress being made in our
schools.
I believe that change starts
with legislation and by
supporting these changes you're
telling students what their
experiences are valid and they
deserve the opportunity to be
supported passing this
legislation will quite literally
change lives and four are you
the opportunity to thrive in
situations of injustice.
Sexual violence isn't going to
disappear overnight but with
this legislation we have the
opportunity to invest in the
well being of our students in
ways that I can attest to to
help this is not the end of a
discussion on how to better
combat sexual violence but it is
the beginning thank you so much
for your time and are I'd be
happy to answer any questions
you have.
Thank you.
Yes please.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is just Clark
and I'm the prevention manager
at solace crisis treatment
center the sexual assault
service center here in Santa Fe
I've been teaching affirmative
consent to middle and high
school students as part of
comprehensive sexual health
education for the last nine
years.
In those years students have
responded with excitement over
the idea that they're entitled
agency over their bodies
determination to move the
conversation into their peer
communities and anger that
dominant narratives about sexual
violence haven't given them the
access to the information they
need to have healthy
relationships.
Because according to the youth
risk and resiliency survey
thirty eight point six percent
of high school age young people
grades nine to twelve report
having had sexual intercourse
and nine point nine percent
report having been sexually
assaulted in the last twelve
months this education is clearly
necessary.
Affirmative consent education
help students understand that
sexual violence is not only the
stranger assault so often
presented in media and which
rarely resembles how people are
salt in real life but also that
the people we care about and are
in relationship with can cross
boundaries and cause harm.
Among the students for which the
latter is true having their
experience named can be the
first step to accessing support.
Beyond that affirmative consent
education give students tools to
build and navigate the
relationships they want on their
terms and for the students who
are already survivors of sexual
violence without the guilt that
so often comes with being told
that because they didn't
physically fight back they're to
blame for being assaulted.
Looking down the road the number
one comment I get from teachers
were present during our sessions
is that they wish they would
have had this education when
they were growing up that would
save them years of confusion and
sometimes unfortunately
extraordinary pain H. B. one
forty two will help us ensure
that ten years from now today's
students won't have to say the
same thank you making.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Elena Rubin felt and I'm the
legal director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs Representative
Representative Thomson Jassin
Emily did a phenomenal job
explaining at this bill and I
know we are conscious of time so
I just will say that I'm here to
answer any questions that might
come up thank you so much.
Great thank you all for being
here all right so we will move
to the attendees list those in
support of house bill one forty
two and you wish to speak please
go ahead and indicate by raising
your hand.
We'll give it a moment wall the
list shuffles on my screen.
All right.
No.
So I have first on the list
read.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you good morning chair
amero and committee members my
name is Brady Garrity and I'm a
senior at the university of New
Mexico I am here in support of
house bill one forty two.
A young college student I
understand the importance of the
bills such as this because I
see the negative consequences of
not having trainings on
affirmative consent sexual
safety and sexual abuse.
We hear the statistics about
young people who have been
abused but what is equally if
not more concerning as the
number of young people who don't
know that they had experienced
sexual harassment abuse all
right there are many students
who have not been taught to look
out for coercion or manipulation
nor how to set boundaries which
leads to the self cleaning and
explaining away of bad
situations.
This bill not only can educate
young people on how and when to
not cross boundaries but more
importantly in my opinion it
teaches young people that they
have control over their own
bodies the power they have to
say no or yes and the self worth
they have which deserves to be
respected.
Changing environment does not
happen overnight but these steps
will make young people safer and
programs such as these can
change someone's life overnight.
With this bill we have the
opportunity to make a safe
campus environment where all are
given the right to safety and
resources and we have the
opportunity to give students a
personal authority and power to
make educated decisions thank
you for your time and your work
in this committee.
Right thank you.
All right we'll go to Japan.
Good morning Jen you have two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Jennifer
billet with girls Inc of Santa
Fe of this bill house bill one
forty two is our top legislative
priority not only for us as an
organization but for our team
leadership council are where we
have a group of girls who have
been in our programs for a long
time they learned affirmative
consent at a very young age we
still work with girls as young
as five and teach them right out
of the gate up about you know
asking for consent before they
touch other girls in our program
and as they grow up and reached
junior high middle school and
high school that they start to
see how important this is in
terms of their more sexually
related encounters that start
happening at that age so we
stand in strong support of this
bill and I hope it will get it
to pass from the committee.
All right thank you.
All right we will go to Andrew.
Good morning injury you have two
minutes welcome good morning
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Andrew
Eckels I'm a student at MSU New
Mexico state director of the
every voice coalition and an
organizer with a quality New
Mexico I'm here today in strong
support of HB one forty two
particularly the biennial campus
survey component in two thousand
seventeen when I was applying to
colleges I noticed that MSU had
only reported three cases of
sexual violence that year my
first two months on campus for a
rude awakening and MSU students
received five margin seal arts
regarding sexual assaults that
had taken place in the dorms in
that two month period not only
did I feel that my safety was
threatened I felt like to the
school I uprooted my life for
was not interested ensuring
accurate data the campus survey
and H. B. one forty two will
allow students to make informed
decisions about the future of
their education students and
survivors are counting on your
support today and on the floor
thank you for allowing me to
speak.
Great.
Thank you and your.
All right we will go to
Marshall.
Good morning Marshall you have
up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I Marshall
Martinez and executive director
of equality New Mexico the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
I'll take you people have been
on a long journey toward
liberation and that journey has
always first and foremost
centered on autonomy our ability
to control our bodies make
decisions about our bodies and
the lives we live in communities
and it is inherently tied to our
ability to thrive and seek our
liberation affirmative consent
education is critical to this
journey for one simple fact we
cannot be in power we can not
own and make decisions about our
bodies if we are not educated
and taught to create and enforce
boundaries.
House bill one forty two is
about just that is about the
stigmatizing conversations is
about teaching young people the
ways to measure and enforce
boundaries for our bodies is
about learning how to navigate
this world in a way that leads
us whole and less traumatized.
We're in transferable especially
queer and trans youth are much
more likely to experience sexual
harassment and assault because
of our sexual orientations and
gender identities this bill will
provide one more opportunity for
us to mitigate these hazards by
teaching us by providing us with
the resources when we are in
schools including colleges and
by helping us to live in a world
where the larger society around
us understands how to discuss
and navigate consent we urge
your support and thank you for
the time Mr chairman.
Right thank you.
All right we'll go to Karen.
Good morning Karen you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning chairman members
and excuse me members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter when we stand in strong
support of this this bill and
I'm just gonna say for all the
reasons stated above in the
interest of time thank you very
much.
Right thank you can.
All right we'll go to route.
Please welcome you have a two
minutes I thank you so much Mr
chairman I'll keep it short just
not repeat what others have
already said the my name is
Bruce I'm currently a program
coordinator for together for
brothers and that means that
I've had the opportunity to work
with young men of color agents
thirteen to twenty four here in
Albuquerque for the past four of
five years and I'm here in
speaking in support of house
bill one forty two because we
know that consent is vital to
the success of young men of
color and their peers which is
why we believe that he needs to
be included in curriculum and
taught in our schools so our
young people are better equipped
to live healthier lives
foster safe and healthy
relationships
and and and be better equipped
to to handle situations I'm in
school and also in their and
their private lives I ask for
support from other members of
the house the Education
Committee on the on house bill
one forty two thank you.
It thank you.
All right so is there anybody
else in page speaking support.
Okay so we'll go to opposition
is there anybody that wishes to
speak in opposition to house
bill one forty two.
Okay.
Just making sure it wasn't on
you for that all right so we'll
come back to committee
Committee.
We await Representative please.
Mr chairman when appropriate and
I just.
Seems appropriate is there all
seconded are there questions
comments.
Earns.
Issues.
Okay.
Madam secretary you call the
roll need to pass for house bill
one forty two please.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
No.
Our.
Dow.
Representative figura.
Representative thank you are a.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Lane.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Stapleton.
Thanks chair Garrett.
Chairman.
Yes.
I have to to.
All right so by a vote of eight
to to do you have a do pass on
house bill one forty two
certainly appreciate it I don't
know if you have any closing
remarks as you all move on to
the next committee or the floor
but but please I know things
where we're quick in there were
questions but if you had any
closing remarks please.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I just want to thank
you this really is a good bill
it's been vetted over the years
and that and I I encourage your
support on the floor and talk to
your friends thank you Mr chair.
Great well thank you all so much
for being here have a nice rest
of your day and committee we
will reconvene at eight o'clock
on.
Friday so Friday morning
everybody will see you on the
floor in the next fifteen
minutes by everybody.
Okay thank you to Taylor to for
calling in.
Forget to mention.
So do we I guess I and this.
You're on mute.
You're you're on mute you're on
mute.
Apparently you in this because
you are.
Taylor is now the host.
I am the host yes for once I
can.
I can mandate yes.
Did did we need to meet more.
