Thank you for Baca I at all.
Representative or ball coming
in.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garrett your.
Representative del.
Here chairman.
Here.
We do have a quorum awesome so
we have a quorum good morning
everybody it's nice to see you
all on a Saturday
sorry about the the issues this
morning about time and things
like that I can wish it worked
like my Google classroom for my
students for we just have a wing
can you go to the classroom and
then click the link and you
enter
but just know that if we do have
a Saturday meeting at least for
these first couple of weeks they
will begin at eleven because we
have financing appropriations
doing their preparations for the
budget that's coming up in the
next couple of weeks so we have
a number of members that are on
that committee and one of our
presenters today so I just want
to be respectful it was
something that I hadn't fully
realized till later on down the
week that we needed to
reschedule it and obviously
being on this format is a is a
little bit more cumbersome for
everybody to our
get that message out in the
links and all that stuff re
oriented so I really appreciate
that those of you that we're in
finance and appropriations we
appreciate all you certainly
being here and hopefully your as
bright eyed as everybody else
If not more so so with that
without further ado we will go
to the house bill one twenty
eight this morning so we have
Representative sardana back from
when state in order to walk us
through kind of the changes that
she made so Representative I
neglected to ask before you get
started you have anybody here
that wishes to speak or is gonna
join you for this yes Mr
chairman thank you just to let
you know energy and and the
other side appropriations the
still on so this is a little
crazy today
I have Mr S. bills also it is
here and Julie palms from I mean
you'll Garcia for problems just
in case okay.
Okay if you would help if you're
in the attendees list please
raise your hand.
You get pumped up that right.
Panelist.
The.
Well.
All right so
Can we start off obviously we've
covered your bill you heard the
committee its wishes
so can you read us the two oh
two number of your first
amendment please hi Mr chairman
it's two one nine six zero zero.
It and we combined everything
and point to point to okay so so
we'll give it a minute.
Okay cool so give you all the
equipment two one nine six zero
zero point two it should be the
third one on the ShareFile you.
Your own equipment to pull that
up.
All right so we have that so can
you kind of walk us through this
amendment Representative do we
need somebody to move it first
or help please yep you're good.
Discussion okay I'll have
Representative Dow segment.
All right thank you Mr chairman
so we made several changes to
this amendment we did address
Representative is L. as an
agency and Representative lanes
issues as far as students and
the child in student I'm we need
to keep those in because when
we.
When their school their child
but it can also talk about an
educator abusing a child at home
are two year old three year old
who are in school so we need to
both in the bill so we went to
the bill and they're changed
consistently throughout do you
want me to go step by step on
how we changed it or you want a
summary or would be care could
use summarize for us I think we
all have the amendment here but
that can you also color in more
of the distinction and where it
was placed because part of the
issue was we had child in some
and student and others so where
you're making the changes and
why.
I'm what's best whereby I'm it's
changed everywhere where was
wherever there was just child or
children and students so we just
made a concise throughout the
bill and standardized throughout
the bill okay eight an avid but
school before volunteer
throughout the bill I know it
was a volunteer at school.
I'm some big things we did was
we struck on number five on page
five by twenty two through page
seven line twenty five we took
out all of subsection II which
talked about child abuse.
And we moved to page nine input
in between lines sixteen and
seventeen my going to pass.
A little bit you might want to
give a little bit of a wait time
for for members to to follow and
track thank you.
Okay so are we there members.
Okay so if you could talk about
the next amendment.
So that was for it
Representative that'll be child
and students.
Senator lane on page ten line
can we took out it was
discriminatory comments or we
take out the comments or so it's
just discriminatory.
But
have a hard.
And then the rest pretty much
throughout urges children Jane
or student and.
For.
And the.
The last major thing was we
took.
Right on page eighteen line
fifteen.
we had superintendent of a
school district and we just had
check out of a school district.
Thank.
I'm so Representative just so
you know it sounds like you
might be using external
microphone and when you flip
through the papers it's making a
lot of whirring like noises.
We now B. and I when I under
Jeter's okay.
Now now now I totally
understand.
all right so for this amendment
do we have questions comments
from committee.
So.
Okay.
It's.
Mr chairman I was going to move
the equipment.
Thank you Mr same here move
okay you're gonna move it for.
Your adoption production option
all right all right so we have a
motion to adopt the amendment
from Representative Lane will
give the second to
Representative Dow is there any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
All right see none you have a
further adopted bill
representative awesome
for the next one can you walk us
through or give us the two oh
two number for the next and and
that should be all the equipment
we have we incorporated we had
one originally we recorded
everything into this one.
Okay awesome.
It I was a little bit afraid of
having more amendment.
We're great so we do we have
further discussion on the bill.
Right if not what's the will of
the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Representative please that would
be best.
All right so we have to pass a
motion by Representative meant
that all seconded it
madam secretary called the roll
on to do passed motion on house
bill one twenty eight as
amended.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield
Representative Dow.
Representative the cell.
Representative is al.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative lame.
Yes.
Representative Ladda.
Representative Ladda first
representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative R. ball Cabana.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garant.
Chairman.
Yes.
Nine two zero.
All right so you have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
one twenty eight as a man thank
you for really working with the
committee and sticking with it
and making all those changes so
we had a nice clean build to
head out of this committee on to
your next one so good luck
Representative Sari√±ana thank
you so much have a good day
eighty five.
All right so we will move on to
your house bill one seventy five
Director Gajah I believe Joey is
going to be presenting with me
correct all right there is that
all right so we'll give you all
the second so house bill one
seventy five.
And I'm.
Roybal Caballero it needs to
have the link sent to her
For New Mexico only.
I I trying to senator but she
said she didn't get it.
Okay on to that.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman are you ready.
Yes madam chair thank you thank
you
All right so house bill one
seventy five I'm so house bill
one seventy five is probably all
one of the most
important bills to come out of
the session so one of the things
we've heard all interim longer
as it relates to the pandemic is
this fear of on school districts
losing money because they're
losing students and student
enrollment during this pandemic
so what we've heard from
superintendents we've heard from
school boards we've heard from.
I say all the education
stakeholders is for some sort of
hold harmless bill for the next
school year since we in New
Mexico are in a prior year
funding so meaning the school
enrollment from the previous
year will determine the school
budget for the schools and for
the districts in the next school
year
the fact that so many of our
school districts and so many of
our charter schools have lost
students due to the pandemic for
whatever reason
Is it is certainly a concern
that headed into this next
school year with things being so
and certain if we return to the
classroom say in August what the
enrollment numbers are looking
like one of the things that is
super super important about this
bill that I'll explain well all
explain the bill right now and
they talk about why it's so
important and I think why we
were we're going to have broad
based support and I think it's
important for the education
community to really past this
bill and have this version of of
the hold harmless enacted is
what this bill is doing is
basically saying that school
districts cannot lose funding
meaning they can not dropped in
there funding as compared to pre
pandemic funding levels.
obviously a few things are noted
in the LESC analysis like this
idea of a cliff that we're
dealing with that we have a
natural and
decline in enrollment that may
be true
we don't know if schools are
going to have the same amount of
students returning with the in
them there's a lot of
uncertainty but I think our role
as legislature now that we're
meeting in January from January
until March school districts are
are starting to really plan
their budget as soon as we
passed one in March April and
then it's finalized usually in
may so all that time schools and
districts are trying to budget
they're trying to determine what
classes they're gonna have some
scheduling they're trying to
determine all teachers to have
to fulfill those roles in the
needs of their students and
school so the the proposal that
we have in front of you to not
let school district budget
declined period whether they've
lost a lot of students or in
some cases we'll hear some
schools.
Have actually increased
enrollment significantly is is
super timely but it provides
that certainty for the school
districts moving forward into a
great no that is the next school
year but it certainly prepares
the schools to to address the
concerns and the needs of of
their students there's also the
transportation allocation as
part of this bill obviously
because of the pandemic this is
affected ridership on
transportation I think this part
is probably this part is is
accounted for in the LFC
recommendation from the inner on
the LFC recommendation and
the executive budget
recommendations to address
transportation the real the
difference may come in terms of
what this hold harmless could
look like but I think this is
the strongest proposal on that
we'll see and the the one that's
most likely to provide that
certainty for school districts
headed into on on certain next
school year
So with that I have Mr Simon
from legislative education study
committee I don't know if you
want to make additional remarks
Jareth or we can wait for
questioning.
My only remark at this time
would be Mr Chairman is there is
no clarifying amendment to the
bill I just wanna make sure you
have that yeah.
So there is an amendment.
I'm amendment for discussion.
Is there a second.
All that.
Okay and everybody the amendment
number is two one nine.
Six three seven point one.
Great so as far as the amendment
in discussions with districts
and superintendents were really
came to light is this idea of a
clawback of funds and whether
PED would claw back funds if too
many were given out on this is
to clarify that because there
was never any intent for it to
mean that the simply makes clear
insuring the calculation is
always in a positive number for
school districts so it's a lot
of clarifying language is so so
school districts are fearful of
of having that money clawed back
something we heard the districts
be afraid of.
With that mail stand for
questions on the amendment.
Question from the amendment
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and and my
question is not on the amendment
but on the bill I apologize.
But the option of the amendment
okay it's been moved I second
that is there any objection to
accepting the amendment.
Okay we have an amended house
bill one seventy five I continue
Mr chairman.
Great thank you madam chair
thank you committee for that we
stand for questions.
Okay and with that we'll go to
the audience I'm going to I ask
that people who would like to
speak in favor of the amended
house bill one seventy five to
please raise your hands now.
Okay and we'll start with a
super superintendent.
I Dennis Rocha you have the
floor.
Of course I want to be held
harmless yeah thank you madam
chair and thank you.
Chairman Romero for the bill
this is among the top.
Priorities for the
superintendents association I am
speaking for the association as
the president.
And that this is one of our top
priorities without a hold
harmless for operational what
we're seeing in school districts
is a double scramble will see a
scramble this this spring to
reduce the size of our staff to
get down to the budget which
will be reflecting this year's
lower enrollment and then if all
those kids come roaring back in
the fall which we hope and
anticipate will see a second
scramble to try to staff back up
to address the needs of those
children that are returning to
the building the problem is we
don't know for sure that they're
returning or in what numbers
that's the downside of I think
the LFC is approach we very much
favor the LAFC's approach this
bill is the vehicle to
accomplish that and we urge your
adoption of the bill as amended
as well as please urge your A.
HA FC colleagues to include this
approach in house bill two thank
you so much we stand in strong
support.
I thank you superintendent and a
reminder we like in our
committee to have you put your
first and last name
so we love your first names but
if you can add your last names
to that's helpful our next
speaker is superintendent Scott
elder from APS.
Hi can you hear me now.
Yes.
Warning you hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
Mr my name is Scott elder at the
interim superintendent
Albuquerque public schools thank
you for meeting to hear this
bill it takes time on a Saturday
especially.
This bill is a priority for
Albuquerque public schools to
support the stability of the
district unpredictable
environment enrollment for the
twenty twenty one twenty two
school year will that resemble
current role but actual numbers
are no we will continue to
ensure that we have a safe
welcoming engaging and
innovative educational
environment in this bill allows
us to more effectively planned
for next year at the coming
years we truly appreciate your
support to ensure we have the
stability to support each and
every student Albuquerque thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Our next speaker is great and
great if you can identify
just identify yourself fully.
Yes Representative my apologies
this is Greg Maxie speaking as a
individual school board member
for the Lovington municipal
school district we stand in
support of this bill and as
superintendent wash spoke
earlier in cover those points
exactly we believe the LFC that
this is the mechanism and we
urge the chair and all committee
members
to support H. B. one seventy
five thank you so much madam.
Thank you Greg.
Our next speaker is actually
long of a fifteen New Mexico.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
actually wrong with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico in the interest of time
will just be sure to say that we
stand in strong support and we
appreciate the work of the
Sanchez on this measure thank
you.
Thank you
our next speaker is Stan rounds.
Thank you madam chair.
We can hear you.
You're more Madam chair on
Stardoll lost yes we can okay
thank you so much good morning
members committee madam chair
this is stand around I'm the
executive director of the school
superintendents Mr are Dennis
Roch indicated our support this
is an organization I want you to
know how pre should we are the
sponsor and staff really is C.
as we have gone through this
bill meticulously we believe
this is the proper approach the
only approach will ensure that
we can maintain staffing
viability services to students
and their ability to conduct
business next year we strongly
urge your support of this thank
you for hearing on the Saturday
morning.
Thank you our next speaker is.
Are very par Sanchez from.
Are any New Mexico.
Hi can you hear me yes.
good morning
Chair
and the committee I we any in
New Mexico I'm the president of
NEA New Mexico we stand in
strong support of the bill we
have a big responsibility and
bringing kids back to school
from the pandemic and we need
the staffing to be able to do so
so.
Appreciate the Sanchez bringing
the bill forward and again we
stand in strong support thank
you.
Thank you and our next speaker
is from any a New Mexico.
Do we have an additional speaker
labeled any a New Mexico.
Can you hear me yes can you hear
we can okay I guess I was noting
that that yes we.
Good morning Mr chair and and
chair and members of the
committee status Yang is
government relations director
for any in New Mexico on behalf
of our members we stand in
support of this bill is aligned
with our goals and prioritizing
education funding to guarantee
adequate recurring revenues and
it's also a shared legislative
goal of the New Mexico education
partners of which eighty eight
New Mexico is a partner up we
know student enrollment has
declined and this will have an
adverse impact on public school
funding as per the current SCG
formula the mere fact that our
public schools might face a
decline is in funding is this
what we as a state have been
working on so hard in the past
few years and that is we need to
continue with our work in
providing a sufficient public
education for students as
outlining us the Martinez.
We thank the sponsor for this
bill we stand in support of this
bill with our partners and
encourage the committee to
consider a favorable vote for
house bill one seventy five
thank you.
Thank you our next speaker is
Steve.
Please mute yourself Steve.
You hear me now yes well my name
is Stephen curry okay I am a
commissioner with the Public
Education Commission in district
ten which is a Santa Fe tells
Rio Arriba Colfax counties all
right of the Colorado border so
we can't forget our public
school kids that are in state
charter schools either we stand
in support absolutely of this
bill but I'd like to go on to
say that it's unfortunate that
it took a pandemic to bring up
the issue of holding education
harmless we're in a state that
has fluctuating revenue and we
can't keep looking to the one
item that has the biggest
percentage as most states do
public ed every time we need to
make a cut so I would consider
us to take you along with you
absolutely not only to pass this
bill includes complete support.
Let's continue holding education
harmless into the future making
sure that always our districts
are public school students are
prioritized in the budget thank
you very much and and I'm sorry
that I didn't address that your
first thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and audience
that wonderful that thank you Mr
curry all our next speaker is
Linda Siegel.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Linda Siegel
representing the Santa Fe public
schools are superintendent and
board of education and we stand
in strong support of this bill
in the last fiscal year we had
to cut over eight million
dollars to balance our budget
and if all things remain equal
and we don't get this hold
harmless we're going to have to
cut another seven million due to
a significant loss in enrollment
but we believe that many of
these families who went out of
state or out of the country or
started home schooling or send a
private schools we believe that
they will return so if we may if
we have to make these cuts again
and or more New Mexico will have
to cut staff and then we'll have
to hire people back when the
students return so we appreciate
you all introducing this bill
and strongly supported thank
you.
Thank you our next speaker is Dr
Ellen burn sting.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Ellen bursting
from the Albuquerque teacher.
Sorry.
That was my mistake.
Dr Byrne Steen put your hand up
again please.
Mr Chairman do you see her.
I don't think he you may have
been booted permanently so we
can move on this issue of
second.
Okay our next person is slowly
may our keys.
Good morning.
We can hear you.
Board association can you hear
me yes okay I just wanna make
sure my screen was changing
I'm as well along with our
executive director Jody and
we're both wanted to the
progress of the this bill he's
on the website as well this is a
very important bill for us this
last December and our virtual
annual school board conference
our school board membership
unanimously voted to set this is
a top priority and advocate for
a hold harmless provision for
operating budgets for members in
guarantees that their schools
will receive no fewer SCG
revenues than prior year free
pandemic level levels so that
critical teachers staff and
operational costs are available
to continue providing
instruction required for
students NMSA stands in strong
support of this legislation that
will hold our public school
harmless from reductions to
these operating budgets due to
the declining pandemic
enrollments and we support
legislation to guarantee school
received no fewer SCG revenues
in prior year levels
NMSA thanks to Sanchez very much
for bringing for this
legislation and we ask favorable
consideration by this committee
thank you madam chair and Mr
chair thank you for our next
speaker is Matt Paul.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes we can.
Thanks madam chair my name is
Matt Paul with public charter
schools of New Mexico we support
house bill one seventy five when
we presented our policy platform
to the LFC this winter we asked
for stability and flexibility
for the school funding next year
at the time we admitted this is
a tough needle to thread but we
believe house bill one seventy
five accomplishes this.
provides a reasonable for for
school funding as well as
providing for growth units of
the fortieth day first and
foremost this ensures that every
student is funded who comes to
school next year and secondarily
it means that administrators
have the stability they need to
plan appropriately for next
school year we applaud the
sponsor for finding a sensible
path forward for one of the
critical questions that need to
be answered this question the
session thank you.
Thank you Mr call and
doctor burn scenes trying to get
back on so it Linda you can
watch for doctor burn sting K.
our next speaker is Jason
Espinoza.
Madam chair can you hear me yes
we can okay
good morning madam chair members
of the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico kids can which is a
statewide education advocacy
organization we stand in support
of this legislation Raul funding
projections are certainly
complicated for the year due to
the projected five percent
increase in public school
enrollment Mexico kids can't
believe the strength that
Mexico's education systems are
student centered funding system
support any legislation or
budget language that emphasizes
allocated resources based on the
students a district or charter
serving our particular support
of the bills based on the forty
eight adjustment to ensure
districts are getting funded on
the students enrolled and that
the students that's schools that
see in Rome increases based on
meeting the needs of the
community are recognized with
adequate funding and not
penalized thank you madam chair.
Do we have any more people that
want to speak in favor.
In that case you would like to
speak in opposition to the bill
please raise your hand
attendees.
No people are wishing to speak
in opposition will go to our
panel of representatives first
with questions is representative
Lente and next is Representative
Gleim representative Lente.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you chairman for bringing this
bill no questions in regards to
the bill or comment regarding
the bill but more of a comment
regarding something that the
former Representative Ross Cruz
superintendent Ross mentioned in
regards to of making sure that
we can support the initiatives
of this type of bill and that
Elia sees budget as opposed to
LFC it goes to the point again
that you have a group of folks
that are interested in very much
involved in education making
decisions and they have those
that are not but then you have a
conflicting view in regards to
budget aspect and so in some way
I think there has to be some
changes made in regards to how
these budget issues go forward
in regards to budget aspects
particularly for education so
that being said thank you madam
chair thank you chair.
Thank you representative our
next panelist to speak as
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair if I may
if I if I may I'm sorry I
Representative Sweetser has her
hand up and have questions too
so if you could adhere to the
list okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chairman Romero for bringing
this bill and and I do confess I
I raise my hand before public
to patients over several teacher
and German American doesn't
Senator me but I appreciate this
bill madam chair I think if I
understand this correctly
essentially what this does is if
we look at the SCG numbers for
FY twenty compare those the SCG
numbers for FY twenty two if the
twenty two numbers come in lower
than twenty we're gonna take but
twenty SCG numbers is that
correct madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
yes that's correct so that no
school districts I mean even if
they're losing enrollment at
that time they would not see a
declining in funding.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair so my my question and I I
do support this bill and so I
just want to ask a question
because it.
Maybe I'm not understanding
fully but I I have a suggestion
if we look at page five of the
bill.
And then winds nineteen through
twenty two.
this section what it bills what
is we're looking at
transportation numbers of
students and trying to to make
sure that that funding for
transportation doesn't fall off
as a result of fewer students
writing school buses.
And so what this language does
is what it said basically we are
going to.
just give you whatever funding
for transportation that that you
out of the school district from
the year two thousand twenty.
and so the scenario that I would
I would raise madam chair and
you know maybe something
you're trying to put this bill
moves on the next committee is
what if I as a school district
for more twenty two my FY twenty
two numbers one of the COVID
higher than they did in FY
twenty but I think this bill
would require me to still
receive my by tweet FY twenty
numbers so what was done in
other sections of the bill is
that basically what the school
district the higher of the two
numbers and I think this
language year mandates FY twenty
regardless of whether twenty two
is higher Madam.
Representative.
Jerry are madam chair Joe we can
address that.
Madam chair and representative
lane so it doesn't specific
section you're referring to
deals with enrollment count
dates right so these both
secondary reporting date I'm
sorry not enrollment count HSD
ridership count dates
both the second and third
reporting date in fiscal year
twenty twenty were pre pandemic
right so there's ridership data
for those years the issue with
transportation specifically is
there just isn't.
Universal ridership data that
can be used this year so it's
not like enrollment we're
schools still have enrollment
and they say they're still.
Serving students like that
ridership has been affected much
more than school enrollment and
so PED is concerned with even
attempting to use current year
data and this is is based on
their recommendation
essentially the data for FY for
the current school year does not
exist and because we base our
transportation funding based on
prior year ridership that
creates a problem for FY twenty
two.
So madam chair we also add
something to that the
transportation formula doesn't.
Doesn't account for current year
ridership and so no we're in the
transportation formula is there
an adjustment for current year
ridership and I think that's a
an important piece you have that
adjustment in the current SCG
formula so folks that are
growing if they want to use
enrollment growth they cannot
but I think get it's something
we can go back and look at make
sure we've got it right but I
think we I think we do based on
the way the transportation
formula works.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
the answer so yeah sensually
there's there's not a scenario
where a school district's gonna
be penalized because a high it
has higher transportation.
Of.
As a higher transportation
counted it in two thousand
four hundred of those responses.
Okay perfect thank you are
watching thank you.
Thank you representative of next
as Representative Sweetser and
then Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair for the bill and
and and I too am a strong
supporter of holding the
districts harmless I think it's
it's the huge issue that we have
to embrace the session but my
question is I know that there's
been calculations that are shown
declining.
and membership across districts
for years there's longitudinal
data how is how is that affected
or we just skipping that for a
year.
Madam chair representative
that's a really good question
and that's something we tried to
take into consideration and and
that's part of the class that
we're talking about is that we
have these natural decline in
enrollment by school districts
but all it becomes cumbersome
when we're trying to maybe
average things out from school
year to school year and try to
find that target I mean as you
heard from some of the the
support from the school
districts in the audience is
that it's this is an extremely
tough
needle to thread so basically
what we're trying to do is is
the understanding among school
districts is that there will be
that class but since they have
to budget so far in advance is
really giving them a predictable
baseline in which to hire their
staff called and plan for the
next school year so I think
that's the understanding with
the school districts is that
there may be that square for
them and that's something that
we're going to obviously be
talking about the inner and and
school districts are are
certainly well aware of and have
been well aware of.
So thank you for that madam
chair Mr chair just so still I
have it in my head we're
basically those those districts
that are showing a natural
decline we're just skipping this
year holding them harmless going
back to where they were and and
not worry about the declining
for four of the year it in my in
my simplifying that too much but
that's what I got to get in my
head.
Okay.
Madam chair of my so I see
Representative R. I. director
gradual can the.
Looking to.
I think the short answer
Representative is yes like like
Representative Romero said that
there's also you are thinking
about increases to the SCG so as
you think about making
appropriations that increase the
SCG year over year.
You're holding people flat to
last year's SCG so there will be
some some wiggle room in there
that will naturally recognize
some of that declining
enrollment if it doesn't come
back.
Okay.
No I I think I have it I mean
that we what we really want to
do is make sure we don't analyze
districts for whatever has
happened this year where ever
their membership is gone and I
just doing that they're all
coming back.
But we're not losing the fact
that that we still have some
some districts with declining
membership and we'll just take
that back act up when we get
back to normal what of what
normal is that there madam chair
Mr chair.
Madam chair and representative
yeah that that's more than fair
to say I think in in what we're
trying to do in in the S. and
again it's to provide it's also
to to add its to provide that
sort of stability headed into
the next school year so that as
these districts are creating
their budgets here in April in
March or April and may that they
know and have a good idea as to
how much money they they will
have headed into the next school
year when we don't know we're
hoping all our students return
by that's a big question mark as
well.
Right now all right thank you
madam chair and thank you Mr
chair for bringing this.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and I also think
that we need to hold our first
to school districts and parents
and students harmless you know
for for what is happening under
this health order and so I.
Fully support what we're trying
to do here the only thing that's
crossed my mind is that you know
right now many of the school
districts or state choosing to
stay closed.
Even more so than what the that
health orders allow so I just
wonder Mr Chairman
representative if anybody
considered a provision that the
bill would only be applicable to
the school districts or charter
schools that are requiring the
maximum in person learning
that's allowed by law supposing
we're still under some sort of
limited so we should fully fund
them even if they choose not to
vote with the health orders
allow them to be open and
learning on campus I see
Representative Stapleton I
really do want feedback from the
committee I think our parents
and our students deserve to be
as in school on campus as much
as the law allows and I'm all
for holding them harmless but
also holding districts
accountable for being as open as
this as the law allows so Mr
chairman and Representative like
to hear your thoughts on that.
Of chair Madam Madam chair
representative no the short
answer is now and I mean that's
of according to the governor now
in the administration PED is
that that's up to the school
district and the school
districts that are still doing
virtual still have costs that
they're incurring whether
they're in school in person or
out of school so I mean the
short answer is no and and I
think it's it's keeping it with
the narrative that we've heard
about flexibility and and not
having a top down or one size
fits all approach to education.
Thank you Mr chairman I
certainly do believe in
flexibility but I also think
that local school districts
should be listening to the
parents and and putting the
needs of the students to be in
person learning
thank you.
Don.
Is.
Is there anybody else that would
like to ask a question among our
representatives.
Okay I'm I don't see any hands
would you like to make any
closing remarks Representative
Romero.
Of thank you madam chair and
thank you committee for for the
questions I mean I think this is
and and we've heard
fair amount of of support from
the education community to to
this idea I see your
Representative Roybal Caballero
just put our hand up at this is
the closing so I'll reserve my
comments if she has questions.
No I I I had might I'm sorry I
had my hand up for a motion I'm
sorry okay just aeration okay
where is it okay so I think this
is is probably the most timely
and one of the most important
education bills of this
legislative session and I think
on the other proposals that are
on the table deal with including
into the general appropriation
act with kind which kind of a
service the the well and the
project is of the education
Committee and the education
community and I think that we we
deserve to have this sort of by
in in in utilized just as as our
voice to help school districts
and well that you heard today
really have stability in what
we're looking for in education
in the next.
In the upcoming school year so I
urge the body support on this
thank you madam chair.
I'd like to make a motion when
it's appropriate.
I can hear you your your muted
madam chair your muted sorry I'm
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes madam chair like to move a
do pass on house bill one
seventy five.
Representative Williams
Stapleton just a minute second.
We've had.
Our motion
and second to for a do pass on
house wanted seventy five as
amended and secretary if you can
call the roll sure.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dowell yes.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lang.
Yes.
Representative Ladda.
Yes.
Representative landed yes.
Representative much read yes.
Representative or Baca I at all
yes.
Representative.
Stapleton yes.
Representative Spitzer yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chairman.
Yes I'll.
Mr Chairman appear to both I can
please yeah Representative
Baldonado spat okay
Representative Baldonado.
Yes okay
Chairman you say yes so that
brings us to fourteen zero.
Representative chairman Romero
you either do pass for House
Bill one seventy five thank you
madam chair I would like to
apologise I should have called
you last.
I can live with that thank you.
Chair.
Madam chair.
Representative Williams
Stapleton madam chair mass a
question of Rachel gradual
please.
Yes please go ahead on the on
the on the bill that we just
passed.
I'm Rachel
Are you aware of what the
process is in that with the LFC
going forward of this question
regarding
various alternatives to school
funding losses from the pandemic
all going forward about.
Funding for prior year funding.
So madam
you madam chair representative I
think LFC and HCFC HFC has the
budget right now as you're aware
I see that Representative
Trujillo just got on the call
and I think she is
the strictly has been the lead
on HFC on public school funding
you know we're starting to talk
with HSC staff about the
different proposals safer hold
harmless
how those are working out LFC
has a different proposal for.
there's one key one key
difference and I think that key
differences
consistency at the beginning of
the year versus waiting for the
legislature to potentially hand
something handle something next
legislative session.
But and I'm not sure I'm
answering your question though
or eight were you specifically
asking about the hold harmless
provisions in those discussions
are budgeting in general for FY
twenty two as the director of
LDS the have you been part of
those discussions in regards to
holding harmless school
districts we are madam chair we
are just starting to schedule
those discussions right now
across both the house and the
Senate with education and
appropriation leadership so
those are starting I think HSC
is just getting into they've
already heard it
They've already heard
preliminary public school
support hearing.
The first week of session and
they will start their work my
understanding in the next week
or so really digging into the
public school budget
and we're starting as I see
Representative trio shaking her
head yes to that we are starting
to have those conversations I
will save HSC did not hear the
L. S. C. budget proposal they
did not have it as a side by
side next to them though there
are really not of not a lot of
differences between what you
guys recommended and what LFC
recommended there's some
fundamental fundamental
differences and early learning
how I'm sorry extended learning
But they were very similar and
so
we over the last years haven't
been involved in that sub
committee work that HFC does but
are talking and spending our
time with the chairwoman along
with the chairman of this
committee okay thank you very
much.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and I turn it back
over to chairman Romero.
Thank thank you madam chair so
we will go to we're gonna have a
presentation from
Joey from el ESC on state
equalization guarantee so
obviously we just had a bill
that was dealing with it and how
to work within its confines for
the next school year well we're
going to have for the next week
some pretty substantive bills
that are looking at changing how
we divvy up money from the SCG
for consideration over the next
week so would allow I think
returning members and new
members alike could really
benefit from kind of this
overview of the state
equalization guarantee along
with a preview of some of the
bills that we have up for
consideration all point four
they overlap points where they
differ in some of the expected
I don't want to say fallout
because it has negative
connotations but for lack of a
better word kind of the I say
the implications of
some of the bills that we're
going to be hearing about
because we all recognize the
importance of of how we find in
the and finance our schools and
we do throw through the SCG so
these are these are pretty
weighty topics for us to
consider so that was really the
thinking in in having
Joey give us overview in kind of
a preview at the of the bills
that we are going to be hearing
so with that I mean I'll ask
members if they have questions
or comments before heading into
the presentation I think.
Joe we had this E. mail these
out this morning in the slides
he's going to be working from is
that right generally.
So so Mr chairman I do I know
those two Linda I'm so I
apologize if I was supposed to
email those to me to members of
the committee we got our wires
crossed on that
I don't know if if possibly
Linda can forward it for me I
would appreciate that I
apologize for that.
no worries.
And Monday if you can just
forward that will we begin The
presentation are you able to
presents Joey
so that we can have that going.
Thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I think you can you
see my screen now.
We can members San defer to you
all to make sure on your various
devices you all are able to
follow as well.
Looking around and seeing lots
of not and I'm seeing some blank
looks.
Okay looks good thank you Jerry.
Okay so Mr chairman and the vote
on.
Yeah
so Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Many of you have seen are sort
of this presentation before and
in terms of a going a high level
overview of how the public
school funding formula works
I'll just briefly highlight this
this high level sheet which is
on your screen now and and once
you get the packet there's also
a larger version of this
particular sheet and then I will
go over some considerations for
the legislature when looking at
at our proposals involving the
public school funding formula
and then as a you said Mister
chairman I'll just give a high
level overview of us several of
the the funding formula bills
that have been introduced this
year or or different proposals.
So the way the public school
funding formula works is it
looks at do Raul meant levels
and the characteristics of
students that tend to reflect
whether those students will
require more resources and in
order to receive an equitable
education and allocate what are
called program units based on
ratings that are provided in
statute for the specific
programs.
So
on the on the right side of the
screen here you can see all of
the different programs that are
included in funded within the
public school funding formula.
It's important to remember that
the factors in the the funding
formula are additive so for
example every student is counted
in the in the top portion of the
blue portion that's label basic
program units and then if that
that's student for example has a
disability or as a gift
education student there
allocated additional funding
from the foreign section if
they're participating in an
elementary fine arts program for
example they're allocated
additional funding if there are
I'm at risk students are there
allocated additional funding
funding.
So for each school district and
charter school the number of
program units are added up by
PED and that number is
multiplied by a unit value which
according to language that's
included each year and the
general appropriation act is.
Multiplied by a unit value that
step by the secretary of public
education under the authority
provided in the general
appropriation act so although
do this the general structure of
the funding formula has been the
same since nineteen seventy
three different things have been
added and changed
over the years the funding
formula is been amended over
eighty times since.
It was first adopted in nineteen
seventy three.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee this here is a
visual representation of the
amount of funding that flows
through each of the different
components of the public school
funding formula so as you can
see from this the vast majority
of program funding for school
districts and charter schools
are provided with your
relatively few factors in in the
funding formula and we're gonna
talk a little bit more about
that as as I go on but as you
can see in the blue in the
orange and in the purple that's
all your basic program units
your special education program
units for students with
disabilities and and gifted
students and then you're at risk
program units and they're in the
purple together those components
if you just add that up make up
over eighty percent of the
roughly three billion dollars
that you all appropriate every
year for public education is is
allocated based on those counts.
The at risk number in particular
has been growing in recent years
as as recently as a few years
ago you would have seen that
number at about four and a half
percent so that number has more
than doubled I have been more
than double by reforms that have
been passed by the legislature
in the wake of the consolidated
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit.
So.
What's the purpose of the public
school funding formula of the
public school funding formula
provides funding for for schools
to carry out the provisions of
the public school code so in
this committee and and elsewhere
you all hear a lot about
unfunded mandates right and so
the public school funding
formula is how the state funds
those mandates that are included
by the legislature in the
different provisions of the
public school code so I'll give
you an example
a few years ago there was at
Ellie S. C. endorsed bell on to
on teacher mentorships
and at the the importance of
tier member mentorship.
So what the legislature did back
then is they enacted that bill
but there was also an
appropriation to the state
equalization guarantee for
school districts and charter
schools to fund their individual
teacher mentorship programs so
when the legislature added that
funding to the formula again
they didn't create a separate
program unit for that they
didn't create a new
calculation in the public school
funding formula for PED they
added those dollars to the base
and allocated those out to
school districts and charter
schools to then determine how to
spend those dollars on teacher
mentorship programs I think it's
also important to note that when
you all did that you also
included in our house bill five
and Senate bill one from the
twenty and nineteen legislative
session you included
requirements that school
districts and charter schools
report to you annually as part
of their education plans on what
they're doing in involving those
mandates on teacher mentorship
how are they feeling that to
meet the needs of students which
then enables you you all to
demonstrate that the state is
providing the kinds of resources
that are needed to ensure that
all students get an adequate
education.
So I'm.
The public school funding
formula is also very precise in
how it allocates.
Dollars so PED does not have a
lot of discretion over how they
can determine what each school
district and charter school get
that's tightly controlled by
statute.
And then as I mentioned before
there's also so many reporting
and auditing requirements in the
different provisions of the
public school finance act that
allows PED to.
Accurately calculate formula
distributions in a fair or in a
fair manner.
and as I mentioned in response
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit the
legislature added performance
based budgeting requirements
because.
The court was very clear in in
that decision that the state
would be judged based on how it
students were performing that
the state needed to show
progress on standards based
assessments on graduation rates
and college remediation rates
and and show improvements and
really focus policy making on
those on adopting those
evidencebased programs that have
been shown to improve those
results.
So couple considerations for you
all to
to think about when you're
considering funding formula
legislation.
and it's very basic the public
school funding formulas the
complicated math problem.
So.
Quantifiable data to be able to
feed and to
calculation to determine
individual allocations so.
Asking the question is does PED
have accurate reliable data that
can be used to calculate dollars
for these programs will PED need
to mandate additional reporting
requirements on school districts
and charter schools when
collecting that data
and I will PED need to do audit
auditing on are these data
sources I'll use an example here
on the auditing
The auditing issue when the
legislature.
Avid Katie three are sorry K.
five plus to the public school
funding formula
if it was a little bit of a
surprise that the Public
Education Department
interpreting that statute.
Came back and said well if
there's there's a requirement
that that students maintain
enrollment with this with the
same teacher in cohort of
students so if you trend if the
school district transfer the
student out of that classroom
we're gonna true up on the on
the fortieth day of the school
year and if if the students with
the same teacher that districts
not gonna get that money no
that's not something that was
anticipated by the law but it's
something that PED
did when interpreting the law
and so thank you about those
kinds of issues is is really
critical.
Another important consideration
is.
Is the program that you're
trying to implement do you want
to be a discretionary program
that school districts and
charter schools can choose to
partake in or is it going to be
a mandatory program that you're
requiring as part of a basic
education so keep in mind the
funding for the distribution
model so if you wanted to add a
add a factor to the public
school funding formula for which
every student responded you're
essentially not adding anything
to the public school funding for
because every students counted
equally there may be the
opportunity to simplify the
process by adding money to the
base rather than require the
Public Education Department good
to go through a more complex
calculation about how exactly do
you allocate program units when
those allocations will be
relatively similar on a per
student basis.
Moving on UP.
The.
Considering the issue of
complexity and the ability of
the public education department
to implement individual programs
so the public school funding
formula relies on.
You know a lot of different
official dozens of different
officials at a school districts
and charter schools around the
state to understand how the
impacts of the data that they
are putting into the system will
affect their budget so I think I
am in our.
Mr Chairman in your comments
earlier you noted you know
school districts are going to be
doing their budget process here
in the coming months well
actually many local officials
have already started that
process and so they are not able
to wait until PED tells them
what their budget allocations
are to start considering what
the impacts of the data that
they put into the system will
have on their individual budget.
It's also important to keep in
mind that.
School district charter school
budgets are written at the local
level and not by PED and so the
ability to engage our many
stakeholders and these
in the in the public school
funding formulas critical I was
just on the other day a call
with some business officials and
those local officials that have
stressed that training is
actually their number one ask
for what what needs to be done
to to assist them in their job
training from PED.
There's also
Important for you to consider is
how easily manipulable is the
public school funding formula so
this is sort of a double edged
sword as one of the the things
that you all as legislators have
to balance when you're
considering additions to the
public school funding formula
because on one level you there
there is a desire to incentivize
schools to adopt certain
programs and and do the things
that are best force are for
students but being careful about
the out the amount that you
would allow school district or
charter school to chase funding
or otherwise presented that.
Their data in the best possible
way to maximize the amount of
funding
it is it is a real concern and
it's it's something that
that we see in education finance
quite a lot I I remember reading
relatively recently a news
article about Michigan schools
giving away you know free
laptops to get students to come
to.
To their school on account day
that increases their funding I
think in New Mexico we don't
have that problem is much but I
think a lot of that result is
the
it's clear thinking about how
easily manipulable is a school
district or charter schools data
to to drive funding.
Another important consideration
is.
In looking at what date is going
to be used for a public school
funding formula component is
will that be stable from year to
year so I think and again Mister
chairman I'll refer back to your
comments from earlier
Stability is or is it is a major
concern of local school budget
officials and administrations.
In in their budget process I'll
give you just one example of an
unintended consequence when the
at risk index was adopted in the
late nineties.
There was a lot of volatility
that was noted after the first
recalculation of the at risk
index and so what the
legislature did in response to
that volatility was go in and
add a three year average which
smooths some of that out
and provided a bit more
stability it is actually
something you still see in the
at risk index it's just not as
bad as it was in the early years
and something to consider
as we're increasing the amount
of funding that's provided on
the basis of the number of at
risk students.
And finally and this.
hearken back to something that
was a real key part of the last
presentation you all heard from
LFC and LESC earlier in the year
is.
Really keeping a clear focus on
supporting evidence based
programs force for students that
have been shown to demonstrate
results.
and I discuss this briefly so I
won't repeat it here but it's a
really really key consideration
in the public school funding
formula.
So Mr Chairman moving on I don't
know if members have received
the package yet I will point out
that on page nineteen of the
packet when you receive it there
is a high level challenge
Charlie I'm sorry just it should
be.
Linda did send it out as soon as
Joe we started The presentation
so it'll be in your in box.
Surgeries on page nineteen
sorry.
Yes Mr chairman and members the
committee I just wanted to refer
the committee to page nineteen
of the packet that's a sort of a
high level overview of all of a
number of the different funding
formula bills that it will be
Up for consideration for you all
and give some some of the key
Key statistics on column about
really statistics but that's
what I call them
Note about them is and this is
you know perhaps not surprising
in light of the March Martinez
Yazzie court case is a number of
these bills deal for proposals
deal specifically with how the
state funds it's at risk
students
HB eighty four H. B. one thirty
five and the family income index
proposal.
By the Public Education
Department all have different
ways of looking at how how do
you find at risk students.
also another major
Another another major issue that
has been brought up in in recent
years is the issue involving
impacted and that's dealt with
in house bill six so I have on
the screen here and and turning
back to the the overview of the
bills
it earlier in your packet.
Summary of house bill six so
house bill six would eliminate
the credit for in the public
school funding formula for
federal impact aid programs
federal forces are payments and
the local half no levy the bill
would also require school
districts and charter schools
to budget the equivalent of
seventy five percent of these
revenues for specific purposes
those purposes including capital
outlay projects our programs
related to the implementation of
the Indian Education Act or for
community schools so we would
estimate that this proposal
requires an appropriation of
fifty one million dollars to
hold the unit value flat with
current levels.
This would result in a
significant state funding
increase for several school
districts particularly those
that receive federal impact aid
payments.
So the total amount of credits
that would be eliminated would
be eighty two point three
million so the difference
between that is in FY twenty one
you all approved replacing
thirty five million dollars of
the funding formula credit so
thirty five million dollars of.
The eighty two point three is
already been funded so the
additional appropriation for FY
twenty one is is merely the
difference from that also note
that
budget recommendations from LFC
and LESC include additional
general fund revenue to the SCG
to prevent program costs from
falling over and the and just
you know value I got a question
for you all.
Mr chairman I got it okay.
So
Mr Chairman H. B. six could have
a deceitful as in fact on school
district and charter school
operating revenues but this does
provide additional funds for
programs that stakeholders have
argued are needed to support
both instructional programming
and capital outlay projects in
particularly high need schools.
Moving on Mr Chairman house bill
eighty four would do would make
several changes to the public
school funding formula including
creating a new native language
program unit for
for for native language programs
implemented in accordance with
the Indian Education Act and the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act so currently the
public school funding formula
does include a bilingual factor
which includes native language
programs.
This bill would include the new
a new native language program
unit and authorize tribal
departments of education to
receive our to receive this of
funding from the date of
language programming and other
other factors that are that are
going to here in just a moment
authorizes tribal departments of
education to receive allocations
from the public school fund and
would authorize PED to enter
into an intergovernmental
agreements with tribal
department of education's for
funding.
So the inter governmental
agreement is a little different
than how
the the public school funding
formula typically allocates
Allocates funding.
So typically PED makes a
calculation and then provides
that to a school district or
charter school to inform them of
their amount of the SCG.
The
The.
Propose on an H. B. eighty four
is all is a little different and
I think PED will have to I'm not
a hundred percent sure sure how
PED will be able to implement
that provision there is a an
amendment to our current section
of law that tells PED how to
calculate.
Program costs including four
for tribal departments of
education it's it's not clear if
PED would be bound to that
specific calculation.
But this.
This provision also does not
appear there there's not an
amendment to the the reporting
and audit sections of the public
school finance act related to
PED budget approval or education
plans initiatives so that that's
a little a little difference
there as well for tribal
departments of education.
I went backwards one sec.
So in addition the the bill
would make tribal departments of
education eligible for early
childhood education program
units for kindergarten programs
and for three and four year old
developmentally disabled
students.
It's unclear if the bill would
require a tribal programs to
meet the requirements of the
public school code or the New
Mexico administrative code with
with relation to to contents
dander so as I was saying before
Mr Chairman there are many
different mandates that are
included in the public school
code.
And it's unclear if if those
would be required to receive
this funding.
The bill also notes that
accepting the the state funding
for tribal programs would not
waive tribal sovereign immunity.
Going back okay.
In addition the bill would
require PED to ensure that
resources linked to native
students and here to culturally
appropriate methods determined
by each each tribe or pueblo
nation.
This increased this would
increase tribal responsibility
and control over the education
native native students in public
schools overseen by the Public
Education Department in addition
the the bill would provide
funding to support tribal
departments of education and
tribal community based and after
school and summer programs.
So I'm.
Mr chairman I mentioned before
that
HB eighty four would increase
the at risk index in the in the
current public school funding
formula by adding the percentage
of native American students in a
school district to that
calculation.
Looking at the current
calculations and
the percentage of the students
in each school district that are
were reported by the department
as native American.
We would estimate that this
would increase the at risk index
by about forty six point seven
million dollars.
and in addition the creation of
the native language programs and
that we would estimate at about
five point three million dollars
so for tribal education programs
of the General Fund impacted
this is no we're not certain if
this would cover students funded
currently through B. I. E.
schools to make transfer to
tribal programs there also could
be individual school district
and charter school budget
impacts if
if.
Students should shift from us
from public schools into tribal
programs I would note that under
the attendance for success act
of five year olds are required
to be enrolled in kindergarten
so those students are already
served so that may not have as
much of a the general fund
impact is the other other
provisions of the bills.
Also
The the bill may require
additional amendments to the
public school co to the public
school finance act clarify how
PED's to calculate SCG payments
for tribal department of
education to clarify data
collection processes or to clear
either clarify or make
exceptions to Sir certain
program requirements that
already exist in the law.
So the next bill I have on here
would be house bill one thirty
five which replaces the at risk
index with an opportunity and
equity index that index is
calculated based on a
statistical methodology called
canonical correlation that and
includes our data related to
student assessments and to
student demographic data
including students low income
status of students mobility
whether or not the student is.
A student of color or if the
student is receiving special
education services of the
students with disabilities.
So this is quite a complicated
calculation and PED has reported
an analysis of the bill that
it's unable to currently
reproduce this calculation at
this time and able in order to
estimate the fiscal impact and
that it may provide staffing
challenges for the department to
implement on a long term basis.
However Mr chairman and members
of the committee so the
developer of the opportunity
index concept has provided us
with some data that we were able
to use to estimate the number of
program units that would be
created as bad as best we can
it's it's still highly uncertain
but it would appear to create a
large number of at risk program
units by our estimate more than
a hundred fourteen thousand
that's roughly one sixth of the
total number program units that
are currently in the public
school funding formula so at the
current unit value we would
estimate that cost at five
hundred eighteen million
dollars.
Also note that this is a huge
cost it could involve some
redistribution of at risk
funding away from some schools
and towards others.
In addition Mr chairman of house
bill one thirty eight would it
increase the waiting for the
fine arts education program unit
with that's currently in the
public school funding formula so
Mr chairman of that the
committee actually heard this
bill last year and and passed
out of committee following
reforms that were adopted to
align the three tiered licensure
system to the Gini index there
was a perception about cut to
elementary fine arts programs
following the enactment of that
bill.
So what one thirty eight would
do is is increased though the
individual weight of the fine
arts
factor within the public school
funding formula to provide
additional dollars for school
districts and charter schools to
implement those programs based
on the waiting that's in house
bill one thirty eight we would
anticipate that that would cost
about two point nine million
dollars to hold the unit value
flat.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize at my errors are not
working on my screen
finally Mr chairman of the
public education department and
the executive in their budget
recommendation have included
proposals to create a family
income index so.
I was a Mr chairman this bill
has not yet been introduced but
we've had several conversations
with the public education
department to better understand
what they're proposing to
accomplish in this bill and it's
worth including and this
discussion because although it
doesn't propose to amend the
public school funding formula in
its current process it could be
a way to to take a look at some
of the.
Challenges with the at risk
index particularly related to
how do we identify low income
students within.
The public school funding
formula so currently the at risk
index when it was developed
the recommendation of the of the
school finance expert the panel
that developed the index work
use the percentage of a school
districts students that are
eligible for for title one as
part of the calculation from the
federal government.
So.
That means that the at risk
index is currently are only able
to be calculated based on a
geographic location basis so the
public school finance act
currently in law provides that a
charter school receives the at
risk index of the school
district in which they are
geographically located in
addition to the charter school
issue I think there we have also
We also heard.
In the hearing LFC this summer
there are individual
yes.
This the school at the school
board level their discussions on
how do we adequately divide up
are at risk funding for for
schools in different areas of
larger
school districts so that each
individual school is being
adequately funded for they're at
risk students.
So what the PED proposal
involves would be to use tax
return data from the taxation
and revenue department to
identify individual schools that
serve low a larger share of low
income populations so PED's
called Sliq in there and the in
their initial proposals let
let's run this as a pilot it
could potentially be something
that down the road the
legislature looks at as a as a
way to amend the at risk index.
So we are the proposal as we
understand it would be to
provide additional funding
to about half of schools with
the highest level of students
below one hundred and thirty
percent of the federal poverty
level.
And to do this be executive as
as were recommendation has asked
for the legislature to
appropriate eighty million
dollars for use in FY twenty two
in FY twenty three so about
forty million dollars a year
And at the school districts
would be restricted on how they
could spend these dollars it's a
fairly broad restriction though
and and mostly anything that
school districts could currently
spend their at risk funding on
would be authorized by the
proposal.
and schools would have both but
schools would have to direct
those to the specific schools
with the largest share of the of
students below a hundred thirty
percent of the federal poverty
level.
And so with that Mr Chairman
I've thrown a lot of information
that you know so I think I will
back often and stand for
questions thank you.
Also.
Thank you for that overview JOA
appreciated we have a couple of
members at their hand right so
go to Representative Dow Jones
questions Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Joe presentation I'm I had a
question about the SCG when was
K. five and extended learning
added to that yeah yeah and when
when did we add K. five and
extended to the SCG SCE.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
that was added during the twenty
nineteen legislative session
effective for fiscal year twenty
so just very recently thank you
and thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Jerry I'm not I.
I have a little bit of a
difference of agreement whenever
you said the intention was not
to get the home room teacher and
all that kind of stuff in there
because I specifically remember
in the language in the budget
bill is it said right there in
the language beside the
appropriation that it had to be
the homeroom teacher and it had
to be yeah there is there is
changes that we are making so I
think that was very intentional
and it the language so my
question is the language.
For the homeroom teacher and the
language for it being K. five
not the option of K. three was
in the budget bill so when the
budget is over does that
language go away.
When that because it's not a
statute was put in the budget
language.
This so Mr Chairman
representative let me let me
clarify my comments because
you're absolutely right there is
actually in statute not in the
budget bill a requirement that.
Students maintain with the same
teacher or
And in both K. five plus and the
regular school year sort of what
what I was illustrating to to
sort of illustrate the audit
requirements Big that may not
have been considered was thank
you you have been approved
program that says okay we're
going to fund this classroom for
for four K. five plus and you
know we anticipate that.
Every student in the classroom
will remain with that teacher
but for whatever reason at some
point during the school year you
know it's.
One student get transferred to
another student there forward in
a club Act funding for that
single student I think it goes.
Mr chairman and Representative
Dow it goes to the difference
between sort of looking at a
program approval and then sort
of a a audit work a very careful
audit requirement of of what PED
is doing so our is the school
implementing the program in
accordance with the statutory
provisions are you inadvertently
creating a more complicated
reporting process between school
districts charter schools and
PED that that was sort of my
illustration not to not to say
that according requirement
doesn't exist because it
absolutely does it's just sort
of illustrating some of the
complications of that I'm okay
so and thank you Mr chairman
thank you Jerry for that is this
I don't I didn't know that we
put that in statute I mean I
remember.
Having discussions in the EDD
committee about the budget line
items but I didn't remember us
being that statute do you happen
to know or could you tell me
later or just email me what
statute that was that that
mandated that I'm and then but
in general when you know I've
I've seen quite a bit of
prescriptive language in the
budget so Representative verses
it being.
At education bill are statute so
when the I still don't quite
understand when the if we put
language descriptive language a
company money in the budget does
that prescriptive language go
away when the budget ends.
So Mr Chairman representative
Dow is so my understanding of
the of the way that specific
relationship forces if it's in a
general appropriation act only
applicable for a specific fiscal
year and I may actually as the
director for clarification on
that but that is my
understanding of.
Of those things that are
specific to the general
appropriation act.
Mr chairman that's an accurate
an accurate reflection.
All right so thank you Mr
chairman thank you Jerry Rachel
where once entered the answer
this so theoretically if the
appropriation committee chose to
take the family index formula
and use reverted it school
reform Fund dollars to implement
a pilot they would not need a
statute to do that but the pilot
would be over in a year because
the appropriation would be over
a year I'm just I'm just want to
make sure I'm understanding how
the dollars flow.
So madam chair on on.
On a program that is funded
without a statute.
Which is I think what you're
asking about language would be
included in the general
appropriation act and then that
language would only guide how
those dollars were to be spent
for a year if there is a
statutory provision the
statutory provision controls
unless there's additional
language put in the General
Appropration Act.
Thank you Mr chairman and Rachel
could you give me an example of
when we did a statute an
additional language put was put
in the appropriation acts like
an example of that.
I'm.
I'm guessing what the good a
good example teacher salaries Mr
Chairman representative teacher
salaries in statute right now
say the minimum for level one
teacher should be forty thousand
but the language in the General
appropriation act in the funding
that you guys have included in
the general appropriation act
says.
The minimum salary of a level
one teacher shall be no less
than forty one thousand dollars
so it sets the minimum salary
above what statute requires.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
reversed art director Kendall
that's a perfect example okay
and then in following the
dollars.
One more question about this SCG
with K. five in extended is it
accurate because it seems to be
the impression that sums
superintendents have that this
SCG change that added Kate a
percentage of the K. five and
extended learning into the SCG
formula if they don't to
participate in K. five plus
extended they don't get that
small percentage and that small
percentage is it so it's sort of
it's an infant incentive to do
K. five and extended learning.
The way it's formulated now is
that correct of my
misunderstanding so Mr chairman
and and Representative Dow I
think
that that's that's broadly
correct I'll just quickly go
back and I think I'm still
sharing my screen so these
programs in green here they're
all optional programs that that
are not
and actually I apologize Mister
chairman actually under the
bigger version so I can zoom in.
So not every school district and
charter school receives funding
for these programs and you'll
you'll see K. five plus extended
learning are in there but so are
sourced other programs that not
every school district or charter
school participates in and so
there is there is some
flexibility at the local level
for some of these programs to
determine whether or not to
participate.
Thank you Mr chairman and Joey
but but like for example pre K.
not in there so pre K. is wholly
funded on its own separate from
the SCG we didn't change the
total SCG units we just change
how they're generated is that.
Correct I'm.
I'm just trying to understand if
we are trying to incentivize the
districts that for whatever
reason aren't or don't want to
or cannot do K. five extended
learning are we somewhat at I
don't know I I'm going to use
the word incentivized by
changing the way we did special
program units.
So it Mr chairman and
Representative Dow so you're
correct that prekindergarten is
not part of the public school
funding formula is not part of
the public school finance act
it's not part of the public
school code it's part of the
children's code and so it's
completely separate from a
school districts
Participation and in in regular
education programs and so
it's a it's a different funding
source it's a different
administrative department.
Now with the creation of the
early childhood education and
care department
and so it is not impacted by the
SCG.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Jerry maybe I should've use pre
K. as an example because I don't
see community schools or our
other programs that are still
not in the formula so in
nineteen we change to this
program because someone believes
that it should be come a
permanent thing that happens at
every school every year.
Is I mean okay well I just have
one more question and that is
around I I I believe that local
school districts can choose
evidencebased programs that that
would produce student outcomes
that might not be K. five plus
or might not be extended
learning and and would like to
see how that looks ability but
I'm the Senate bill ninety six
that creates that following the
dollars to the school rather
than the district is that going
to help resolve some of the the
tracking issues that you say are
difficult.
So madam chair representative
Dow it it may and I think you
know the real and and and I have
I hesitate to tell you what you
all intended by Senate bill
ninety six but I think Senate
bill ninety six is going to be
an important tool for
communities to get involved in
and seeing how their local
school boards are allocating the
funding that's allocated by the
state to serve the students
within their district and so it
really pro shining a light on
how local districts are making
budget decisions and how they're
allocating those dollars to the
different programs within their
district is going to be a real
positive step towards
enabling community members to
hold that local boards
accountable.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you at Joseph and and Rachel for
your help.
Thank you representative
Representative Williams
Stapleton.
There muted.
Mr chairman I don't have a
question.
Okay great Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman
and Rachel getting back to the
K. five plus extended learning
so there is a so is the reason
that a Senator is bringing forth
a bill I'm K. five plus extended
learning is that and then to put
it into statute instead of
House Bill to that dedicates how
those monies are used each year.
Simpson Mr chairman
Representative the K. five plus
programs already in statute you
guys enacted at it was in
statute pre twenty nineteen
legislative session as a.
Basically a below the line
funded special program at PED
and.
In twenty nineteen with the
ruling in the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit you're the education
moonshot bill what do for you
guys I was house bill I put
K. five plus in the new extended
learning time program in statute
the reason is started to get to
Representative Dow also question
the reason for doing that is
there's been a lot of concern
about instructional time
provided for students and we
know students need better
more instruments will help close
the.
The legislature put those to
programs in statute
recognising you know so some
studies say up to six thousand
our difference between a fluent
students and non affluent
students by the time they get
out of elementary school which
continues to exacerbate the
achievement gap so trying to
close the achievement gap
The bill I think you're
referencing is Senate bill forty
I'm guessing and its intent the
LFC endorsed bill and it goes
along with the LFC budget its
intent was to me or is to
mandate at least ten additional
instructional days for all
students in the FY twenty two
school year if an elementary
school chose to provide K. five
plus it would allow an
elementary school at that twenty
five instructional days but
really getting at the heart of
lost instructional time this
year and then remind you at
about the two thousand eight I'm
mark you guys had a mandate in
statute that that the
legislature removed but there
were two hundred there were a
hundred and eighty days of
instruction required at that
time for the two years prior to
that legislators have been
working with the American
institutes of research on a
funding formula study part of
the big chunk of money that
study recommended needed to be
allocated to schools was to add
additional instructional days so
the state is going backwards in
terms of average instructional
days since that time so the
extended learning program was in
really intended to get a hundred
ninety days but it's getting at
that average right now given
where we're at on average
instructional days the average
number of instructional days A.
I. R. and school
stakeholders recommended were
needed in two thousand eight.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
Rachel I'll have more questions
down the line but that's a good
starter thank you.
There further questions.
For LFC on this.
All right I don't see anybody
else I just had a couple of
questions for you Joey again
thank you for doing this I
really appreciate you are being
able to educate us on on the
issues forth coming
As far as
Impacted should we in the act
not taking credit for the
various credits we do including
impacted does that mean that we
would still have to submit to
the federal government for the
the disparity test.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee
the the only states that are
required to submit a disparity
calculation to the US department
of education are those who wish
to consider impact aid when
allocating funding through their
state aid formula so
If the state no longer
considers that funding when
allocating state aid they would
not have to submit that but then
of course they wouldn't be
eligible to take credit for that
Great thank you thank you for
that answer Jerry so so if we're
looking at your presentation and
indicated that some school
districts are going to see a
rise there a pretty large rise
in their per student
allocation so so what sort of
tools do we have as the
Legislature to determine equity
in our our funding formula.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee so one of the one
of the things that
that the the proposal and
In house bill six and other
bills does is it
wrist wrist restricts how an
equivalent amount of SCG dollars
allocated to the public school
funding formula can be spent and
focus that focuses on specific
programs rather than on general
expenses of a school district or
charter school so for example I
mentioned before the house bill
six proposal would include among
it's different
Different aspects of funds for
programs related to the Indian
Education Act so rather than
just
Providing additional state funds
and saying and saying could be
spent on anything one of the
tools the legislature could
consider is do you target these
funds to specific students to
specific programs that you
believe will in increase
educational outcomes for those
students
or for for other specific
purposes.
Thank you for that Jared so so
when you say and and according
to your house bill six alone.
When.
I think it's it's covered in.
Currently all of the budget
recommendations executive and we
just see and LFC
that amount of money where is
that amount of money coming from
and and where will it be coming
from in the future so Mr
Chairman that money comes from
the general fund.
And and and Jerry where does the
money from the general fund come
from.
So Mr Mr chairman and members of
the committee I'm not your
revenue estimators to be able to
give you a better answer to that
question but
you know that I know a lot of
the general fund comes from oil
and gas
Related it
industries a personal income tax
all of the gross receipts tax
all of those funding sources
that go into the general fund in
addition
you know important for education
an important source is the land
grant permanent fund so
I think about six more than six
hundred million dollars in FY
twenty two for public schools
will come from the land land
grant permanent fund.
Okay.
Are there any other questions
or.
Almonds from committee.
All right local no thank you
Joey and thank you director
gradual for being here today and
then presenting to us that's
kind of a look at the bills that
we're gonna be working with for
for the next week and really
looking into in considering and
I think it's something that that
certainly warrants a lot of
attention and careful
consideration of this as we
heard it's it's pent up with so
much that that funds are our
public education system so thank
you all for for for that deep
dive in for joining us on this
Saturday Mr Chairman.
Yep.
Ashley wanted to make a quick
plug for folks who are
interested in more information
on
On school finance issues in your
yes the annual port near the
back.
There are a number of different
tables related to the public
school funding formula and and
funding formula data you all
should have received a copy of
LSTs and annual report and some
of the questions you may have
may be answered by that.
And and Choate since we're in
the digital age now is there an
online copy for us and can you
point us.
In the direction of their it's
Mr Mr chairman members the
committee yes there is an online
version and we will it's on the
LESC website we can find your
way.
That's awesome.
Excellent well I appreciate it
thank you all so much in members
we will
Reconvene on Monday at eight
o'clock.
Any any questions comments
concerns.
Okay well thank you so much have
a nice weekend.
Mr Chairman yes
Representative.
Mr chairman I am hearing that we
will not have committee meetings
on Thursday and Friday have you
anything heard anything that
contradicts a statement.
that's about as accurate as I've
heard Representative is L. we'll
get to that as things become
more clear but that's my
understanding as well and with
that we'll probably reconvene
after Wednesday's Wednesday's
hearing on Saturday at the.
All right thank you very much Mr
chair.
Yep so have a nice weekend rest
of your weekend and we'll see
you all on Monday morning thank
you everybody thank you.
