If Representative Lara.
Representative Andrea.
Representative my love yeah.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Christine
Trujillo there.
Madam chair maybe vice chair
here.
Chairman here we do have a
quorum all right again good
morning everybody will start off
house bill four thirteen Sir
presenter here good morning good
morning everyone I am here with
my expert witness merry par
Sanchez who will be helping me
explain house bill four thirteen
which is a class load size bill.
It is
requiring the public education
department create create
maintain an online portal to
provide to the to receive
compensation confidential
information from school
districts about cost loads and
is also a costs load violations
rather and providing cost load
size waivers will rulemaking
authority and requiring school
districts to provide notice of
class load size waivers Mr
Chairman I am going to do for to
my expert witness to talk to a
little bit about the issues
within the bill.
Do one into a short summary.
Sure yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee so
wanted to talk to you today
about class size reduction is
one of the most well research
strategies to improve
educational outcomes for
students with decades of
research and study
a small class sizes important to
parents and students large class
screen size or one of the most
common reason cited by parents
for why they look for other
options like charter schools
dozens of studies show that
class size reduction has been
shown to result in higher test
scores better grades more engage
students fewer disciplinary
referrals and less teacher
turnover New Mexico students
need smaller class sizes for
more academic and social
emotional support now more than
ever.
districts and teachers currently
must work harder to provide safe
learning environments and
address social emotional mental
health enacted them academics
when class sizes are large.
Of smaller class sizes are more
conducive to hands on experience
a learning and we know that
students learn best.
By doing.
Small class sizes facilitate a
healthy student teacher
relationship creativity
character Development
connectedness and safety are
deep into this environment and
economists estimate the smaller
class sizes especially in grades
K. through three would yield the
benefits worth twice the costs
of cost sites averaging language
hi two numbers on class sizes
that receipt the statutory
limits right now and call your
attention to the L. E. S. C.
FIR on page four
according to this state that
we have the staffing right now
to be able to implement these
reduce class sizes if we had a a
re allocation of self I know
that as an eighth grade teacher
for twenty five years in Los
crucis public schools that I had
every year cost sizes of thirty
five and more and usually those
are the class sizes that have
large numbers of special
education students and students
that we're trying to learn
English as a second language so
what this table says to me is
that the staffing is in the
district but not necessarily in
the classroom so with that
Thank you Mr chairman and we
stand for questions all right
thank you also we will go to
support online if you're in
support of the house bill four
thirteen please indicate by
raising and online we'll go to
our audience here in person or
their those in support of my
right hand side.
Staff Sir please give up to two
minutes welcome.
The other here members of the
committee species.
Mexico government relations
director.
And on behalf of our members we
support Cisco also work
Looking at the email.
to table one I like the number
I.
That is not the.
Under this bill.
Six hundred and eighty seven
class.
All across the state.
The.
The
Many of those of us who
currently are but at this.
They are overcrowded.
That's the intent of this bill.
In order to provide.
We're running.
It is and.
For the.
We compared to other states.
We think the sponsor.
We have to consider.
Thank you others in my right
hand side that we speak in
support.
This spans of up to two minutes
welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee on behalf of transform
education and supports and.
bill one of the interesting
things that I found and
listening to conversations about
education and outcomes
the reference to the gains made
by Mississippi Senator coach.
And I would offer that there's
usually a funded research
related to reducing class sizes
in multiple states across the
country and I would offer that
these and consider I also can is
an educator and say that
on numerous times I was over
numbers and I agree that when we
think about the teacher
workforce and recruitment we
have to do something to
humanize.
Teachers so that the word on the
street is that teaching is a
great field right now I would
submit that it's difficult
because classes are over for for
capacity it's hard to get
attention.
and then finally I would just
offer that eight judge their
singles in her on court findings
the as a Martinez case found
that this would be one of the
clearest solutions.
The ability to provide
sufficient education so for
those reasons I hope this
passes.
Great thank you others American
side that was speaking for
please have two minutes.
The committee good morning my
name's Mandy tors in the
education reform director for
the New Mexico thank
Representative Kristine
treatment programs for.
thank you Mexico's support of
this bill because it is our
belief that smaller is better
with the smaller scales are
smaller class sizes preaching to
the choir with the panel of
educators here
stating that students will here
to learn until they know that
they're here for small class
sizes profoundly affect the
quality of life for our students
because there is more of
a character.
As well as connectedness
connectedness
Our students to be more engaged
this is where we have to start
I've had as many as twenty six
fourth graders that were crammed
into an adequate space I've
heard from high school teachers
who have losses as high as a
hundred and seventy four
students who have student
sitting on the floor because
they don't have enough seats no
wonder our students don't feel
connected and engaged our
teachers don't have the capacity
to build relationships with each
and everyone of them nor is
there ample opportunity to build
relationships between students
I've heard people argue that New
Mexico class sizes aren't as
high as other states in the
teachers should just complaining
most other states don't have our
level of poverty our faces and
our rates of suicide.
I also have the luxury is having
as few as thirteen third graders
not only was it one of the most
rewarding years of my career but
my students expand experience
tremendous growth not only in
their task force but in their
social skills and their self
confidence these are the things
I'm most proud of the students
walk out of my classroom it is
my belief that we will will move
the needle until our teachers
workload is reduced and into our
most vulnerable students
attention that they deserve.
Thank you anybody else on the
right hand side.
I will go to my left hand side
those in support
please ma'am you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Representative Trujillo for
offerings and Bethany Jarrell an
early childhood educator from
Alamogordo New Mexico and I'm
the vice president of the New
Mexico and.
In my years in the classroom
I've had classes with twelve
students in classes with twenty
five and that's in pre preschool
four year olds and.
I don't know if I might smaller
classrooms my kids make greater
progress went on to kindergarten
more prepared and more success.
Well because I was able to fill
those bonds with all of my
students build those
relationships to help them be
successful which help them as
they went on through their
education career in my district
I know of classrooms of the high
school you have up to forty five
students in one classroom and
that's just not appropriate
learning environment and we're
allowing waivers and blanket
waivers that kind of stuff
happens way too often so I just
want to thank you for listening
to this energy to support this
bill thank.
A few others in my left hand
side the page speed.
Please have a committee members
and chairperson Romero I am
Jennifer Lawrence thirty year
teacher and presently teach
first created the notate
community school I am strongly
in favor of this bill because
reduce class sizes particularly
in title one schools.
This will have a positive effect
thank you for.
Twenty two.
In our.
First grade classrooms having a
cap of eighteen with each one
more smokers per day
additionally having an EA and
first grade classrooms with over
fourteen students would make a
huge difference in my ability to
have one on one time and we're
small group time with my
students that is one educators
can be most effective and given
that so many of our students are
English language learners and
comes up.
Unsupportive homes their time in
our schools is when they feel
safe when they can actually
really learn to having.
Twenty four straight you can't
be an effective person.
There's been a.
Certainly about extended
learning time teachers know the
smaller classes is what will
make a difference in our
students by recognizing this and
having smaller class.
Particularly in title one
schools will help address the
rampant inequity in schools
across the state thank you very
much thank thank you others
militants of please see of up to
two minutes.
Mr chan chairman committee
members thank you for taking the
time to listen to me this
morning my name is in the first
three teacher and you know
it's hard community schools.
I am here to support for house
bill four thirteen with twenty
three students currently over
capacity in a first grade
classroom this bill will allow
me to meet with my students more
frequently during small groups
and one on one at during our TI
which is perhaps the most
important the date.
Smaller class sizes will also
spend less time and more time
planning differentiating to meet
this each of my students Vigil.
as was mentioned in the late
nineteen nineties the Star City
I found that the decrease in
class sizes with the student
achievement by the family went
to recondition months of
schooling over the course of
four years another study in
nineteen eighty six on the
clearest evidence of positive
effects and primary heat is in
the primary grades particularly
kindergarten through third.
And it is promising for
disadvantaged and minority
students.
It is time that New Mexico
that's what is best for you the
Yazzie Martinez last night's
White House New Mexico as you're
serving.
We know that smaller class sizes
will higher academic growth.
The local population.
To ensure that our students are
down what he needed and what is
there.
More class sizes a lack of funds
is not an excuse for denying New
Mexico.
Comments create an adequate
educational experience for.
I thank you others in my left
hand side of support.
Committee members of the
committee my name is a cell
phone I currently work for
Indian national of the former
for I was a teacher of writing
at the high school and college
level of members of the.
We hear a lot of talk about
about the writing skills of
students and how important
writing this and I can tell you
as a teacher of writing the with
the most important things is
that you have students right and
then you read the writing and
then you respond to the right
and then you have the read write
and write again and read and
respond six seven six it is an
immensely time consuming process
that requires that students that
the.
The U. of teacher has a number
of students are possible to do
that work give us the
ballpark number if you have a
hundred.
Educator and you want them to
write just a couple of times a
week and it takes you ten
minutes per room per from
writing to read that's a hundred
and twenty five this like the it
works out to almost twenty hours
a little over twenty hours of
just responding to run for the
that's a lot of time as those
numbers go up and which they do
most of most high school it was
teachers have a higher.
it means that you have to sort
of skipped stops you have to
stand how to help other students
writing have to drop projects
like we had a very popular.
Intended to project that won
national awards for when I got
into a higher class sizes longer
into those sort of creative real
world right students.
We have heard a lot about people
affording mentions the what is
Education important folder to
the.
Students
I can tell you from experience
as both a parent and educator
that having smaller class sizes
and smaller I
have is a digital relationships.
Right those two minutes thank
you so much others on my left
hand side that we speak in
support.
Right we'll go to opposition.
Online if you're in opposition
to house bill four thirty please
indicate by raising your hand.
In our room if you're in
opposition to house bill four
thirteen please keep your hands
hi please Sir you have up to two
minutes welcome thank you Mr
chairman and members the
committee for.
I hate to I guess my friend over
here at the table but Mr
chairman let me let me just lay
this foundation page two of this
bill what do you think it would
reduce size from an average of
the two right I processed food.
What you put err reliever in
place that brings an
instructional system mandatorily
with caring class sizes of of.
We understand and appreciate the
yeah.
Problem you have House Bill to
and your whole appropriation
scheme those with very different
policy direction you're about
three hundred million dollars
all in in house bill two between
extended time.
And in two parts the the one
that's CENIC part about a
hundred million dollars a little
over two hundred million dollars
in the in the face.
Gives ideas to students student
time.
And in the classroom times that
I would submit to you this is a
contrary view if you were to
spend that money here we might
stand in support the problem is
you have no appropriation would
cover some that's a flawless
with.
but it's too it's a dichotomy of
ideas.
Right now use the legislature
supporting the other and so for
that we're gonna have to suggest
the use that you propose this
but.
There's something worth studying
we understand the issues being
raised but in the in the matter
of the force this point is
simply doesn't work it has
expenses to all right that we
don't have come.
The second part I would remind
all of this is that we don't
have staff.
We currently have six hundred
ninety four or so positions
unfilled in the state of New
Mexico in the current year and
teacher area.
We have a similar number in the
instructional system there.
Right those two minutes thank
you please Sir of two minutes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jovian with New Mexico
state school boards association
I could have easily gotten up in
support of this legislation
because I think it's the best
one of the best things that we
can do for students however as
Mr rounds mentioned it is an
unfunded mandate and getting
back to our school boards once
this bill were to pass without
funding we would have to be
forced to cut our budgets
somehow or other to meet these
demands will also have to look
for additional staff to do that
so again I think and I've we've
talked a partners meetings all
the time about how important
class sizes and we we thank you
for bringing that forward but we
do have to bring this to your
attention thank you.
Thank you others I'm a right
hand side in opposition.
Right those in opposition to my
left hand side.
Right I don't see anybody else
will come to committee
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair
Mr chair came in late that I
didn't know whether these guys
were for and against it but I
was against it but I want to
give the sponsor a chance here I
think my questions already been
after this it has a cost of
eighty million dollars of what
has there been provision made
for the for that I think that's
a low number Mr chair and
members of the committee of
course I said on house
appropriations and finance and
clearly there isn't
financial provision for it the
goal to bring it here was to
have the discussion because
first of all I'm against the new
proposals that are coming from
the Senate side regarding
extending the days even longer
and I resent.
That more money would go to that
amendment to provide money for
this that money could lower
class sizes and I think some of
those folks at spoke addressed
it I I know we didn't talk about
this during the internet think
that if you don't agree with
that that we could do it this
summer but the reality is I
think that that the money for
extended learning could go to
moving small class sizes and we
would get a better result and
that's my response
Representative Chatfield.
Mr Chairman never.
Ever have we agreed more.
Than we do today.
I think the extended learning
time is a just probably not
going to work in the smaller
class sizes I think would work I
thank you in op op just because
I'm forced to a I would guess it
because of the funding aspect
but the idea I support wholly
thank you Mr chair I thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for school board
I like to think this is probably
one of the best things we could
do for teachers and for kids
really I think it's important
you know if this gets a little
tricky in rural communities I
just want to say in our in
little Dixon which is a school
of about seventy right.
Of my first great grandson was
going into a combined first and
second grade classroom with
twenty five kids fifteen of
those were little boys not that
we don't love our little boys
but we just know there by okay
so the antennas went up with the
grandmothers in the community
and two former teachers and
myself went in and said we would
be assistance for one day a week
and just we knew this teacher
was gonna have her hands full in
probably about three of those
kids are specialists marginal
you know they were they were
to they were the root struggling
anyhow we work with them all
year long and I'll never forget
that here but I so smaller class
sizes and I don't think she had
an assistant I don't that year
for whatever reason they didn't
have an assistant so she was
doing this by yourself
I'm wondering if we can take a
you know I'm I'm I read this
bill I I loved it of course the
flags went up because there's no
probation and I said could we
use that at risk index I think
it was forty million could you
use that forty million and apply
it to classroom size it seems to
me this is about children of
poverty could you use that money
to do that at the local school
board level that's what I'm
curious madam chair and
Representative it at all we can
do a lot of things and the
dilemma is is that certain
monies as you know you've seven
appropriations you know that
they're already pre allocated
and and I think we have a
difficult time trying to access
that money that's that's the
issue and I think we have
several colleagues in here that
serve on HFC and you all know
how it is the money's pre
determined and if you haven't
fought for it it's not going to
happen and that's why I'm we've
got this because it's a
discussion worth having it's a
discussion that we need to turn
into a reality.
And not and you know not in the
far off future but in the near
future and and to me and to my
my experts we felt that it is
important to to get open get it
out there and really.
Have folks recognize that we can
re route money in the future to
address the very needs instead
of extending the date again I'm
on my on my soapbox about it but
instead of extending the doggone
day and forcing a ton of kids in
the same classroom we can cut
those classrooms sizes down and
really give kids attention that
they deserve and no frankly
madam chair and representative
the money is not going to be.
Available for it.
madam chair and representative
of.
I really think this is the issue
and you know extended time with
the with the ms rock teachers
just bad time for everybody in
all we all know that I mean I
would put my money into
professional development so that
teachers can learn and and
figure out it and have other
teachers help them to create a
better classroom environment I
mean that's I think where the
money needs to go but I.
I was just wondering if we could
move that at risk this is bill
is aimed at risk I think you
could I don't know if you can
maybe need to change the bill
that I'm gonna move this bill
forward to keep the conversation
going thank you madam chair
thank you Representative medical
million.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I have to say
when I first read this I was I
actually considered signing onto
it.
Because I loved it I I I really
the the the lower class sizes
are something that I mean for me
I was just I was just actually
checking my numbers because
they've changed it now that I've
been gone for a little over
thirty days about last semester
I had almost a hundred and
eighty students teaching
chemistry.
and I had probably four four
classes at my Max of twenty nine
students in the only reason why
they didn't put more in there is
because I had no more than I
couldn't fit any more desks in
my lap and so I told him
absolutely not you know I'm not
gonna try to fit another child
in here so they figured out
something else to do or they
found another class that could
put him in the still got a.
But those so those are very and
and I don't know how many people
have tried to do a chemistry lab
but with a twenty nine students
especially with a lot of the
dangers stuff that we have and
and and then they're they're
sophomores there still haven't
you know so so those are I mean
you have safety issues all this
other stuff so to be able to
have smaller class sizes would
be amazing because I get to
focus my attention and we get to
do a lot cooler stuff because I
can manage that I know doctor
Warniment is talk about talk
about Morty As like why do we
only have one teacher in in the
classrooms that is the so I like
the the the EA over fifteen
students for elementary schools
and stuff but
up I even question this eighteen
million that their costs that
says that costing because this
is at the twelve thousand for
educational salaries hopefully
we're raising that so that would
be double the educational
assistant of the amount but my
thing is
is is the cost at this point and
I and I I I agree with you that
we need to have an in depth
conversation conversation about
this because I love this idea
and more time it is not what the
answer is it is of quality time
with our students is what we
need but but I think what was
saying
One of the what is this the the
Elia sees analysis on on page
two it says that are southwest
of outreach academic research
evaluation policy
they says that we're like what
six hundred ninety teacher
vacancies.
And four hundred and forty six
EA vacancies and and so now I
mean I know from my screen and I
teach in a title one district
It's hard for me for us to even
keep filled one of our science
positions and we have a long
term sub for one of our math
positions so if we now lower
sizes how are we going to find
these these teachers like that's
and how we can find these EA's
so so we need to kind of figure
out how can we do this so we can
get to this point because I
would love to see this of but.
Right now I don't see how we can
get there so so my question is
well I guess it's not really
although one last little comment
What it says average class sizes
are fifteen point one students
and two and I don't know what
schools they're looking at
because none.
None of bill in schools.
Fifteen sorry and like I said
we're title one district so so
like we need the smaller class
sizes I've had I've had a pre K.
classes when I was teaching P.
E. with the thirty kids in the.
and and like thirty three year
olds it's like herding kittens
it's crazy.
Specially impedes it's not.
So I I I I am looking forward to
a conversation on this because I
really I want to get this right
I want to get this right because
I think it would this could be a
game changer it really quickly
thank you.
Representative corolla.
Michael on to madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative I like you I jump
to sign these because I I do
have classes with thirty eight
forty two ones here students the
team up I have students with
gaps to second grade math in
eighth grade and try to be one
to one.
This is yes not even of all time
and I don't know if I'm able to
make that if it is to be honest
at the moment because it is
really needed somebody who'll
teach them so I'm really happy
to start this conversation if we
cannot move from fear but at
least having the conversation
but I have something also to
have a just a chemistry and I'm
talking about Matt.
The only name it that we have
here is for English on how to
have forever and I have been my
argument all the time point only
the EDD's classes have a highly
meet in the students size I
remembered also use what I have
fifty students in one thousand
thirty six and the other one and
they say well but you only have
a thirty two although they will
what is a good what what is the
benefit there right so in part
of the conversation is so having
a full sized and limits for
classes because I saw losses
which was two three sitting
outside that the whole I'm
talking about title one schools
right so students sitting
outside on the floor because
they were mature for them inside
the classroom and unity that
they were able to accommodate
once actually to put any Eighth
Air I mean I don't see how much
that helps hi this is outside
but I I I I really want is to
move forward I do that class
ISIS is very important for
teachers outcome we do
individualized attention
differentiation on all that
queen we can even I do through
can walk on the tables to
support the students right so
thank you just wanted to say
that thank you madam chair
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Trujillo and then
merry thank you for bringing
this forward this is one of the
things that I personally been
harping on a lot as well I don't
agree with extending the school
year I I I agree with this
smaller class sizes and a little
resentful that wasn't included
in the station.
Just a little bit because this
is very very you madam.
Because this is very very
important and I'm glad that
we're starting the conversation
and.
I I don't once again say that I
don't believe in that setting
the school year is gonna solve
our problem that we have thirty
plus kids in the classroom it's
not and and and I really love
the alternative especially in
our elementary schools to have
an E. and the structural systems
in the classroom to help the
teacher present at least help
the process but one of the
things that that was mentioned
earlier about the the priority
of of of the legislature when it
comes to public education and
we're focusing on extended
school year as opposed to doing
this well in a heartbeat I would
dump extend the school year and
I would do something like this
did did thank you for bringing
this conversation forward Madam
chair representative I believe
that you are making a very
strong point here I agree with
your point I support a hundred
percent and I will vote yes
because Madam chair
representative we need to get
the conversation started and
people need to see that it has
our support thank you madam
chair.
Thank you any more questions.
Representative and and
In a present I must say that I
like the little clause about
lunch to do.
Having done cafeteria cleaning
for six consecutive years
although I did end up with my
lunch my thirty minutes of lunch
so many teachers do not so I
know that's not the main purpose
of the bill but the inclusion is
extremely meaningful for
educators.
I think everybody agrees that
this is really important but my
question is how do we want to
proceed do we want to make a
vote do we.
Okay I'm so sorry.
Representative Chatfield with
your I apologize for going for
going twice but the
representative sponsoring the
bill knows what I know and and
see the good intention of people
even myself to one vote yes for
this bill but if we pass it and
it passes in our schools are
saddened with with the bill I
mean it's an unfunded mandate
for schools that are struggling
anyway and so just just a
thought you know that if if we
even though I supported if we
pass it they got to come up.
Madam chair may respond also.
When we both sit on probation as
well if we pass it today it
though kept will kill it in
probation and or table in
appropriations I would submit
that we.
That you all entertainer motion
to roll it over and then ugh
that we we can discuss it in the
interim and I think that would
bring more fruitful discussion.
Do a quick madam chair members
yes and I just want to also say
that we did discuss this in the
interim with the powerful
legislative finance committee
two weeks after the last session
ended we started speaking about
reduction in class size and also
the importance of the educator
health care bill and and
planning time so we have that
within the entire interim
interim time so I don't know do
we need to meet with the
committees directly and I don't
know why that why that
information is not being passed
along to you all because we did
meet with the LFC all throughout
the interim.
So thank you
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much I think that this does
deserve a lot of the discussion
but whenever the sponsor even
states that whenever thanks for
coming through our budget is too
light for us to do anything
about it therefore I do have a
problem if we're going to ensure
that our young kids.
Are educated to the best of our
ability this is what it's going
to take I do represent three
school districts that are
High poverty they do have a free
breakfast is and lunch is.
And I think it's very very
important but until we change
the process for budget hearings
and everything and there is
input from committees just like
ours.
That has a say in what happens
in our budget instead of
everything being predetermined
we don't stand a chance and so
madam chair and representative I
appreciate what you're doing but
at this point I cannot support I
think that we need to hold tough
of what we're asking from our
Ellis a committee.
And.
Be adamant about it this is our
kids future thank you madam
chair thank you and and I just
want to add you know we have as
as we sat here where do we get
people well now we're making
teacher residencies a much more
robust program this is something
that teacher residencies where
they're required to have master
teachers I I feel there's new
things emerging that can address
some of the staffing issues also
the next committee is not
appropriations it's house
government and we have nineteen
days left so this still has to
go to health government and then
the floor and then the Senate so
I mean we can vote yes and make
a statement but I know the chair
ability is C. for the next two
years I believe will be chair
Romero and personally I believe
a really robust hearty LA see I
know you you go to it you know
there's tension between
everybody knows it between the
ledges of it legislative finance
committee and the legislative
education study committee.
But personally I feel that we
really have to make this a
priority but it does require
study because we don't have the
time to do the policy work of
where we gonna get the staffing
and the financial work we're
going to get the budget but what
is the will of the committee.
Madam chair doing this move to
table.
We can table a role.
okay so would you like to roll
it but with the understanding
that this will take a priority
place on LFC and we have that
deputy director and several
members sitting with us nodding
their heads also.
Okay so chairman and our expert
witness will roll it over
our chair is currently
addressing high school stuff in
the other Education Committee
will make sure gets a strong
message that we want this on the
agenda these are we couldn't do
more today thank you appreciate
it okay.
Yes.
Okay.
Is our della crews here.
Yes.
We're waiting to see if
Representative dela Cruz is here
otherwise we'll go to house
memorial fifty six if he's not
here.
The.
Your call has been forwarded.
Okay where did miss waited
Representative Trujillo go.
For.
We.
We don't have a.
We do not have a quorum we're
going to wait for a moment.
If Art De La Cruz does not
appear.
either will do my bill or will.
So for well I what can I
introduce my guess what we're
waiting.
Okay actually my expert witness
is in the audience it's Vivian
Wiseman if you can stand up
you'll hear a little bit more
about her.
She's Albuquerque high school
student who is observing and
shadowing and presenting and her
mom Mrs Weissman.
So thank you.
Going to get a hold of.
Okay.
Yes Representative Baca.
Disney Representative and thank
or Volkoff okay yes seven as a
quorum to have for.
Five six seven.
you back yeah okay I'm
invisible.
So we do have a point.
Thank.
We have to have a committee T.
C..
Okay tribal.
You madam chair and then we'll
start can you share.
Okay we're going to house
memorial fifty six which is
great study high school start
times.
I mean for.
We have a point we have not
having his friends here.
Okay.
All
right I think.
Yeah.
The.
Welcome.
Vice chair and expert witness we
are anxious to hear your house
memorial fifty six thank you so
much of Madam chair and
committee.
I'm happy to be here today I'll
say some remarks of the non
expert witness is Vivian
Weissman.
From fourteen she's a fourteen
year old freshman I just want to
crawl.
at Albuquerque high school she
brought the bill to us attempt
familiar C. worked on the
memorial with her and we're here
to presented today of house
memorial fifty six calls for LFC
to
do a study on high school start
times they would work with
actual high school students PED
the staff from school districts
and charter schools and to study
what's being done around the
country and I will say that
increasingly there's a
recognition of the impact the
adverse impact on the mental and
physical health of our
adolescent population because of
early start times and studies
show that several things have
been achieved in schools that
are changing this there's better
mental and physical health
improved academic outcomes
including higher test scores
which people are always looking
at there's a reduction in car
accidents because as you know
many teenagers are drivers one
study showed a sixteen point
five percent decrease in
accidents and better attendance
because kids can get to school
on time.
And so I'm going to ask my
expert witness to give her
remarks I may make a couple of
other things and one will stand
for questions given hello chairs
and members of the committee
we get started us so I know that
improving educational outcomes
is important for everyone in the
government and especially in
this room in New Mexico I'm a
freshman Albuquerque high school
for a certain high school I
research what I can do to make
my four years as successful as
possible would help me to move
on to college and career not
only I can be proud of without
my community could be proud of
me as well in the course of my
research is here either one of
the biggest elements for me
doing month school is that is
something I have no control over
but you as a government do and
that is what I'd like to take a
minute or so every time to talk
about.
So the one element that I don't
have control over it is what
time school starts did you know
that the American academy of
pediatrics put out a statement
that high schools to start
thirty AM or later since they
naturally go to bed at nine to
eleven.
Teenagers brains developmental
time doesn't even start till ten
to eleven morning which is three
hours after the average high
school star to New Mexico.
Adolescents who don't get the
appropriate amount of sleep
which is eight to ten hours are
more likely to be overweight
suffer symptoms of depression
engage in unhealthy respective
years smoking drinking and drugs
and not engage in physical
activity and perform poorly in
school according to the CDC.
Teenagers who get more sleepy as
of later start times have better
grades better attendance and
even fewer crosses up will.
These are all things that are I
know you're trying to improve
for New Mexico teenagers and
this is a simple way to solve.
The N. M. Y. R. R. us to data
dot teenagers with fewer than
six hours of sleep have the
highest risk of mental health
outcomes my feeling solder
hopeless making a suicide plan
or even attempting suicide.
Okay you know that teenagers
right now are suffering mental
health crisis later start times
could help prevent some of these
issues.
New Mexico could be at the
forefront of something the AP
and the chief of national center
mental health have been urging
schools in St city for here.
California has already passed
this law and went into effect to
the school year.
I am asking as a high school
student and on behalf of my
classmates for you to please
consider later start times give
New Mexico teenage teenagers
every opportunity to thrive.
And I think she has said it all
I will only add that there's now
seven states studying this since
California has done their law
and California's law was a three
year process they had three
years to figure out how to do
things and rural schools were
actually exempt due to the
nature of some of the smaller
rural schools with that we stand
for questions madam chair thank
you madam chair and what we'll
do is go to the audience on my
left first to see if there's
anyone who would like to stand
in support yes the gentleman in
the center.
The committee doesn't just give
you know Albuquerque public
schools on my sixteen year old I
was telling him this morning
about this bill and he said I
need to go to support that
school.
But I really think it's
important to consider one of the
things that we struggle with an
APS is transportation so movie
schedules and transportations
are really encouraging to
committee to include
transportation in that study of
ten will make sure that happens
so thank you so much for the
thank you anyone else in to my
left.
Is there anyone on my right that
would like to standards for yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee Martians registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
coalition of education leaders
administrators and
superintendents we stand strong
support at this memorial and the
study we would ask however that
also included in these task
force or the workgroup and then
A. A. B. involved the New Mexico
superintendents association and
the school board association as
well thank you thank you anyone
else and on that side.
Is is there just just a little
side is there a parent in here
that would like to stand in
support.
I can stand.
Her daughter so obviously part
of it.
She's really looking at this
from a health standpoint you
know she learned a lot about
this from health class and just
as a she's my youngest I I she
has a five thirty wake up to
make it towards our our and it's
just not the natural circadian
rhythm for teenagers I think
anybody who has a teenager knows
that teenagers are not actually
just be waking up at five thirty
in the morning that's a
biological fact so I think what
we're asking is for you to just
study it so that you can see
that you know teenagers that are
able to wake up a little bit
later gets a school little bit
later have greater outcomes all
the health issues that are there
but also I think even teachers
would appreciate not having
class you know students
wonderfully complex which also
an educator and that's something
that I would really welcome
thank you the and the reason I
mention that is because you are
the only person in the room that
was just beaming when she spoke
everyone.
Everyone was happy to there was
a glow that.
And is there anyone
as soon that would like to say
that they support.
Yes okay that will go to the
opposition anyone in opposition
to the bill to my left.
To my right.
And soon.
We'll go to the committee that
we have they have one person
sorry.
Talk to go ahead and and speaker
Deborah.
Yeah and madam chair I'm
actually speaking in support I
can get to my zoom button fast
enough that's okay you can
support.
Okay Deborah Condit I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
public charter schools and we
Soto prong strong support of
this bill we appreciate the
Sanchez attention to this issue
and support this study is
outline and many charter schools
are interested in later start
times for secondary students but
we have we do have
transportation limitations which
was brought up in committee and
we hope that this bill at the we
suspect this will be part of the
conversation as it moves forward
and on a on a personal side I
went to a very for I fall for a
lot of the students had to work
to supplement for family income
so they were working at jobs
like Taco Bell and McDonald's
and I remember students working
so late and always having to
miss our first period its person
second heard it sometime so I
thought this a lot of times
because they would work to one
o'clock in the morning they try
to get hold and do homework in
this is difficult lives so we do
I do stand in strong support of
the spells thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anyone else on zoom.
Charles Turner.
Are you with this Mister Turner
to sell.
Unmute yourself please.
Charles Turner are you there
unmute yourself.
No.
Okay we've given them time we're
going to go come to the
committee.
We're going to come to a
committee and I have miss made
of on Moya.
The the thank you madam chair
thank you for saying my name
right I love that I'm I'm not
used to hearing it.
Unless I set of.
But I really like this idea are
are a of district has.
To a mall this around for a
while because I am one of those
I have seen the difference of of
kiddos in my first period of
luckily it's my freshman class
so they kind of have to ride the
bus in order to get but when I
had
but I have a older students in
my first period I had less my
first pre than I did all the
rest of the time because they
just wouldn't show up so.
They were sleeping the could
wake up so I really like this
idea I do like the idea like you
said with California how they
exempted rural schools because I
think some schools it may not
work for of the the culture
that's that's going on in the in
in these and those areas so it
may not work for all but but I
the but I you know the so the
the whole maybe having some
exemptions because I didn't
really like the whole statute
that the poll we you know we
emphasize local control.
but I do agree with I forget who
talked about it including anime
because it would have to be a
huge would have to have game
change times changed and has
right now a lot of these a I
know basketball some of best
will coach but but our first
games are at four so this would
be putting us let's see and our
fifteen the white blend schools
an hour and fifteen minutes
later so that means we would get
out like at three thirty ishe
and games starting right then so
they don't miss a lot of classes
so so things would have to shift
but I think it's worth a
discussion and and and the and
the study because I think
they'll be I've seen the
difference between on a two hour
delay losses I think they just
excited because we finally got
snow but a.
Two hour delay of the the
alertness of my students on
those days verses regular days
is like well why don't we start
at nine o'clock every day.
It is crazy so I I I like this
and thank you for bringing this
thank you and before I go to
Representative result we found
someone that finding it was able
to hit the.
The mute button go ahead and
Andrea and just dressing.
Yes madam chair thank you for
the opportunity I hope to get
out there fast enough I think
there's something that we always
seem to forget the parents who'd
actually do have to take their
children to high school this
will influence their work
schedule as well we also I have
been contacted by many parents
to say right now they need the
work that the whole schedule for
pick up for their Senator aged
age group so they've got
elementary that got middle
school they've got high school
students they're trying to
deliver to school and back and
get to work
and I think this is good
discussion I think this needs to
be evaluated but for the most
part the parents do need to
decide this is on the local
level and that's just my two
cents and thanks for all you're
doing appreciate that thank you
Mr.
That's it and then
Representative yes I will go
back to to.
Thank you chairman Trujillo.
A young lady did a remarkable
job here today even though I
disagree with you okay.
New Mexico to soften the blow.
Madam chair whenever I'm looking
at the Ellie is see bill
analysis on house memorial fifty
six is under substantial do
issues is starts list in schools
and the start times for them
Albuquerque Los crucis Rio
Rancho gets to Gallup McKinley
in Santa Fe.
And madam chair.
And Representative Garrett.
The majority of those high
schools are on the more western
side of the state in the area
that I live in so one size will
not fit all.
We're at daylight when it was
still dark here in Santa Fe.
I do have students that do not
have a long trip into their
school some of them right school
bus for over.
It's unfortunate that some of
these kids do have to help out
at home it's unfortunate.
That sometimes there's only a
single parent there and I get
that I really do.
That parents.
Tip of the apparent.
If you've got a young child.
Kindergarten through I'm gonna
say fourth or fifth grade there
needs to be a set bedtime for
that child that child that need
to be until ten or eleven
o'clock at night the apparent.
I'm very adamant about that
that's going to help our
children succeed in their
educational goals.
Unfortunately there's too many
parents that don't want to get
involved.
And our teachers are having to
teach their children everything
that there is to know and for
that I'm very sorry for that
teachers are having to do this.
As far as.
Some of the other things that I
read and believe you me.
I really don't want New Mexico
to become like California I
don't care what kind of studies
they have I don't want our state
become an at the California.
Whenever you were also looking
at the FIR this one thing that
really jumps out at me is a
transportation aspect of.
Because our more rural schools.
That's going to be real hardship
on the.
In that they will not be able to
afford that I'm afraid.
Under the performance apple
implications on your on the F.
I. R..
You're talking about is states a
lack of sleep can also as long
term physical and medical they
have a physical see what happens
whenever you get a Berlin you
work late so.
A lack of state sleep also has
long term physical and mental
health consequences poor quality
and quality of sleep can lead to
health concerns such as diabetes
cardiovascular disease and
obesity.
Yes ladies stated several other
factors that went along with
this.
And I I'm not going to disagree
with this I just have all of
this is science based.
I know that stress sometimes
causes cardiovascular disease
the stress can also help
contribute to obesity diabetes
or welcome I'm not going to talk
on that that the middle and
health mental and physical
health consequences yes it is
but it's true and human adults
as well.
And it is a huge adult we still
have to get up in the mornin I
start my day I wake up about
four thirty five o'clock every
morning and I'm out the door at
six o'clock and I'm working I do
physical labor outside plus all
the the stuff I have to deal
with plus.
Trying to help my constituents
up.
And.
I go to sleep at night because
I'm tired.
Maybe some of these younger
people need to realize that you
don't stay on the freaking phone
text in your buddies at twelve
thirty in the morning.
Parents take control your kids
what it boils down to.
And I'm sure that everybody is
like oh my god she's lost her
mind I've I've raise kids.
We had set bedtimes for those
children on school nights if
there was a school activity as
soon where we live thirty
minutes out of time.
Was that school activity was
over with whether it's a
basketball game or whatever the
case may be on a school night
they had thirty minutes to get
home.
Is really easy.
But with no appropriation
attached to this and and and I
realize it's just a memorial.
When when ari in here and I
found this very.
Very in the administrative
implications Representative
Garrett provisions of this
memorial would require L. E. S.
C. to work with high school
students.
Why are you leaving at the
middle school students why are
you why are we not taking into
consideration those in grade
school for kindergarten.
Where did the parents fit into
that conversation that we're
gonna have.
Then it at the end PED and staff
from New Mexico's to school
districts and charter schools to
develop more recommendations.
Local control is where it's at.
What works on the side of the
state may not work on the west
side of the state just because.
When the sun does come up over
the horizon there.
And so like and it also goes on
to state about sport scheduling
that could be problematic but
the the main thing is.
The parental involvement local
involvement the transportation
cost might be a.
Something that each school
district needs to make the
recommendations to PED.
Is that this is what we are
going to do but haven't mandated
now I cannot agree with that
madam chair thank you very much
funding madam chair this is a
study it's not a mandate I know
but eventually it could become a
mandate and therefore I have to
I've got concern madam chair
thank you very much for that
thank you Representative Garrett
I have Representative it it I
followed by Representative good
on.
Thank you madam chair and I I I
to just wanted to make sure that
this is a study that will be
conducted by the LFC therefore
there won't shouldn't be it's
kind of what they do anyway
right Representative care yes
madam chair that is correct and
an absolutely parents would be
called in middle schools would
be called in everybody can be
involved it just specific things
are included but all the groups
were obviously be involved.
Madam chair and representative
there there has been really a
lot of research on this
and I ate I'm trying to remember
why taught high school class I
was asked to teach when I did it
but I can't remember why I think
maybe as director of a school to
work program is kind of combined
with that curriculum and I I
remember three boys at the back
of the class and then he just
struggled it was eight o'clock
class and and they were great
but what is I mean they would
come to me and apologized after
class because half the time of
the sleep in the class they it
looked like they kind of rolled
out of bed and got to class I
mean really it was all they
could do to get there and they
really struggled with that time
and it was genuine if they were
they tried they could not do it
and I you know I can see this
day during a special high school
when you have periods you know
you could stagger class time so
maybe that first period if they
could you know it it it it's a
lot of factors which is why it
needs to study I could see them
skipping a first period and
having a later period in the
afternoon for example and
staggering ours if they're not
in sports that might work if
they're working and they're not
in sports that might work so I
think there are traces it we
could do at the local level but
again it really does have to be
local level my high school kids
index center on the street at
six thirty in the morning you
know it's it's not that it's
that long of a drive it's
probably a thirty minute drive
but when you have to stop.
You know fourteen times on the
way takes time so so those are
just the issues from a real
perspective I don't know how you
do it but that's I think we need
to study so I think you
representative
Of for bringing this bill
forward I I really don't have a
lot of questions I think they'll
be examined in the study thank
you madam chair thank you I have
Representative go to a lot.
Thank you madam chair I move
onto passed house memorial fifty
six their second.
But we don't need a second
Memorial Day we.
Yes we do then also regional
second I mean Representative I
will send it.
With their opposition yes.
Of please.
You've recorded Representative
Weisel as in the.
Opposition will call the roll
that would be good.
The interactive yes.
Representative Ezzell now.
Representative Ferrary left yes.
Representative Herrerra yes.
All Representative Lara percent
Lara Representative Madrid
Representative Lara Maria here I
mean sorry yes.
I'm still here.
Thank you
Representative
Care Act yes.
Madam vice chair Christine
Trujillo yes.
All.
We have a six two two one six
one okay you have a memorial
Representative thank you
everybody and we've noted
everybody's input but I think in
and our next the presenters
here.
You will have the committee.
The can't hear mass.
From.
Of.
Thank you.
Okay we are rolling
Representative data crucis
graduate study loan act and we
are now on this B. three as
amended the family income index
distributions flexibility and
Senator when you're ready please
start.
The one with no foreign.
I don't have a quorum.
So when she's back we'll have a
good one.
Of we're going to take.
We're going to wait.
I just for a moment our
foreign person is coming back in
a minute.
Madam chairman another
committees so if it gets longer
I'm going to happily.
Madam chair.
Yes I I recommend that we going
to sub committee here the bill
and then we can do that and then
we can wait for Corona to come
back we need a motion for that.
The second.
Okay any opposition.
Okay please begin thank you so
much madam chair and good
morning everyone I set this
committee for many years so it's
great to see new faces here in
Education Committee so Senate
bill three is about the family
income index we started this in
twenty twenty one as a pilot the
we've done it for two years
fifteen million each year.
This bill says let's do it for
one more year because in the
middle of the pandemic things
kind of fell apart for any
pilots we were on the design of
this is to look at some schools
around the state that have the
highest poverty.
The extreme poverty that we see
all over the state so we've.
We put too many restrictions on
the bill originally we required
so this funding fifteen million
goes directly to the school it's
for literacy for math for.
Development of curriculum that's
more culturally appropriate
social emotional learning it
Senator so they have a wide
variety of things they can use
it for so this extends the pilot
for another year there is
fifteen million in the budget
and it does the restrictions
that we put on is probably my
fault accepted that we we
record heard the funding to be
spent the third on math work
third on literacy and the rest
of third so this bill takes all
that off
for example one school wanted to
buy math program they couldn't
do it because we had required
them to use the money to
different way so this takes this
off we tried to do this last
year but it it died on the house
floor ran at that time so that's
essentially what it does I can
talk more about the distribution
or how it works if you want me
to the fact maybe I should
because.
Work with.
For.
The committee yes that is
correct.
Okay she still speaking
actually.
So madam chair that the way it
works is the family income index
is determined by the taxed right
department they take those
students in New Mexico and they
pull income tax data for those
families households are
classified into five categories
extremely low income very low
income low income moderate
income an above average this
funding goes to schools in the
bottom two categories we did
find put a provision that no
more than ten percent of your
schools so that the money didn't
go to three or four districts
because.
There's districts with their
extreme poverty so the the we're
supposed to be looking at the
data so the data that we do have
shows about a ninety two percent
positive.
A result from what they've done
so far we think that loosening
up restrictions extending it for
another year will give us the
ability to look at more data to
look how schools are using it in
a different way.
So that's essentially it.
Okay with that will take public
comment is there anybody online
who would like to speak in favor
of that Senate bill three as
amended.
Okay is there anybody on this
site who would like to speak in
support K. Steve.
DCN news within the New Mexico.
Relations director on behalf of
our members we stand support of
this bill SB three is a solid
bill it makes a lot of fun L.
cages and improve the delivery
of three funds
and our students that needed the
most.
You know this amendment will
allow schools more flexibility
catering interventions and
service to their particular
needs.
And spending limitations what
this means for that very reason.
Particular learning barriers
this is a very.
A little flexibility re
financial resources that are.
In the sponsor for sponsoring SB
three and we ask that you will
do things thank you.
Thank anybody else on this side
who wants to speak in support.
Okay anybody on this side would
like to speak in support we're
just gonna go one two three four
starting with job.
Thank you madam chair.
To be in New Mexico school
boards association we support
the legislation we think the
sponsor for bringing four it
does provide more flexibility
and options for our districts
and again our strong support
thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee just has to be
about thirty schools I thank the
senator for bringing this
forward and stand.
Madam chair members of the
committee with lobbyists for the
New Mexico coalition education
leaders we also stand in support
of this legislation extending
this pilot project and the
flexibility it provides you with
the family income index and we
think the sponsor for bring it
forward thank you thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee rob Robert Beatty our
representatives are swept south
residential apartments for
training and Robert F. Kennedy
charter school I appreciate the
sponsor for continuing to
support this legislation and and
I do support I do believe that
there needs to be ongoing
conversation regarding the
distribution as some of the
poorest schools in the state are
still not getting that that
support as well the truck
complicated world charter
schools a state authorized
charter school together hundreds
of thousands of dollars worth of
district a charter school will
get knocked I appreciate Sanchez
thank.
Thank you is there anybody
online who would like to speak
Agence Senate bill three as
amended.
Is there anybody in the room who
would like to speak against
Senate bill three as amended.
Casey no comment will go to
committee Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair good
morning
madam chair you in concept from
all for
of mine Alice's says at the
Senate because of.
That the Senate finance
committee stripped the
appropriation
so.
How do we pay for so madam chair
they have to do that on all
bills that come in with them
money tech at the end they have
to take off making appropriation
at the take off that paragraph
but this is in the bill it I
mean it's it's in the budget.
Yeah so that's the way it works
and it looks like we're moving
forward and no money but we're
moving it forward because it's
in the budget.
So madam chair I sat on House
Appropriations so I do
understand that just the way my
review here refuted it was as if
it was it had moved for with no
funding so the funding is in
house bill two yes the number
again thank you madam chair.
Any other questions madam chair
I move it to pass on this bill
second okay we have the our
motion to two passed from
representative to you second by
Representative Herrerra is there
any opposition.
Seen no opposition you have to
pass Senator thank you.
Are you gonna do the next one to
yes okay moving right along are
less bill today will be Senate
bill one thirty one fort worth
back in full committee right yes
we are so we were able to do
that we're good.
Okay a Senate bill one thirty
one as amended is the public
school funding changes and start
when you're ready.
So madam chair that this is my
favorite bill this.
It reflects twenty years of work
the on the Zuni loss.
We have put in place a public
school facility authority of
public school capital outlay
council and a public school
capital outlay council oversight
task force process good this is
endorsed by both LFC AMPAS good
of but three agencies worked on
these changes L. E. S. C. plus
good of and the LESC it
represents the end of what I
think of is really guidelines
and restrictions that we've had
to place on the funding of
public school capital outlay to
address the issues brought up in
the SUNY lawsuit so this bill
under this a lot of the things
that we've had to put in place
when we passed house bill six
several years ago Representative
Lundstrom said that on did our
capital R. impact Aid credits
what we put in house bill six
starting next year the those
native American districts that
would we're getting that capital
money that they would have to
have that be part of their local
match This repeals that fully so
that impact date stays in those
districts they decide how to
use.
Additionally we put in place
many years ago legislative
offsets that if we is
legislators ever sent money to
our public schools.
That it had to count against the
district when they came to the
public school capital outlay
council we have about seventy
eighty million I'll get you the
exact number of offsets that
keep districts from coming to
get help with capital outlay
and you know of course
Albuquerque has the most with
the most kids but they're
significant amounts all over the
state law thing to three million
dollars and I'm reading off of
the back of the LESC of fire but
it's also in the LESC.
Late Carter one point three
million Lovington three million
Santa Fe almost six million.
New Mexico school for the arts a
charter almost five a little
over five million so this bill
under as past present and future
legislative offsets
It does a lot of cleanup
but that's essentially what it
does it it moves us for the next
three years into thank
increasing state match for every
district by thirty percent.
Up in we have funding now for
public school capital outlay and
for the last few years we've
just had districts not even try
to improve because there wasn't
as much money and also there is
the offsets before them and then
many districts with a very low
state match This tries to write
all of that so it does that it
temporarily thirty percent more
from the state for every
district is for the next three
years in the next three years we
are going to look in detail at
L. during LFC and LESC and
postcode this on the local the
what we have right now with
state local matches if we need
to move that formula in a
different direction but in the
meantime it helps every district
come up I capital outlay it
loosens up these guidelines that
we've had and it really
represents the success over the
last twenty years where we spent
almost three billion dollars to
build new schools to improve
schools to bring them into the
modern era with broadband
etcetera so it's just something
that we should all be proud.
Fifty cent plus thank you is
there anybody online who would
like to speak in support of
Senate bill one thirty one.
A JD Bullington have the floor.
Madam chair this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which like the
sponsor also believes this is a
very important building strongly
supported so thank you Senator
Stewart the chamber supports the
actor distributions and this
bill especially those for
funding school security upgrades
and CTE facilities many of our
schools are still playing catch
up with security project axe
light upgrading entry systems
adding security Bestival
vestibules at school interest
says for safety visitor check
and several so having special
appropriation just for these
kinds of projects is is very
appropriate and many of our
state CTE programs lacked the
facilities and equipment to make
high quality modern curricula
reality the CTE programs give
our students valuable hands on
experience and workforce
training but they need to
provide essential support to get
there so thank you store thank
you members of the committee I
think madam chair can I
interrupt you just for a minute
I forgot about that if this bill
it's a hundred million dollars
going into the SCG twenty five
million for security seventy
five million for CTE pre K. and
and then I'll I mean last year
we tried this districts loved it
was for maintenance at this year
we've expanded that so I
apologize thank you I will
continue with our online support
Deborah Condit.
Yes good.
You madam chair Deborah Condit
register lobbyist for public
charter schools of New Mexico I
would like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward
it makes mistakes and make and
making this fixture facility
funding this is that bill should
it pass will unlock millions of
dollars for schools across the
state and we strongly support
this bill thank you thank you.
And of.
C. address trailing straddling
you have the floor.
Thank you yes I'm the one of the
school board members in
Farmington and we are looking
forward to being able to
facilitate
building of some preschools and
things like that we need I'm we
appreciate the the sponsor for
putting this forward and I just
speak on my behalf not for the
whole school board but I sure
appreciate it I have eleven
grandkids in this district this
means a lot thank you so much
thank you.
And with that we'll go to the
room if you're on this side in
the support the bill please
raise your hand.
Okay I will go with Rick and
then next to it.
One of them chairman of the
committee
president trump supporters Bill
I was honored to of to be able
to carry the original bill for
this on a lawsuit input is to
position where we're at right
now it was a good bill them but
Representative Stuart Senator
Stewart double
the representative of the time
the bill the first time around
but it was a good bill then it's
a better bill now because of all
the changes that have and it's
really impressed with is going
to say to the termination so
thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much Senator
Stewart thank you and next.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and Krista
Kelly right right for this from
Bernalillo public school
district and we stand in support
of the entire bill and are
extremely thankful to the
sponsor for putting this forward
enough and especially the
removal of the osek offsets and
the ability for public school
districts to be able to see
capital outlay funding thank you
thank you.
Anybody on this I want to speak
in support will start from the
back and then move forward.
Madam chair members of the
committee marshes registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
coalition of education leaders
and we stand and support for the
reasons stated by everybody else
Boller incident and the Sanchez
thank you thank you Morning
madam chair members of the
committee because of us to be a
public schools this is a
priority item for are the APS
board of education sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josie and
executive director of the New
Mexico school boards association
and also I have the pleasure of
serving as chair of the public
school capital outlay council
the last several years
we think this is the Senator for
bringing this forward this is a
long needed.
Discussed on many occasions at
different levels as you
mentioned the PSC C. R. council
also supports this LFC Elia C.
the public school capital outlay
oversight committee and just the
details again reducing the match
getting rid of the offsets
will certainly open up the doors
for more participation in the
program we start started to
build up a little bit of a
balance there and those funds
are sorely needed out in the
community the appropriation for
CTE school safety in pre K. are
also of.
Well deserved and we've
streamlined that process to make
distributions rather than an
application process for those so
all the district will be get
them those funds recent receive
those resources very quickly
thank you.
Thank you.
now will go to opposition to
this bill is there anybody
online who opposes this bill.
Okay see none is there anybody
present in the room who opposes
this bill.
Okay CNN will will ask the
sponsor for additional remarks
and we'll go to the committee
apologize I have just not done a
very good job of telling you
everything in this bill so I for
god that not only are we
reducing the local match by
thirty percent we're reducing at
fifty percent for pre K. and
reduce it reducing at fifty
percent for the micro districts
if you have under two hundred
so.
Thank you anything else out
these are my guys that know and
I think they're laughing at me
over there because keep
forgetting things so I just want
to say that thank you thank you
are there any other questions
from the committee.
Public relations of
Representative it at a.
I was just going to say madam
chair and as senator the first
time I got exposed to the public
school capital outlay farming I
said my god we have all this
money and nobody's getting
anything that was my take away
so I really appreciate you
bringing this bill forward and
I'll stop with that.
A manager moved to pass the
Senate bill one thirty one is
amended.
We have a motion to pass from
Representative lane and a second
from Representative chat field
there any opposition to this
bill see no opposition you have
a do pass meditative appreciate
the time and with that we are
finished for the day thanks
everybody for being here we'll
see you on.
What's today Monday and we'll
see you on Wednesday.
