Representative.
I am here.
Representative Lane.
Representative they.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lente here.
Representative Madrid.
Here to be working out about
eight thirty.
Representative to provide
collateral.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative said Sir here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Here madam chair.
I'm
gonna call you queen.
Thank you Representative vice
chairman care I'm here.
Chairman.
Here.
We do have a quorum.
All right good morning everybody
I hope you all are doing well I
made this announcement prior to
beginning the meeting but I'll
make it again for those of you
that just joined us we will be
losing a number of our our
Appropriations Committee members
as they will have to break in
work on the the final vote for
the budget here at nine o'clock
so
We're gonna try a obviously our
sponsor is one of those so we're
going to fit in the first bill
house bill one thirty one prior
to breaking and then will
continue on and they're after
okay so if we could could keep
things short concise.
Brief in answers any questions
and statements and all the way
around Representative Trujillo
please house bill one thirty
one.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning everyone it's so good to
be here today to present house
bill one thirty one house bill
one thirty one is titled
it assistant of Hispanic
Education but does cover a
couple of other things you know
that New Mexico finds itself
uniquely situated to influence
the educational outcomes of its
growing Hispanic student
population the country this is
this the country's.
State that has the majority
minority in that and it's huge
it's a huge issue and then
twenty ten governor bill
Richardson signed the first
Hispanic Education Act into law
is aimed at improving the
educational achievements of six
two percent of this panic
students and closing educational
opportunity gaps what this bill
will do well fund positions for
assistant secretaries of
Hispanic Education that New
Mexico pad in New Mexico AGD to
address those opportunity gaps
from pre K. to twenty it'll
provide sustainable frameworks
and systemic opportunities to
identify resource materials and
communication tools for those
students it also really promotes
a community engagement and
empowerment it'll establish
collaborative decision making
process sees through authentic
family and community engagement
and incorporate those decisions
in school district actions to
improve outcomes it'll provide
culturally sustaining pedagogy
and culturally relevant
materials to one or more
multicultural education models
proven to be effective with
Hispanic students here in New
Mexico and this C. as we work to
increase those resources in
those programs will use those to
implement it and it'll provide
per diem and mileage for council
members this provided for non
salaried public officers and the
per diem and mileage act and Mr
speaker I mean Mr chairman I
would like to ask the first
doctor center goes Rodriguez and
then drive out of my mother who
are my witnesses if they wish to
give a brief opening statement.
Thank.
Dr to guess.
Okay thank you Representative
Trujillo if it's okay I'm gonna
go ahead and turn it over to Dr
I'm of the he was he had a few
state
key things needed to the wanted
to say first and then he'll turn
it over to me okay that's fine.
General manager would please a
committee my name is Dr Adam
Garcia Google I'm a proud son of
a homemaker and minor in Vietnam
veteran from the mining district
in southwestern New Mexico in
addition I'm a product of both
public education and higher
education from the state of New
Mexico general meddling if you
would please a committee I would
like to ask all of you one
question and please answer by
show of hands how many of you
support enhancing the education
for students families and
learning communities in the
great state of New Mexico.
Excellent thank you students
families and communities are
mentioned in one combination or
another over twenty five times
and house bill one thirty one
this is the tenth anniversary of
the ATA today just like ten
years ago present us with the
choice to operationalize the ATA
to better services banning
students families and
communities in New Mexico with
the creation of two Assistant
Secretary positions one of the
higher department and one of the
PED that went initiated will be
a catalyst for cultural
proficiency educational access
opportunity and achievement of
Hispanic students families and
communities in the great state
of New Mexico it's a greater
reality.
If if I need to switch over to
drive our three guests.
Thank go ahead and by the way Dr
Rodriguez and Mr chairman you
and I have both served as state
at the state press sense of
Munna so it's nice to meet you
formally.
We have a lot of good work.
It is a sin.
Okay.
Representative you mentioned
governor bill Richards this sign
the person's Banik Education Act
into law in two thousand ten but
in order for that to happen a
lot of work to place in two
thousand nine community forums
were organized to solicit ideas
and suggestions on how to
improve Hispanic Education in
New Mexico during that year over
one hundred fifty three
responses were collected and
categorized into thirteen
categories from these different
forms that thirteen categories
identified key areas that it
that time would dean as
necessary elements to positively
affect educational outcomes for
Hispanic students.
Summary of those categories
included one family community
business collaboration
partnerships to approve Hispanic
Education we knew those are
those collaborations must exist
to.
That pre K. to grade twelve
which is PED and postsecondary
which includes HEP formal
structure organizations must
exist if we were to improve the
education for Hispanic students
in New Mexico we that culturally
relevant environments resources
training instructional materials
and curriculum must exist if we
were going to improve those
opportunities for Hispanic
students.
And for that consultation by P.
AGD with the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council who works on
behalf of our communities
must exist if we're going to
improve opportunities for
Hispanic students.
The original H. B. one fifty
Iraq at the time provided for
the fall it created a Hispanic
Education office of the Public
education department.
And the rest it is is back
exactly the same that we have
now.
What we currently have now.
As this bill made it through
the legislation late
legislation legislative session
at the time it was amended and
instead of the office or an
assistant or anything else in in
R. AGD are PED it was changed to
identify as Hispanic Education
the eighties our.
Was in PED.
My reason for pointing this out
that now we're at a place where
fourteen years we have tried
working with limited resources
we can no longer afford to do
that this was in two thousand
ten two thousand nine.
That all of these areas were
discussed identified in New
that's what it was going to take
the new revisions of the of the
new amendments to the R. H. E.
house bill one thirty one.
Has gone bad.
And we're saying this is what we
needed them we can no longer
afford to wait another two years
before we provide services that
are needed to make the positive
changes to Hispanic Education
opportunities for students we
can't afford that in.
So are if we have a few minutes
but I would like to do is to
point out a couple of.
Areas that.
The new house bill one thirty
one.
Is addressing the first one is
the purpose if you would look at
your
H. one thirty one I'm just
hoping that you have in front of
you and you turn to page five.
Section three.
And you get to line twenty two.
Where it states the purpose.
Twenty two in that area the
three provisions that are
included that were included in
the house bill one fifty
there is the same as they were
in two thousand ten except now
they've been further delineated
so that we have a very clearly
defined path that will promote
educational positive.
Educational outcomes that
provisions now those three have
now been delineated to include
eight.
And they're all now very clearly
defined and to help us so that
there's no question asked to the
steps that need to take place
for us to make positive changes.
Our concern with the effect just
two more areas if you would turn
to page seven.
Section four.
Line twenty five.
The definition.
The change from.
Liaison and Hispanic Education
which exists now in house bill
one fifty and we are proposing
for house bill one thirty one is
to us Assistant Secretary of
Hispanic Education in the public
education we have that position
of the ace on.
We have been very fortunate in
the last ten years to have two
individuals that worked
tirelessly to support the work
of his age bill one fifty.
That work cannot be done in
addition to having a full time
job outline has it has happened
in the past two years right now
we have our money who is the
liaison she works tirelessly.
She's also the director of the
bilingual department and
multicultural Department.
But this if we want to in our
ensure that we can do the
changes then take the changes
that need to be done it cannot
be done as an afterthought and I
don't implied my resume this is
an actor.
Needs a full time person there.
The last one if you would turn
to page eight section five.
In this section it delineates
the duties and responsibilities
of the Assistant Secretary of
Hispanic Education.
You can now look at the list of
duties that need to be
addressed.
They are very clearly right now
so there is no question.
As to what needs to be done many
of the same duties are the
second ones that were identified
in that that list of a hundred
and fifty eight that we got in
in two thousand ten two thousand
nine excuse me.
We care not we cannot afford to
wait another ten years this is
Scott to stop and we need to
make a firm commitment to our
students in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Right.
Turn it over to
Adam.
Thank you secretary Romero to
duties aboard I'll give you some
statistics and then go back into
the possibility of a greater if
we could if if we could we're
gonna have to work start
wrapping this up because the
public testimony we're gonna
have to go to questions and
because the sponsor has to leave
at nine o'clock and let's work
to roll this to Wednesday's
meeting so please be very brief
I will so so just some some
data.
In twenty eight twenty seventeen
twenty eighteen the Latino
adults in the state of New
Mexico degree attainment was
twenty three percent New Mexico
the ninth largest Latino
population a teacher call
population is sixty percent
Hispanic the to your graduation
rate for Hispanics is twenty
nine percent and the four year
graduation rate for Hispanics
forty one so this you position
the Assistant Secretary for
higher education if you could go
to page two section two and I'll
go through this quickly the
inflammation of the
implementation of policy to
support a Spanish student
success we have the AGA and we
also have HSI's Hispanic serving
institutions in the state of New
Mexico H. two section for page
three section eight eight seven
section F. culturally and
historically relevant pedagogy
curriculum and learning
environments okay so page this
is the thing that that the
Assistant Secretary will support
and and and oversee in tandem
with the communities families
and universities page two
sections section six resources
and tools for students families
and communities access
opportunity pathways you know
eliminate gatekeeping okay Page
four section thirteen closing
the achievement gap that's huge
that's been about the since I
started teaching seventeen years
ago here in the state of New
Mexico and before that so how do
we continue to close this expand
education opportunities
increasing graduation rates
retention and completion this is
a positive for economic
development and also a
diversified tax base H. five
section seventeen teacher
administrator and Hispanic
leadership preparation we
already have a teacher shortage
okay so who's teaching the
teachers so this is a really a
circle of accountability between
the higher ed and and the PED on
teacher training professional
earning and teacher preparation
and leadership preparation and
then page seven a section at
college and career readiness
that's huge right but we really
need to start lower and look at
the college and career
conversations and how to help
the.
These at the lower levels of
education so when they get to
there last senior year all or
they do have some kind of
direction on financial aid on
curriculum and they they have
direction on where they're gonna
go in the next four years.
Thank you.
Mr chairman we stand for
questions.
Great thank you all for The
presentation so we will go to
are we have some eager beavers
I'm gonna lower hands in the
attendees list please wait till
I get directions on the so I
will go to opposition is our
opposition to house bill one
thirty one if you do our our
please indicate by raising your
hand if you to speak.
Okay so we'll go to support if
you're in support house bill one
thirty one please indicate by
raising your hand.
If you wish to speak.
I'm gonna give it a moment what
people raise their hands and it
comes up so we don't have any
shifting okay so you will have
up to two minutes but like I
said we're under some kind time
constraints as we're gonna lose
our sponsor and quite a number
of our members here in.
At nine o'clock so if you would
you have up to two minutes.
So.
David please go ahead good
morning welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the of the committee yes my name
is David Rogers and with two
language education of New Mexico
and I it served for seven years
as the chair of the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council along
with my.
My colleague Mister Alex from
Middle East Fund chamber of
commerce I just want to say that
in the seven years and actually
still a member of the Advisory
Council we've been successful
putting forth
annual advisories to the PED
that were pretty darn good if I
can see myself Representative
Representative these advisors
have represented the best thank
you from our community and
family organizations that are
out there fighting for for
family engagement our more
engagement in the educational
process as well as our business
community and institutions of
education that are represented
in the advisory however those
advisories for the most part
have remained on paper and it
has been almost impossible to
implement them due to a lack of
human resource and other tools
and I'm very proud to say that
this this bill house bill one
thirty one provides for those
tools in human resources are are
for us to be more effective as
an advisory in in creating the
change that's needed so I ask
you to please vote in favor of
house bill one thirty thank you
great thank you David.
All right so we'll go to
Jennifer.
Good morning Jennifer you have a
two minutes.
When LCS everyone this is
Jennifer Gomez Chavis I serve on
the static Education Council
I also am here Representative
teen that we need those project
in college connect New Mexico
both initiatives are focused on
increasing student success and
access to education and in
addition to college application
and increasing that's the
applications across our state I
am here in support of this a
piece of legislation because as
a member of this council and.
Representative of those two
organizations this is greatly
needed we need to fight for
their leadership so that we can
ensure that the goals that were
set out for the Hispanic
Education Act are met thank you
so much.
Thank thank you for being here.
All right so we'll go to Julia
we are.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
You may be needed.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is we have
also Lopez simply and I am a
member of the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council Service the in
that council since the beginning
and as others have mentioned the
council has been able to do as
much as they can with the
resources that we have but if we
if you do approve house bill one
thirty one we are sure that we
will have the resources and the
people power to put all the
effort and things that need to
be done for a Hispanic student
population in New Mexico thank
you.
Great thank you.
So we'll go to jasmine.
Morning then you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep up and I am with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we'd like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this legislation
the court in Yazzie Martinez
ruled the state was not
complying with the three key
statutes the Hispanic Education
Act being one of them the eighty
eight calls for a culturally and
linguistically relevant
education for Hispanic students
and also bring stakeholders to
the table to collectively make
advisement on how to meet the
needs of Hispanic students in
New Mexico.
We can make the AGA stronger by
creating an Assistant Secretary
of Hispanic Education to be
charged with excuse me I'm to be
charged with ensuring the
Hispanic Education Act gets
fully implemented without this
crucial leadership role the
compliance with the act will
continue to miss the mark as
others have mentioned.
For these reasons we urge the
committee to passed house bill
one thirty one thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to about
three CM.
Twenty but the Sir.
Morning chairman Romero members
of the committee my name is
Patricia he minutes late them
I'm the project manager for
transform education New Mexico
and a sitting member Hispanic
Education Advisory Council this
morning I'm representing both
HVAC and transformative cation
initially I would like to thank
Representative Trujillo for
sponsoring house bill one thirty
one I've been a member of HVAC
for eight years during this time
we brought both advisement to
the public education department
and the coming to fruition such
as the by literacy so upon
graduation and we also supported
creating a position at the New
Mexico public education
department for a family
engagement cord coordinator but
the truly bold advising mints
that would affect the
opportunity gap faced by
Hispanic students have failed to
be addressed house bill one
thirty one provides amendments
to the HA that will address
these opportunity gaps based are
spent students and will ensure
leadership positions at both pad
and head allowing seats at the
decision making table to address
the needs of our sixty one
percent of the student
population the community has
spoken in the revision of the HA
house bill one thirty one it's
time to be able on behalf of
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council entrance for medication
we kindly ask this committee to
support house bill one thirty
one thank you for your hard work
in the opportunity to share.
Thank thank you.
Right so right.
Good morning okay Mister
chairman members of the
committee Rick Miera of the bill
before you Mr chairman house
bill one thirty one is result of
action taken in June twenty
twenty by the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council to amend the
ten year olds first of its kind
act in the United States it was
resolved amendments be made to
bring the act up to date and
reflect the needs of the static
students the largest population
of learners in New Mexico these
amendments reflect numerous
statewide so meetings with
students families and experts in
pre K. through higher education
Hispanic students reflect more
than half of the students in New
Mexico and these amendments
signify the needs as needed for
families and communities.
But within the next ten years
but ten years and beyond thank
you Mr chairman.
Great thank you.
All right Lawrence.
Good morning weren't up to
minutes.
Chairman Romero.
And members of the committee I
would like to thank god
Representative Trujillo and
Representative Roybal Caballero
for caring this important bill
forward and of course I want to
thank Representative yet after
his mission to carry the
Hispanic Education Act forward
over a decade ago I'm Lawrence
Roybal I'm within last in New
Mexico and I'm a member of the
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council this is an important
initiative that continues to
elevate.
The importance of increasing
access to success in education
we're grateful to the New Mexico
state legislature for continuing
to support our students and
families this is an important
vehicle and platform to continue
to provide support and to bring
all of the resources across New
Mexico together.
In synchrony so that we can
continue to elevate education in
New Mexico and we thank you
chairman Romero and all the
members of the house Education
Committee your support of this
important legislation.
Great.
Thank you all right Adrian.
Morning enter any of up to two
minutes good morning Mr chair
members of committee this is
agents on the lan Center for the
education study diverse
populations we stand firmly in
support of H. B. one thirty one
which will fund the position for
Assistant Secretary of Hispanic
Education and PED and and I may
need to address closing
opportunity gaps for Hispanic
students across the pre K.
twenty system
thank you very much.
And I also concur with
everything else my colleagues
have said.
Good.
Thank you you too all right Sir
anybody else wish to speak.
All right.
The testimony thank you all I'm
so first on my list when we come
back to committee is
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Trujillo for
bringing this legislation
forward I just have a quick
question on
he H. eight I think section five
it is deleting Hispanic
Education years are and adding
Assistant Secretary of Hispanic
Education my question is will
there still be a liaison
position or will there be no
longer liaison position and now
only and Assistant Secretary of
Hispanic Education it deletes
Madam Mr chair and
representative it deletes that
liaison position.
Thank you for that
Representative Trujillo and and
Mr chair that's what I thought
so when I looked at the FIR it's
a hundred and ten thousand is
the liaison position also funded
in the budget.
Mr chairman and the
Representative snow we are only
asking for a hundred and ten
thousand and we're working on
getting that through HFC eight.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative so that the at
the money that's attached to the
liaison position which is
currently filled it as to my
understanding right I think one
of your witnesses testified it
was quicker we failed so that
position will go away.
It's my understanding and I can
defer to doctor Garcia if he
would like to respond Mr
chairman.
Senate legislative seeing where
it stopped.
If I'm not mistaken the petition
allies on is is a multi rural
delays some goes away but my to
whatever's in the director
bilingual at that position
stable only.
Doing away with that and that's
what this Assistant Secretary
position a will fill thank you
Mr chair representative and
and Dr Christiana doctor so
that's my understanding as well
so that liaison position was one
part of somebody's.
Local level responsibilities
that part will go right one of
this new position all right I
appreciate the clarification
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative further
questions.
Not all entertain a motion.
Mr chairman of the depends so we
have to do pastor present
Sweetser here Representative out
second a second by
Representative link that thank
you
All right madam secretary called
the roll on a do pass on house
bill one thirty one.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield
Representative dallo.
Now.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes Representative.
Representative Lane.
No.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative or Volcom bye at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton
Representative Sweetser yes.
Christine Trujillo.
Yes.
Vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman yes.
By a vote of nine to three.
In order to pass all right so
vote ninety three you have in
the past and house bill one
thirty one thank you all for
being here appreciate it thank
cherished here and thank you
committee thank.
All right.
So we're moving right along we
have known for getting the
number but I know it's
Representative Brown House Bill
to twelve maybe we can fit in
our agenda by nine that would be
nice.
All right House Bill to twelve
Representative Brown if you're
in the attendees list can you
raise your hand please.
So I may promote you.
All right.
Or demoed you to the panel
depending on your perspective.
Welcome Representative Brown do
I need to bring anybody on board
for you this morning yes good
morning Mr chairman would you
please invites John Heaton.
John you could you please raise
your hand on the attendees list
so I can bring you in.
All right and.
We also Wendy Austin.
And Craig Stevens.
Who might be let's see no I
think yes John Heaton Wendy
Austin Craig Stevens and then
when public comment starts we
have a few others would like to
have speak as well.
Yes during public comment
Representative accept I don't
believe I caught your first
expert can you repeat the name
is hand went up and then went
away John he.
All John.
Our.
Right.
Hello our hands for now.
Please do not raise hands yet
because it shuffles my Dick on
my screen okay so I think you
heard Representative brown and
experts were trying to conclude
hopefully by nine o'clock if we
can
as much of our business as
possible because we're losing
members I think you're part of
appropriations wells that
correct yes Mr Chairman yes so
so we're losing a lot of members
so we like to fit in bills prior
to that but without further ado
Representative brown please yes
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
bringing before you house bill
twelve which proposes to convert
the NMSC Branchen curry's bad
into rural independent community
college so actually are what
people don't know this Mr chair
but Carlsbad had the first unity
college in the state of New
Mexico it was started in
September seventy years ago that
was nineteen fifteen and it was
called at that time the Carlsbad
instructional center have a lot
of community support and was was
very successful but seven years
later the Carlsbad instructional
center was invited to get under
the umbrella of New Mexico State
University and they thought that
the banding together would
create a synergy and that they
could work better together.
So that has worked of for a long
time but
really about fifteen years ago
Mr chair there were there were
some things happening that
really were not for the benefit
of the local branch and so what
we're gonna talk about this
morning are are the reasons for
seeking are independent status
and and going back to being an
independent Mr chairman members
New Mexico has seven independent
community colleges and they're
all over the state among them
Santa Fe community college
central New Mexico community
college San Juan college Clovis
Community College and Mason
lands.
Each of these is independently
twelve and in the case of the
Carlsbad community college is
accredited by the north central
association of colleges and
schools and our if this bill
passes that are independent
accreditation will continue.
So the probably the major
difference in our branches and
and a main campus our system our
governs the the college in the
case of an issue there's a board
of regents and it oversees a
very large system in the case of
being an independent there would
be a board of trustees elected
from the local community.
And I think that this advantages
Mr chair or that there's going
to be a better understanding of
campus needs if the leadership
is local they're also be greater
accessibility that has been
really a big problem on main
campus and the prospect bencher
many many miles alright a
is often very lacking so we
think independence because they
answer more directly to the
community there's greater
accountability and
responsiveness to the needs of
the students the staff and
faculty.
Mr chairman members it's really
important that I I emphasize
that House Bill to twelve would
not be adding a new college.
It would simply consider an
independent governance status to
an existing college and involve
the name change so quick
explanation of the bill section
one provides for NMSU Carlsbad
to be made into an independent
community college known as
southeast New Mexico college.
Mr chairman and members this
name was chosen from by a
students staff faculty and
community members who
participated in a public poll.
The governing board would be
created just as I mentioned
earlier and it would be done via
a regular local election in
November of this year.
So section two of the bill
provides that the functions
personal property and contracts
with transfer.
into the the south southeast New
Mexico college and the exception
here is the Carlsbad
environmental monitoring center
that would remain part of the
NMAA you system and that
facility is down the drive a
little bit on campus it's
existing facility and so again
that would stay with MSU and
then the bill provides for
references in law to curl Spence
a branch to be now called
southeast Mexico college it's a
pretty easy way of transferring
things are just so what just
about working during that.
Section three of the bill this
is the last section in the bill
Mr chair it provides to
effective dates the first one
would be July first of this year
and that is what essentially are
the new that nothing new but the
southeast New Mexico college
would exist in law has to be a
legal entities are that way and
then the next effective date is
April ten of twenty twenty two
and that is the date by which
the transfers are would occur
and basically it be the hand off
and that kind of talk to call it
the closing date so that would
be more than a year away.
will acknowledge Mr chairman
that the conversion takes time.
And that there are logistics to
be handled chancellor Dan Arvizu
of main campus has promised to
support whatever the community
wants and so the community does
want to have this college
transition into an independent
and chancellor RBC has said that
she wants this to be a cordial
and collegial process and we
agree completely with them on
that.
There's kind of a sweet sorrow
in parting I think is even as we
think about it but I believe
that
we will be stronger part but
then together again through
articulation agreements and
things like that and net NMAA
you can still be the college of
choice for obtaining the four
year degree so we think there
advantages for both main campus
and and the local community.
So Mr chairman and members or I
just want to give it a minute or
two to Y. independence and why
now.
basically the community of
Carlsbad has changed
tremendously we've had a large
population increase in the
workforce needs of our community
I'm like anything anywhere else
in the state and quite frankly
that the responsiveness to the
changing needs and sometimes you
changes are rapid of main campus
really has not moved with us in
terms of what we need to supply
in our education system here and
I thought one public member said
something really important that
I'd like to relations that it
suits the city of our size to
take this step that that was
well expressed Mr chair and
members so the dressed that's
occurred be to.
Depart this occurred between
main campus and the prospect
branch has really been going on
for many years and I really was
not aware of just what the
problems of been until a local
task force was assembled by the
mayor of the town to evaluate
options for the local fire add.
Decisions and this was.
Ordered by animus use decision
unilaterally to eliminate the
campus presidents position which
was a very hurtful change
because that president is our
liaison to the community and our
voice in the main system and so
the drifting apart became even
greater and that's why this task
force got together and so I'm
just so you know Mr chair
members there are at least forty
people who participated on a
regular basis through the fall
and the winter and they have
been meeting once sometimes
twice a week
exploring options and learning
what independence would entail.
The community is also well
positioned because we have the
second number second highest
number of PH these per capita
just after Los Alamos we have a
very educated community and a
lot of a state educational
manpower to to really support to
a greater extent than ever the
local college.
And ultimately what we want to
do is have more local control
and we've got instances in the
past we've asked for things and
they didn't have been and and
that that was rethink very
detrimental to the students so
Just to let you know the faculty
and staff were sold in December
did they want to go for
independence Mr chair or stay
within the animation system and
seventy six percent of those who
voted favor separating from the
system.
The Carlsbad higher ed task
force was also told that she
next and that was unanimous vote
to seek independence and then
all of you Mr chair and
membership received an email but
separate Wendy Austin one of my
expert witnesses
Rating you with a petition of
six hundred and fifty signatures
of local folks to support the
transition they're also letters
of support in the package and
they're from hosted businesses
and community organizations
including the Carlsbad municipal
school district which currently
is advisory to the college and
then there letters are also in
the packet from the more of what
I think from the and double ACP
of Eddy County the Carlsbad
chamber of commerce and and
quite a few others.
Eight so Mister chair
representative ready one of the
things that really help me make
up my mind was seeing in our
LFC analyses regarding higher ed
the independent community
colleges perform better than the
branches.
And so independence before
better than the branches and and
we see this information in the
purple billions that we all have
they were published in January
of this year.
And I just a very very short
quoted says independent
community colleges showed the
strongest performance among the
two year college secretary at
yes the difference between the
independent community colleges
and branch campuses maybe the
level of local communities
financial support and
participation.
And also another bit of
information from the purple
volumes and this is a really
important call covert of
students it's those who are for
first time full time.
Degree seeking students and it
says they are far better
performing in the independent
community colleges and so here's
just a quick look at the
statistics so courting to the
LFC.
Pollution right at the Carlsbad
requests for this purpose
students is only fifteen
percent.
And that's from all sixteen into
summer of twenty nineteen and we
compare that fifteen percent to
the results we see for students
at CNM there is twenty seven
point four percent San Juan
college twenty seven point nine
percent Clovis Community College
is a great job thirty five point
five percent in New Mexico
junior college forty seven point
nine and then the best
performance independent college
with this program students is
Mason lands at fifty point nine
percent so we don't we don't
like fifteen percent we want to
be among the highest performing
in in the state and we think
that's possible to go
independent.
And I'm wrapping up shortly Mr
chairman members so we please
wrap up yes he's going to there
are chancellor these has told
the higher a task force that he
has commissioned the study to
look at the logistics of
transition and and that's good
it's what we've done already in
our task force to get a very
extensive due diligence work
read the other transition
reports from times this is been
done in New Mexico San Juan
college in Clovis for example
and so a great deal of reserves
are have gone into this and we
know what the map looks like to
get there.
So we appreciate the chance
we're doing that and but we also
just want to let him know and
everyone that we appreciate his
willingness to actually do and
support what the community has
asked for an and so I think it's
pretty clear where we'd like to
like to be so with that Mr
Chairman I'm going to ask that
you bring in our John Keating or
for some comments.
So Representative minutes in if
you would please no more than a
minute we really need to get a
move on.
Please.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee again my name is John
Hayden.
the committee I want to assure
you of a couple of points one
the communities the only
interest is to be able to
provide more opportunities for
our students and to be able to
control our own destiny without
being strangled by New Mexico
state the Carlsbad campus and
all campuses are independently
accredited by accredited by the
higher higher learning
commission and that has nothing
to do with NMSA you all can all
all campuses are credited
totally independent from one
another our campus has its own
money through a three mill levy
state appropriations and tuition
the overwhelming majority of
money comes from the mill levy
we typically get four million
from the state a million from
tuition and twelve to sixteen
million from the mill levy
seventy five percent of the
money is local going independent
will have no impact on the state
budget whether we are a branch
or an independent college the in
the state the formula is exactly
the same.
We will not add as
Representative Brown said to the
number of colleges in the state
we will simply be converting
from a branch to an independent
college the chancellor speaks
often of an enemy in a shoe
system and we locally have no
idea what that means or how to
explain it to us it means more
centralization more central
control and less local control
for us to be in a very
innovative creative in offering
our students more opportunities
with all due respect to the
chancellor we already know the
logistics you are here and talk
about a due diligence study
which Representative brown
mentioned that will take two
months to complete and that this
bill therefore is premature what
is most of a of what is in the
list of items to be completed
our what we have already told in
an issue they need to discover
and complete less on a number of
schedules property personal
property equipment leases money
scholarships dedicated to
Carlsbad CA scholarships
dedicated Carlsbad students
grants and so on like it let me
make it perfectly clear that we
understand the timeline it will
take to make this conversion
that is why in the bill as
Representative brown said there
is a nation Michy ation dated
July first of this year and a
consummation date of April tenth
giving of twenty twenty two
giving us more than a year to
complete the details after the
bill is passed we have a number
of long lead items to complete.
HLC accreditation and a and a
the nursing AC and accreditation
for a nursing program both will
take four to six months title
for loans and grants approval
from the feds will take between
six and nine months we cannot
have a board election until next
November and purchase of some
hardware and software systems
for some six systems also will
be need to be completed and
converted we don't know what
their study will reveal but the
path the path is straight
forward and if something new is
discovered we will have plenty
of time to complete that as well
so Mr chairman this conversion
is all really very very
straightforward.
Hi no way one of the little New
Mexico State University they are
one of our great three research
in institutions and we want to
work cooperatively with them
after the conversion for the
benefit of our students but we
do have a litany of grievances
that have been brought forward
and I won't go into all of them
but just a couple as an example
we can't we can't hire staff for
our nursing program because
we're not allowed to offer an
appropriate salary and our
nursing program is working at
fifty percent instructional
staff and even though we're
dumping money into reserves we
can't add to that and recruit
the the nursing instructors that
we made an issue forces their
compensation levels on us even
though they they don't fit our
positions.
Our students not used to be able
to take classes at the main
campus at forty nine dollars an
hour and now they have to pay
three hundred four dollars
because of this this so called.
Interaction between the various.
Which is and the main campus and
what's worse is they also take
our student cap which affects
our affects the formula
dramatically and for capital
projects they charge us between
eight and eleven percent on the
main campus there are no
services that we have that come
from an issue that we don't pay
dearly for this year we will pay
some nine hundred thousand plus
the usual hundred twenty
thousand for upgrades fees and
to the systems so that's just a
little brief summary of those
grievances that we have and we
believe that that nine hundred
thousand can be easily use in
the conversion to make it and
and probably only cap cost half
of what it would in the end and
in terms of the amount that we
give to an issue so again I just
want to remind you that the
purpose of the community college
is to allow easy access access
for students low cost and for
students to live and work in
home so and closing Mr chairman
I just like to repeat again that
we are still frankly were step
child to an image you and our
people pay more than seventy
five percent of the operational
costs of the college and it
seems to us that is only just
that our people have control of
the college my becoming
independent thank you very much
I would be happy to try to
answer any questions.
Thank you I'm so I understand
appropriations is meeting and
calling their members over
so that means we're going to
have to roll this bill into
when state tried to make it work
testimony ran long but we are
unfortunately losing members
that is a quick right and we're
gonna have trouble maintaining a
quorum so we're gonna roll this
matter to when state and the
rest of our agenda to buy and
state members so we have a
couple minutes Representative
brown do you have another expert
that would wish to give comments
because when we start on
Wednesday we will pick up where
we left off and we will go to
the attendees on staff.
Mr chairman we have Wendy Austin
ready to speak next but I don't
know that we can squeeze her
which she she has a lot of
financial information the
committee will provide very
helpful I don't know if we can
squeeze that in the next few
minutes if we if we could please
okay miss Austin then.
Chairman Romero and
distinguished Committee members
all read my my statement here
pretty quickly thank you for
allowing me to speak with you
today and thank you
Representative Brown for
carrying this important bill for
the community of Carlsbad my
name is Wendy Austin and I'm the
deputy city administrator for
the city of Carlsbad I was born
and raised in Carlsbad and I
know this community very well I
also have a very strong
accounting and analytical
background and I have provided
financial leadership for more
than twenty years through
collaboration with other
committee members I prepared a
detailed pro forma income
statement for an independent
college in Carlsbad I'm pleased
to report an independent college
in Carlsbad is has very strong
financials therefore I
respectfully respectfully asking
for your support of House Bill
to twelve the community of
Carlsbad deserves to have local
control of our community college
for the benefit of local
businesses and local students
this is a very strong support
from our community for this
transition F. I hope you've seen
with the petition signatures and
the resolutions and letters of
support the city of Carlsbad has
a three mill levy to support the
college in Carlsbad by state
statute branch colleges are
required to have a one mill levy
an independent community
colleges are required to have a
two mill levy.
Not only does because we have a
three mill levy as I mentioned
Carlsbad has a very strong tax
base related to the property tax
in Carlsbad Carlsbad three mill
levy generated twelve million
dollars of revenue in fiscal
year nineteen and fourteen
million dollars in revenue in
fiscal year twenty chairman
Romero this is very significant
revenue generation because of
Carlsbad strong tax base
associated to the three mill
levy there would be no
additional cost to the state.
Currently the city of Carlsbad
has an approximate thirty six
million dollar reserve that
would be included with the
transition this reserve can be
used for legal services and to
purchase any needed systems for
the independent college again
there would be no additional
cost to the state nor to the
main campus this thirty six
million dollar reserve belongs
to the community of Carlsbad and
should be used to pay any
additional costs associated with
the transition in addition
this arteries are had there has
been interest earned year after
year on this reserve that would
need to be transferred to the
independent college as well
today you might hear the
leadership team of the main
campus promote consolidation and
centralization as a cost saving
tool and that it's in the best
interest of Carlsbad to stay in
the system well this cost saving
methods certainly doesn't seem
to translate to cost savings for
our local college Andrew over
the past two fiscal years amount
that are branch college has paid
the main campus for branding and
shared services has increased
more than forty eight percent
frankly consolidation and
centralization of shared
services is in the best interest
of the main campus
consolidation of socialization
has not only increased our costs
that has eliminated jobs in our
community yeah increased jobs at
the main campus our campus has
lost jobs and our campus has a
thirty six million dollar
reserves that year after year is
invested back into our community
and our students.
Finally businesses in our
community can not get the
support from the main campus in
evaluating and developing
vocational programs we need to
find both are traditional and
nontraditional students with the
training they need to have
meaningful employment we have a
very dynamic economy in Carlsbad
and we're not training for these
jobs we hear story after story
about the main campus not
considering the needs of this
community this is not fair to
the taxpayers of Carlsbad and
this is especially not fair to
our local businesses and our
students.
Chairman Romero this isn't
anything it gets an MSU
animation is a great college my
daughter is currently living in
Los crucis and finishing her
last few semesters with.
Of her degree with an issue and
she will be in an MSU graduate
I'm very proud of this this is
only about doing what's best for
our local community and our
local businesses and our local
students thank you chairman
referred me to speak today.
Right thank you so much like I
said we're gonna be rolling
we're gonna be rolling the rest
of the agenda Representative
Brown I'm really sorry about
that I know how this issue
certainly deserves the
committee's full attention and
I'm sorry we're being squeezed
by a committee Rick meeting at
an unorthodox time and then
we're having a floor session as
well but I'd like to get this
bill the utmost attention I
believe it deserves so this is
my first time actually rolling
our agenda because my committee
notes that I generally like to
take all of the bills that we
have this by the time
constraints however we're going
to have trouble maintaining a
quorum and I would like to get a
full hearing in on this matter
so for those of you on the
attendees this liking for either
this or the next house bill I'm
certainly sorry about that but
we will return on Wednesday with
house bill two twelve and we
will go to a very brief recap
all disco do you Representative
Brown is a recap of your
statements in about two minutes
and that will go to public
testimony okay.
Yes thank you Mr chairman so I I
guess what I'd really like to
focus on is that Representative
Brown I meant I meant on
Wednesday we will have your
recap okay just to remind the
committee of some of the points
you all have raised as a recap
and then we will go right into
our public testimony in that
will come back to committee okay
thank you Mr chairman appreciate
it all right no thank you so
much I appreciate it thank you
committee we're kinda getting
squeezed for time with
appropriations meeting and at an
orthodox time and then we have a
floor session at a lab and so
you know this is again an
unorthodox situation for us but
we will reconvene at eight
o'clock on Wednesday and we'll
start off right with house bill
two twelve.
Thank you.
All right well thank you all.
Right.
Question Mr chair I did not
receive a Wendy Austin package
did anybody else.
Not but if when the if you're
listening if you could resend
that to us all I I.
I sent a text Representative
Brown also letting her know
that.
Thanks.
I don't get anything in an email
for myself either.
So okay when the if you're
listening could you send that
resend that to us please our to
our Committee secretary Linda.
and then she can distributed to
the committee prior to
Wednesday.
Or Craig.
St Onge John if you could do
that now yeah.
Funds some staff and all.
Great did you have a question.
Your need it.
Well let well at when you know
that that have you received the
package be sure that you receive
or or Wednesday please if you
could have her send it to to our
committee secretary Linda and
then she can distribute it and
we can
also have it here with us as
well as we start committee on
what state okay you got it thank
you Mexico thank you if there's
a silver lining in that.
Okay okay do you want.
Yes
okay thank you alright right
okay.
