Is there.
Here.
Last year Garrett here.
I thank you Linda and now we'll
start with the house bill one
twenty six school graduation
requirements with chairman
Romero and leisure lane
presenting it right thank you
madam chair thank you committee
good morning so house bill one
twenty six is the graduation
requirements bill so many of you
that are returning members to
House education and the House
and general probably remember
two years ago I carried a
similar reform but the work.
The LFC has done over the past
two years after my initial bill
had stopped continued going so I
think we have a great bill that
is really raising the bar for
our students one of the ways
that I think it's important that
this bill is raising the bar for
students is that we're really
highlighting district in student
choice in this we know as
educators that having student
buy in we're encourages a best
practice to encourage student
buy in we're encouraged to
give our students agency in the
educational field that they're
venturing into and the work that
they're doing into the classroom
this bill very very much does
that in different ways I would
refer the committee for to a
comparison so in you are
legislative education study
committee analysis there's a
nice break down on page two at
the bottom amount to leave that
still the case that carries over
to page three about.
The proposed changes.
So for English for.
Currently it would still
remained for one of the key
differences is that there would
need to be a sequence order
during of units so thank English
nine English ten English eleven
the fourth credit however in
English for English credit could
be things like journalism thing
creative writing
so it's providing flexibility
and student choice with in the
requirement itself math for
credits for math that staying
the same however sequence of
mafic is it too so that would
mean that other math courses
could be student choice and
student driven
Math or science rather stays the
same to lab sciences and then
the third one anything else that
the student could work out.
Social studies so my field as a
social studies teacher we go
from three point five to four if
you notice under the
requirements it would be U. S.
history and geography he would
be government and economics and
world history and geography the
fourth would be at the students
discretion so if they wanted to
take
sociology psychology and ethnic
studies course it would count
toward their graduation
requirement health physical
education point five for each of
those electives this is where we
move from seven point five to
four but as I mentioned that
we're trying to in bed not just
the electors but that
flexibility into the
requirements themselves so it
would be a minimum of four
And then career.
Careers something that's
interesting if you notice
throughout all of the
requirements it can be in that
is the in count for credits in
math we know that CTE programs
are very robust on their work
intensive they're very rigorous
we want to honor that as part of
the graduation requirements at
the different levels math
sciences things like that very
much embedded into the bill
itself
if you look down at local
discretion local discretion
there are two credits that local
school districts have the
flexibility to add so if for
example a school district wants
to require something like
financial literacy they can do
that whatever suits their
district they can have up to
two.
That equals twenty two units
overall but it can't be stated
enough that this is a base you
may hear from
from the audience today that and
in your all's experience with
your individual school districts
those are the minimum.
School districts can include
more should they choose and
that's something that we're
encouraging throughout this bill
in different levels one thing I
want to refer the committee's
attention to is the inclusion of
graduation profiles I don't know
if it had been handed out to
committee on it if we could get
those handed out their
graduation profiles examples
from as tech
school district of expectations
for students what.
Reading a profile of what the
school district.
And what students should know
and understand coming out of
their high school experience so
there are a couple great
examples hopefully they get out
at some point I know we have
those printed out that show a
couple different pathways and
expectations depending on the
pathways at the choosing as
textiles
But again I think the focus on
this is really student driven
student by and district by and
for the graduation requirements
and so I have leader lane next
to me
and R. L. E. S. C. folks joining
us for for comments but with
that leader lane if you wish to
add anything on please thank you
good morning madam chair good
morning members the committee
I think that chairman Romero
actually did a wonderful job
explained what the bill does I
just want to I want to talk
about a couple opens the room so
to speak and just make sure
we're all clear.
So does take the the overall
requirements from twenty
fourteen to twenty two and and
there's been some some concern
over that I know if you look at
the data though there's nothing
to support that that twenty four
has any connection to student
success and the reason why state
that is if you look at the top
ten states.
And educational performance only
one of those requires twenty
four of the averages twenty one
and a half so we're at twenty
two and primarily from my
perspective that's helpful
because what it does is it
allows a student to have more
ownership over the types of
classes that that here she wants
to take instead of us at the
state level saying from a top
down these what thou shall take
so it gives them more
flexibility.
The other thing is the removal
of our culture to that's the
other piece I think of some
people some Harper New Mexico's
only one of twelve states that
requires I'll defer to so this
is not like we're breaking from
the norm here in fact we're
we're joining where most states
have landed on this issue
of course that students want to
go that fast they absolutely
still have the option to do
that.
But maybe have a kid in the
district is more interested in a
in a a tech education so they
can take map that's more
relevant to what their career is
going to be so I think that's
helpful component again sort of
eliminating these artificial
classes that you know don't
necessarily have an impact in a
student's overall life.
I think somewhere around
fourteen percent of jobs require
algebra two so it's not like
it's a it's a huge piece of of
what we're doing as a society.
The one thing that I I really
appreciate that this changes is
the to local option credits I
feel like I have a very good
handle of what the needs are
aspect but I don't have a very
good and what they are in Los
Lunas and so I think this
recognizes the reality the
education is most effective when
it's done at the local level and
so this gives more more
authority more agency to local
boards of side what's most
important for their communities
so I I think this bill actually
is a is a big step in the right
direction I think if we as a
body adopt this I for see
students moving forward at the
high school level having more
slide into their education being
more interested in in in staying
in their seats and finishing
their high school careers.
And the stats in terms of
overall flight time earning
capacity from someone who
graduates from high school
versus someone who doesn't is
staggering and so I think this
is going to help keep kids
motivated keep them interested
in getting to the finish line so
thank you madam chair.
Correct thank you on.
First.
This.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think that you were
very eloquently from the
sponsors only support with the a
couple of things from the
perspective of the education
study committee the first is the
research is showing us right now
that.
By the time the this the kids
get to their senior level a year
students get to their senior
year.
Only thirty four percent of them
are engaged.
That's a pretty significant
number so students start off in
kindergarten fully engage
looking forward to school
excited about it and then upon
graduation that year thirty four
percent a third of them actually
feel like schools meaningful and
want to be there.
That's telling us something
about the design and what high
school is the experience was
like for our high school
students.
I think the intention behind
this is to broaden support
educators in their approach in
the core content as well as
address how those electives
become meaningful for students
and allow them to see that path
leads into the post secondary
world.
I also want to state that the
last time the high school
graduation requirements for
comprehensively addressed was
two thousand and seven to two
most of us here that doesn't
seem too far too far off
but the reality is that you know
we're getting close to twenty
years now since that.
so really understanding the
world where are high school
students are right now is a
critical piece of this thank you
madam chair.
You madam chair and I believe we
stand for questions thank you
Sanchez and executive director
of with that we will go to the
audience I'm gonna start online
with those supporting this if
you support house bill one
twenty six please raise your
hand online okay.
And.
Kevin you have the floor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Kevin
summers and the superintendent
of the aspect of this as you
heard chairman chairman Romero
state we did find a couple
samples of some draft profiles
for your viewing as a
superintendent of that staff I'm
in full support of house bill
one twenty six.
Because it aims to change
graduation requirements that
will in turn affect both local
and state economic development
across all of the various
communities of our state.
Hundred some beliefs house bill
one twenty six does not water
down the high school diploma in
fact I believe house bill one
twenty six is intense and
opportunities available to
students in a way never imagined
before.
A key component of house bill
one twenty six is that L. E. ase
create profile of a graduate
that profile hopefully has been
distributed to you as well and I
would like to emphasize first
our engineering pathway.
As you can see by lessening the
requirements from twenty four
credits twenty two credits and
providing students with the
additional flexibility in regard
to English language arts
mathematics science and social
studies students across the
state can now pursue dual credit
courses there are various higher
ed partners at higher rates than
ever before in order to not only
meet hi high school graduation
requirements but also to in four
year degree requirements while
certifications and certificate
programs if passed this bill
would allow an engineering
student at Aztec high school to
obtain between eighteen and
thirty three college credits and
potentially graduate from high
school with an associates
degree.
Conversely a student aspects
schools welding program could
obtain between nine and twenty
seven college credits and
potentially graduate high school
with multiple industry
certifications as well as be on
their way to earning a
certificate or two year degree
from our higher end partner
locally San Juan college.
Simply H. B. one twenty six
unequivocally does not lessen
the rigor of a high school
diploma in New Mexico but
instead strengthens that diploma
well creating meaningful
engaging individualized pathways
for students thereby reducing
the number of absences increase
engagement and subsequently also
increasing academic mission six
force thank all of this while
reducing all thank you for.
Thank you eloquently done sorry
to cut you off the last minute
our next speaker is Danny Parker
and a reminder of your online
identify yourself and try to
stay under two minutes else
you'll hear a buzz.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee we
appreciate the opportunity to
get to talk about this bill and
and we are most most definitely
in favor that by the way I'm
Danny Parker assistant
superintendent of the Artesia
public schools and we we we
really see this this bill as as
making our children's education
more appropriate to what they
they want to drive Warniment
talked about engagement and and
these are the students see
relevance of what they're doing
at school better than anyone any
other group that is ever gone
through our schools we use to
just have you have the the
curriculum for the to the
children and and the children
just accepted that's what it was
but we we have taught our
students to ask why and that's a
great thing and we want to see
that again we will always have
that higher track the the the
college track that that students
will need to take for the
courses that are necessary for
for their education and so
algebra two will always be part
of the curriculum in Artesia
high school
we will take the the opportunity
to stay at twenty five credits
just like what we have in the
past but we certainly appreciate
the flexibility that that that
this bill affords is we going
through the bill there are some
things that we are really going
to take a lot of work such as
the flexibility of health having
that only in grades nine through
twelve we can see some problems
with that and and you know with
the other things that we're
we're trying to do as a as a
district here and then work of
course we'll have to work with
the pad for flexibility of of
the the high quality instructors
and making sure that we can we
can make that work when we're
when we are counting in CTE
course for.
Englischer math creditor or
about personal finance or
something like.
Thank you Mr Parker.
Okay our next speaker is from
Santa Fe public schools
superintendent.
Go ahead superintendent.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee I
want to thank all sponsors and
the work of the alley a C. I'm
Larry Chavis superintendent
Santa Fe public schools and I
stand in full support house bill
one twenty one twenty six
student choice is the core of
this bill and this bill will
bring New Mexico to current
times and allow the flexibility
the districts the Santa Fe
public schools will also
continue to offer eligible to as
an option but a choice of a
student when they choose to
participate in that class so
again I appreciate the forward
thinking I want to thank
everyone this morning for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Okay with that we'll move to our
in person audience will start on
this side please raise your hand
if you want to speak in support
okay and we'll start with the
front row of reminders to try
not to repeat a lot and try to
keep it down because we do have
a timer on with our official
time keeper.
I was wanted to do this to some.
It takes one thing off of me I
appreciate it so we'll start
from the right to the left.
Actually okay.
No actually the person on the
funny.
Your party madam chair members
of the committee my name is
funny like that and this
president is secreted
Association and at without being
redundant you for all the great
reasons why this bill to pass I
passed thank you thank you Mr
rounds.
Mr chair good morning members
the committee stand around for
the superintendents association
and education leaders I just
want to comment first and I care
Sanchez.
This bill it shows the strength
of why we have the Education
static Committee.
And this bill is a is a
culmination of a whole year of
work on homework right what
works best so you for promotion
for tenants and others we stand
for our one of this bill cycle
sponsor and the LESC staff.
Hard work they're listening to
the field and we have a digital
thank you.
Thank you.
Excellent me.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee
pleasure to be with your down
this great valves The New Mexico
school boards have several
positions on this that related
to this bill we believe that
revising the high school
graduation requirements well
allowances to involve themselves
and more easy to recommend
ensuring academic issues totally
support for as we have a couple
businesses of
support local port authorities
Our guys and we believe in
making education.
Decisions that means of course
as regarding the alternative
demonstration
discover sensation also supports
dropping.
Apartment and a lot.
to make the choices regarding
their.
And support for staff for
technical pathways financial
assistance job intern
opportunities that will always
find jobs out of the door.
This bill focus is on local
decisions we really appreciated
that I find students options for
career development allows the
students to be more successful
with that sponsors of our hello
this is mark of the year we
believe it's in the right
direction ask you to support
this bill.
Thank you.
and anybody else in the first
row okay K. met think you're
next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I just want to
thank the chair and leader for
their efforts in creating this
bill we support the bill my
name's Matt from public charter
schools New Mexico by the way
our schools routinely go past
education requirements to
provide opportunities for
students that are commission
specific for the screen by
decreasing the number of credits
that allows us to do that
further for provide more
flexibility for students so we
support the bill we appreciate
the work and think this is thank
you anybody else on this side.
Okay with that we'll go to the
site.
More.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I think the
Sanchez reining in of this bill
I have my name is Barry parks on
December president of the
national education association
New Mexico stand for support of
this bill
mostly for the local control
through the alignment of the
concept that there are many
pathways to gainful employment
and we like the increase of
civics and economics of credit
in that
and we have about regular from I
was and the range of workforce
opportunities that are embedded
in the bill we also like the
removal of the standardized.
Yes the language of a student
completes their records for.
And their community of educators
and family and believe that they
are have the competencies
proceed forward
we support as well so we
encourage or support thank you
anybody in a go ahead secretary
wash for superintendent of
schools Carlsbad.
Fully in support of what the
bill does great step toward us
to our understanding that it's
not just colleges careers and
this gives local school
districts pass committees on
purpose and not have roadblocks
and from the cares.
One credits that.
Frankly.
They're never going to use
because of COVID Rican lack of
our world and so I fully support
appreciate the work and for
those who just came in we're
discussing changing the high
school requirements and it looks
like your high school students
so this is about your future
youngers K. next row.
Thank.
Thanks for.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Chantelle
presentation Mexico University
of Roswell I stand in support of
this bill from the college
perspective we have dual credit
opportunities and Chavez county
Artesia you for from some of the
superintendents this will allow
us more flexibility to work with
the students from guided
pathways we have federal grant
money right now that we're doing
guided pathways in our schools
job as county to assist others
career in tech at or they want
to go into science fields are
health education field.
Following her support of this
bill thank you ma'am thank you.
Morning everyone right across
from the president of eastern
New Mexico university of it also
and after discussions with the
school districts that we serve a
dual credit we would fully
support this bill as well for
all the reasons that percent
thanks to.
Anybody else on the the side.
Thank.
Thank you.
Hello I have eight Mexico I
think it's on the receipt for
the work.
One twenty six and modernize for
graduation and allow local
school districts are college
graduation with the needs and
wants.
There we were graduation
requirement allow for your
technical education students
individual.
We believe greater flexibility
in local decision making make
more fans will reduce the
increased graduation rates by
offering classes actually feels
more students thank you.
Next.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee Ellen burns dean
Albuquerque teachers federation
I do want to thank all of the
leaders.
Who have had the the tenacity to
keep this conversation going
over the last few years I think
Mr chair knows better than I do
have sophisticated our high
school students are hi probably
would get an agreement from the
high school.
very interested and very
different things and that they
have the ability to make choices
for themselves that are
connected with their interests
and I think that the research on
student centered learning
opportunities is so strong that
just embracing that from pre K.
all the way through twelve is
going to really help
like factor Warniment mentioned
the engagement of our students
I just want to say that by
Representative electives.
Program every high school is
that really the latter when it
comes to student engagement and
as a witness that I believe and
I think the evidence shows that
engagement equals graduation so
thank you to the whole committee
for considering this bill I
think it's a great thing for the
students.
Anybody else on the side in
favor.
Madam chair members of the
committee of arbitrators I
wanted the APS school board
members the students you just
bought the inner part of the
superintendent.
Students Advisory Council and
they are brilliant and
articulate we have visions for
the future and the role that
they play in our community we
believe strongly that this bill
will help us as a district.
Meet their needs very best way
so thank you.
Bill forward and we support
thank you very much anybody else
T. C. morning madam chair T.
director Albuquerque public
schools I think LAFC
Representative Romero and
Representative Lane for their
work on the field at APS does
stand in full support at this
bill thank you.
Thank you and when she said the
superintendents council she met
the superintendent of
Albuquerque public schools.
Okay.
our next we're now going to go
to opposition will start on line
is there anybody online who is
opposed to this bill please
raise your hand just a reminder
introduce yourself.
And your limit will be two
minutes we'll go to Sarah
fitzgerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm cert
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce this is a
challenging bill on the one hand
we appreciate the emphasis it
places on getting students at
lex ability and encouraging them
to get workplace experience and
bill technical skills while
they're still in high school but
on the other hand it says key
mismatches between high school
standards and New Mexico higher
education entry requirements
ultimately as a legislative
process starts all that out
we're opposing this bill today
because we believe strongly now
as ever that are graduation
standards should contain a
financial literacy requirement
this shouldn't be optional it is
necessary skill for students on
a college track as it is for
someone who will be learning a
trade and might one day chair
run a business.
That can stifle a young person
stream and basics on investing
can begin to produce
intergenerational wealth where
there have been none previously.
We cannot be a state this as we
take our poverty problem
seriously when we don't require
our young people to understand
from an early age how to manage
money and set themselves up for
financial stability and success
thank you thank you Serra.
The next is Rachel woods.
Bill and have emailed you all
copy for your view as I shared
my op ed I was painfully shy
when I started high school but
luckily I had the opportunity to
take a lot of classes that help
me come out of my shell.
Performing in dramas has helped
me get over my fear of public
speaking competing at the state
and national levels in Dhaka for
three years for that my self
confidence taking your work for
three years and able to me to
become an editor and greatly
develop my leadership skills and
learning Spanish enabled me to
study abroad and travel the
world.
I graduated from Eldorado in two
thousand five and have the
luxury and privilege of having
nine required elective courses
to graduate we should be moving
back towards providing more
choice and exploration through
electives not further away but
this bill reduces the number of
elective classes to for and that
includes any foreign language
classes that all students must
take to get to universities
we're really looking at once to
true leftists for college bound
students my students HHS love
their lack of classes they're
taking money out to be on by the
for politico fox studies to kind
of studies it's hard from the
ceramics jewellery film
criticism creative writing
marketing through daca and much
more next year offering Law and
yoga classes as well.
This bill there and some of the
programs that are cheap that our
students take so much pride in
also like our internationally
recognized bilingual seal
program and our music programs
students are only allowed to
choose between one to four
elective courses he's programs
will cease to exist as they do
now well I support their mobile
of algebra two as our apartment
and I recognize this bill allows
for some flexibility at the
local level it will collectives
and student development
opportunities for many students
across our state and will end up
cutting teaching positions thank
you thank you.
Our next speaker is Eileen.
Hi good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Eileen van we I'm speaking on
behalf of the league of women
voters of New Mexico and I think
want to thank you for listening
to diverse points of view on
about important educational
issues the league opposes parts
of HB one twenty six people have
talked about the many strengths
of the bill one that hasn't been
mentioned is the possibility of
a capsule next experience where
the there are expected
experiencing real world in
project based learning with
students need to be prepared for
post secondary education and
careers and order the minimum
number of units should be
maintained at twenty four and
not reduced to twenty two
credits for a couple of reasons
schools that probably would
require only twenty two units
are like the rural schools and
schools were resources are
harder to find and twenty four
credits would allow for courses
that are missing or insufficient
from the identified requirements
of the league supports requiring
world languages languages which
was implied by the last speaker
as well and more physical
education and health it sounds
like this civics education is
included in the government class
and financial literacy is
included in the economics class
but there there needs to be more
health credits at a minimum
there should be one that's taken
during the ninth and tenth grade
and one during the eleventh and
twelfth grade health courses are
a place for learning violence
prevention social and emotional
skills cultural and self
understanding relationships and
teamwork skills conflict
resolution stress management and
healthy lifestyles all of which
are extremely critical in
today's family work and
community spaces with some
changes we could support the
bill.
Thank you thank you Sir our next
speaker is Maria Elena rose
Mexico.
I mean it yourself Maria Elena.
Good morning Mr chairman members
committee my name is money in
and out of school and high
school Spanish bilingual teacher
under the proposed legislation
for high school graduation
requirements the classes I teach
as well as those of many other
teachers are undervalued in two
ways language is no longer
required for graduation the
number of elective credits has
decreased.
By diminishing the credits
needed for graduation we lower
our expectations for students
and the value of elective
teachers and the content they
teach the courses are not
required well these courses
continue to be offered to a
lower number of students all of
these questions be removed
meaning some students won't have
access to the class at all what
will happen to these teachers
jobs.
In bilingual programs the first
hour that is funded is an
elective Spanish literacy
Spanish literacy is fundamental
required by PED head before any
other Spanish content hours are
funded in a bilingual state in
which many schools pride
themselves in offering the
bilingual sales a fundamental
question is this SLA elected
it's students are merely
encouraged to take more than
necessary credits we as
educators are not providing the
necessary framework of
consistent and high expectations
students will lose career option
provided an elective classes
before removing the kind
graduation requirements consider
what is the career pathway that
will replace this requirement is
solid and tangible course or
lose vision.
Although the intent is local
flexibility inequities will
arrive at high schools with high
university projection will offer
language courses in algebra two
courses required for the
maintenance well schools having
lower university projections
will fail to provide this
opportunity.
Keep our adolescents and young
adults in school and let us
focus on raising expectations in
the curriculum and instructional
time not lowering them and
improving the quality of this
instructional time rather than
wrecking our students.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so
much.
Amy.
Was not raised to speak I'm just
the one thank.
Okay.
that is it for our online
opposition going to our audience
if you are on this side and your
propose please raise your hand
he will take of we'll go from
front to back okay your first.
Good morning madam chair
representative committee members
my name is needed government I
am a parent of two kids the one
from Santa Fe public schools
graduated from central in the
class I'm also a spent educator
for twenty five years in
northern New Mexico am This
healthy reading looks great but
I'm in the trenches and let me
tell you a few examples of the
my time runs out.
First.
House pool.
You.
We already have a shortage of
teachers in New Mexico we have a
real shortage of math teachers
so it was no longer a
requirement what do you think
that this is going to do they're
going to try to cover algebra
one and geometry they're not
gonna cover eligible to they're
not going to provide to teach it
because it's not a requirement
second my son my youngest son
graduated top in his class up to
percent he also rolling honors
algebra two honors pre calc had
a hundred on his vision map got
accepted in an engineering
school they did a math
evaluation yes.
He have to take remedial math
this is the kids were actually
are trying to go to college with
this bill is going to do is
going to short change those kids
want to go to college.
When they're coming in freshman.
I don't know I knew because I
have a doctorate I knew to go to
the counselors and asked for
them to put on a track for
college but many many parents of
kids that I serve do not know
how to advocate do not know what
the requirements are this is
just not.
Language arts.
Do you know the colleges outside
New Mexico require three years
of language and the friends of
my kids.
Who are not accepted in colleges
outside New Mexico have their
acceptance was drug pull back
when they looked at their final
transcript and they did not see
that they have three years of
language I ask the counselor all
my second someone who's entering
freshman here what are you
recommending three years of
language and she's that it's not
in the New Mexico requirement
thank you so much our next.
Yes.
You madam chair members of the
committee like so many yes
monies that you've heard this
morning I think the vision of
this bill is you know we all
want engage students in our
classrooms I I'm I'm made out of
one for New Mexico kids can we
share many of the concerns that
you've heard recently and I
would also like to share her
story that I rarely share it's
not mine share my brothers that
I could we graduated from your
ensure public schools before I
was ready to was a state
requirement it was a requirement
at that time similar to what
we're proposing now my brother
being a typical teenage boy FY
counselors at I don't want to go
to college I want to go to the
military counselors and great
you don't need October two will
wave you out of it because it's
not a state requirement my
brother David changes mind as a
senior in high school wanted to
go to the university of New
Mexico where he was no longer
eligible to apply because he
didn't have the elder to credit
my brother David did not pursue
a college immediately after high
school and did not get a
bachelors until over ten years
later these are the situations
that I think could be the
unintended consequences of
providing these choices to
districts who do not currently
have the amount of counselors
that we would need to make sure
that every student is sitting
down making a plan that they'd
choose themselves that they
fully understand the
consequences of those decisions
and have a pathway created
specifically for that student
not what what's in the system
telling them which path we
should pursue you're more of a
college student your more of a
career student but really making
sure that our students
understand what they need to be
successful and if they have
access to the full range of
courses that they need to pursue
those pass if we do move this
bill forward we would recommend
two things the state as a whole
needs more robust post secondary
measures our our students
accessing college are the media
of course that is a statistic we
stopped measuring as a state are
they accessing the careers that
we say that we're training for
are they earning a.
Living wage and those careers
because of those things.
And we're not thank you so much
NXP Kerr is there one more on
that side.
Okay with that we'll go to this
side raise your hand if you want
to speak mandate.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee meeting committee
is an education reporter for New
Mexico one of twenty twenty New
Mexico teacher of the year we
oppose this bill because we
think they can result students
being adequately prepared for
the world in which they are fast
and one of my nine year old
daughter came to me while I was
making dinner and she said
something to me in another
language and it's like why don't
know what that is I mean I'm a
girl and lack of minutes later
she comes back and she says
another iterations well that's
how you say it in Arabic.
Nanti the world is that our kids
fingertips and they get so we
must get to ensure that our
children have all the skills
they need to exceed an
increasingly globalized economy
language skills will be the so
we are disappointed that this
bill removes language from those
requirements.
The same argument relevance
keeper CTE which also helped
removing CTE from the
requirements basis in this
direction of our state is going
to need for our collective
future according to the US
department of labor and
statistics health care and
social assistance sector is
projected to add about two point
six million jobs from twenty
twenty one to twenty thirty one
the most of any sector in large
part because of the need for
population people may not only
help health care workers to care
for an aging population but we
will also teachers because I'm
sure you are aware twenty five
percent of our workforce is
about fifty four years old we
need to expose our students to
the the file help file path
professions it's also
interesting that within this
bill there is mention of
entrepreneurship principles yes
the requirement for schools to
offer financial literacy and the
lack.
Despite the fact seventy nine
percent New Mexico residents
want their kids to this point in
the school that is local control
that should be more New Mexico
parents want their kids to have
this knowledge as a parent knows
the system much like miss
millisecond about I can make
sure that my daughters get with
the but what about the.
Thank you so much anybody else
in opposition on the side of the
room.
Okay with that we'll go to
questions from our panel first
as Representative Baca.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman and leader lane for
bring this for
Couple things I want to
emphasize in looking at this
bill and as a thirty year
educator
for distribution tenant so
Local control I think it's
important that you always talk
about it this bill disallows a
school district a school board
in contract with the
superintendent and the community
to set the standards for
graduation.
That's one of the things that we
emphasize right now as a state
we put some on necessary burden
against the address I haven't
addresses and sixteen years
things have changed if anything
does come up and pandemic things
have changed the other thing
that I want to talk about is
you've heard me in many other
places say it's quality not
quantity.
Is the quality of instruction
it's a quality the course we
have not the quantity of the
course is needed I am part of a
high school senior and I will
mention it because like most of
you guys in your he's a better
support is that does but.
But by high school senior is
sitting in classes you'll need
to credits to graduate come into
this my high school senior
sitting and taking classes just
to fulfill this requirement and
that he didn't need soap I think
that that's an opportunity what
we're saying Hey let's allow
this.
Next point is we talked about
from higher ed I'm a big
supporter of dual enrollment
concurrent enrollment and
internships this is kind of
schedule will allow students to
go out there and to have that on
the job training it'll have that
internships the opportunity for
them to go out there and get the
necessary school skills to
prepare for culture prepare for
the work force.
So I I understand about this but
I also want to emphasize as far
as this is not take away the
ability to take the offer to or
the AP calc or the pre calc so I
think that's what it needs to be
done is that it gives people in
our students especially because
we serve right.
We serve our students and gives
them the flexibility to chart
their own path and I do believe
that they can this far as with
C. T. and otherwise there is
opportunity for them to to
develop those schools is here
she bears give me a number of
bills coming up this year the
session that are adding extra
money to CTE estimates of the
program so I support this bill I
I think that it's it's good and
it's going to help our students
and also for those students are
affected before the graduation
requirements that we're as part
of the pandemic thank you madam
chair.
Thank you of Representative
medical more yes.
Thank you
madam chair and representatives
for upbringing this bill I the
more more I read it I like most
of it I'm I'm just concerned
about one little part I do
really like the the requirement
of the next that plan before the
end of eighth grade I know that
my of students I have to in high
school right now as a junior and
a sophomore and my junior did
not was not aware of a lot of
the pathways that we when she
registered as a freshman she was
not aware of a lot of the
pathways that our school had so
it was that was one that she
wanted to take but it was now
kind of too late because she
couldn't get it into her
freshman year so doing this and
making it a requirement in
eighth grade they will at least
have an idea of what they want
to do so they can be able to get
get those those pieces in there
luckily it kind of fixed for for
my my son and he is on the
pathways in order to get what he
wants to go so I so I do
appreciate that because I think
so many of our students and our
parents I am a teacher so again
like some of these other ladies
in the audience I know how to
navigate this and I know how to
advocate for them but there's so
many of my students parents that
do not and don't have that
ability my biggest concern and
it's the thing that I've gotten
a lot of emails on especially
from my district and especially
since I am a former health and
P. teacher.
but but why did we reduce the P.
E. requirements especially when
we know and studies have shown
that more physical activity
helps the brain activity and you
actually actually learn better
and socially emotionally better.
Units but lose health as a
strict half unit to the high
school round rather than it
being available in middle or
high school and it does retain
happy to physical education so
the overall amount is not
reduced.
Okay so so before because I
thought we had to have one year
of of P. E. and now it's reduced
to half a year.
Madam chair representative that
is correct in terms of the
physical education in particular
because we are moving to half
unit of health into the high
school round tied to that so
policies that that wasn't made
clear.
Okay so you're considering I'm
sorry but you're so you're
considering the half United
health considering more P. O.
sorry sorry sorry madam chair.
but so you're so you're madam
chair you're considering the
half unit of health part of P.
is that what you're saying.
Madam chair representative so
they would still have to be
distinct units and so right now
there is one unit of physical
education I apologize I don't
think I explained this very well
on the first go so it does
reduce the have the physical
education from one complete
units to a half units and we are
modeling that on what we are
seeing other states for their
embedding those courses together
because of licensure we are
keeping those as two distinct
half units but the changes that
were moving health strictly into
the high school space rather
than middle or high school.
Madam chair representative meet
only million great question I'm
gonna out on to what just
because saying here there are
several states out there right
now who have an and feted Health
with P. E. with physical
education they're finding that
there's a really powerful way to
move forward in terms of
physical education and health is
a combined course so we
initially started down that
route and had one joint course
that had health and P. E.
however upon a lot of feedback
from superintendents and leaders
over the course of the summer as
we were doing our research many
of them felt that there was
going to be a a potential issue
with licensure so we created
standalone courses that could
also however be combined if so
if the cater had the combined
licensure and that would be
ideal.
Okay thank you madam chair
Representative thank you.
Representative Ezzell.
You madam chair thank you very
much I appreciate the
presentations Morning madam
chair what I really really liked
when we're having these
discussions.
Is this the enthusiasm passion
from both sides of the aisle and
I understand what lot of these
parents are talking about it
here.
I think the enthusiasm stands
mainly from going back to more
local control over schools.
Parents do have to have a say in
where their kids are gonna be.
After the graduate and I think
it's very important that there
is that flexibility there.
I've listened to all of the pros
and cons Inc regarding this I've
gotten.
Emails like you can't believe
okay.
Some of more saying madam chair
and representative that we're
Devont'e down our students do
you feel that that's the case
with this particular bill.
Intern Representative Ezzell no
not at all I think what we're
doing is engaging students in
their academic course way in a
whole new innovative way as I
stated in my opening madam chair
is that one of the best
practices we have as educators
is how can we in our classroom
give student voice and student
choice and student left
curriculum to our students I
think we're doing that at the
local level with in their school
within their district to explore
so you heard some of the
testimony to be able to explore
different career pathways and
explore
postsecondary education in New
in diverse ways I think this
bill opens that up and and makes
it a lot more engaging in a lot
more rigorous if we can get that
student buy in from from our end
students.
Madam chair representative I do
appreciate that we heard one of
parents say.
That her son started out on the
course that was he was going
into the military in his senior
year change to wanting to go on
to college so that let's just
take the example okay I'm not
directly pointing at the student
madam chair let's just take any
student that has decided to go
different career path other than
college so there at the last
minute then they change their
mind they want to go to college
there career ideas changed and
everything.
But to date through their high
school career they have taken
the very remedial class so one
of the student does.
Mike application gets accepted
into college and everything it
seems to me like that's going to
be the five year college plan
because they're going to have to
take the remedial courses to
catch up and my understanding
this wrong or not I'd like an
explanation madam chair Madam
chair representative is I think
in your example no because we're
investing so much of the
programming as far as our
requirements soci T.
Programs into the requirements
themselves that student in your
example where they may take
something like have to take
algebra two senior year for
example for higher education
they wouldn't be so far behind
as to have to play catch up
based on their core curriculum
because keep an eye on that'll
fight is in the English
requirements for example they're
on a definite pathway because
three of those requirements
would have to be English nine
English ten English eleven so
that student in your example
would have taken those in
sequence same with sciences
having to take two labs so I
don't think madam chair that
they would be so far behind us
to have to be on a five year
plan that they're still taking
the required classes they'd
still be there they'd be on a
trajectory to to.
The.
A college bound or stay in their
CTE or military track and madam
chair if I can address
Representative is also question
as well the the move actually
for twenty four down to twenty
two units built in some
flexibility in the calendar so
to speak for students so if you
do have a a change of the year
you're on CTE tracking I want to
go to college track or even vice
versa I think that is true also
for what you're describing where
I've missed out on some more
technical type math.
because I don't have to to check
additional boxes of the status
of that you have to check it
provides some flexibility in the
in the calendar and some
different for students to where
they could in fact take some
additional courses that senior
year.
Madam chair and representative
sakes I appreciate your
explanation on that and yes it
can work both ways.
Going from not going on to
college or change in the money
and going on to technical
degree.
partners in public education
they work every day with every
one of our students in the
schools they know them all
members of our community and I
think one of the things I'd like
to mention
Is that one of one of the things
that we do is school is we are
role models for all the students
going through pre K. to twelfth.
And it's an inspiration to
become somebody who works in
public education that's our
whole we hope that every single
one of our kids is inspired to
go on and be a productive member
of society some of our jobs that
are in public education limit.
What they're able to achieve as
full time educational workers so
this is one of those steps where
we can be role models who can
inspire our colleagues to become
sorry our students to become
educational system and then they
can actually feed themselves in
some family when they do.
Thank you others in that same
room.
Hi please thank you Mr chair
members the committee John
American federation of teachers.
We would also like to thank
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward and we really want to
seize on the word really
represented by that which is
which is what the legislature
did a really good job last year
in addressing some of the
salaries related to teaching
staff with this bill really
knowledges that there are
multiple groups of educators
within our with our educational
system that didn't see the.
X. rays this bill goes a long
way to acknowledge the value of
the legislative but also to
compensate them in a better way
certainly not as far as it can
go but we really believe that
this is a necessary for that
this bill also for the strong
message that this is a viable
career path especially are more
rural serving districts is
critical because everybody knows
that serve a that serve a role
school districts that migration
from rural to urban centers we
strongly believe we want to keep
our educators in rural settings
this bill will go a long way to
help the system process and keep
those foundational school
cornerstone intact with
compliment of educators we
urging us thank you great thank
you so much so I'm being before
we go to further public comment
we're gonna have to take a brief
break because our webcast is
down so we're gonna have to
pause for a moment while we get
that rebooted and find out
what's happening.
So we'll take a brief recess
will come back to those of you
wishing to weigh in.
But.
Yes to hang out from.
Twenty seven which is awesome.
We're all public comment those
that are in favor of house bill
one twenty seven but.
Brief so we can get through
today's agenda right it's a
little that would be awesome I'm
hearing my voice that's cool all
right so we will come back.
Okay I now I know the time delay
awesome so we'll go to support
again I was on my left hand side
those in the audience please
keep your hand up we appreciate
your patience all right so
please welcome you have up to
two minutes.
Members of the committee yes.
Hearing this.
Was my life this is my passion I
was educational assistant and I
was with governor bill
Richardson working because from
eight thousand dollars.
It has remained in that
Representative educational
assistance to follow in the
classroom they're not.
Everything just really become a
big part of what goes on every
day session in the special ed
realm we just did it on the
scientific survey I have
educational assistance.
For years a year and a half they
have moved into that position we
are now the nurses helping
nurses systems we work that is
on as we are right directors we
we do everything in the schools
and we are part of the teaching
the majority of our users are
women women of color living in
single households they cannot
make a living they're not making
a living their lives after
property which is.
It is a profession a profession
that needs to be respected and I
want to thank everybody for the
all the hard work you've done.
At.
And I hope you support this bill
will make a lot of people very
happy.
Thank thank you others as part
of the summer.
Hope that wasn't the same row
but it's okay board member
please.
Mr chair members of the
committee our partner Peter
said.
The APS board of education we
are thrilled to have the support
coming for fiscal.
Not operate with that are
by employees they are absolutely
critical to the life of the
individual students the whole
school community as often as the
dust that have the closest tie
not just individual students but
the broader school community
they are essential over the past
decade for as long as I've been
back many decades for as long as
I paid attention to of school
funding.
The higher rate and.
Receive the highest percentage
of rates which has meant that
pacified employees have been
let fire farther and farther
behind the staff it is
absolutely essential.
To livable wage that we can be
proud of.
This bill forward that I
purchased.
Thank you others in the room
please have up to two minutes
welcome thank you Mr chairman of
the committee my name is Gino
Centria and that with Rio Rancho
school employees you I like to
thank the sponsors of this bill
Ford it's like.
It's long overdue I want to
reiterate what Representative
office said these are the unsung
heroes these are very passionate
people they have they are there
when every.
One of the state and the
assistance to all the children
in our schools around
the state and they don't blink
an eye when they're asked to do
something nice and I think this
bill is going to show the value
of that the state actually
values these individuals of
these as as he's not just some
other important artist building
for I thank you so I stand very
very for this bill and I hope to
see you as well.
Thank thank you any other sport
of militants I will go to my
right hand side student support
all right so start on the in
thank welcome.
Committee members of the
committee of money but president
of the synchronization and for
that reason they already.
All right I appreciate the
privative those in support as
well please we may.
Maybe a little.
Thirty years on the New Mexico
association as its two thousand
four to score Association
strongly supported hours for all
of our stuff all over teachers
all of our support workers in
the trenches educating our
students we're very happy that
lasted with.
Increase is good for the added
to that so that we can make sure
education system for the state
budget.
Our.
And federal way we believe this
is a great movie forward this
continues to just really
competitive thank the sponsors
asked for this committee to.
It passed thank you thank thank
you others in the same room all
right the next row doesn't
support.
The move to the next of those in
support of speak please have a
two month welcome.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Matt Paul public
charter schools of New Mexico
we've long held the belief that
we need more caring adults in
our schools this bill helps
recruit the kind of critical
staff members that.
We support.
You've just mentioned that we're
worried about funding we think
we put funding into a public
school formula that is that uses
student indicators to try to do
something for adults we get
short sometimes and so we fully
support this measure but we ask
you to join us in advocating for
adequate funding because we we
don't want to lose positions
because there's a shortfall in
the amount of funding that comes
with the SCG so it's just a flag
there we whole heartedly support
thank you great thank you other
sport in the same room.
All right the next for business
support.
All right so we will come back
to committee here in a moment
with brief comments questions
again please keep them brief but
right away I did notice before
we go to questions we did have
some students and then our folks
online we'll get you all online
in a moment so we did have some
children that were often some
students their sponsor could
stand up and tell us who you all
are.
Glad to see you at work we
appreciate this is All Things
that school model the next go.
Can these students and we
appreciate what up here to see
how the government works because
they will take your place in
the.
All right we sure hope so.
Please.
Welcome.
Welcome to seeing the process of
your Education Committee and the
policies that will be impacting
you all very directly
so we did have members online
excuse me that wish to speak in
support they are very patient
and only welcome you have up to
two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee R. I am Emily will
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and we support this
bill thank you the Sanchez for
bringing it forward I'm in the
interest of time of the state we
support this for all the reasons
you've already heard today and
then we ask you to join us and
give H. B. one twenty seven a do
pass thank you all right thank
you and thank you for your
patience again.
Melissa good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Sorry good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and co
counsel for the Aussie
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit The New Mexico
Center online poverty and
transform education New Mexico
support this bill because
educational assistance provide
critical support to teachers and
students particularly as we
continue to see cost prices that
far exceed statutory limits
education assistants are also
more likely to be bilingual
racially diverse and from the
communities in which they work
and reflect the backgrounds
lived experiences of our
students like teachers the EA
workforce is in crisis with the
number of vacancies almost
tripling over the prior year
it's concerning that more than
half of these are for special
education EA's directly impacted
support the for student groups
addressed in the lawsuit which
is why we are in favor of all
efforts to recruit and retain
high quality education
assistance as part of a
sufficient education and for
these reasons we are strongly
urge the committee to pass this
legislation thank you right
thank you superintendent Chavis
good morning welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee I want to thank all
sponsors and the work of the
alley yes the staff I'm Larry
Chavis superintendent Santa Fe
public schools and stand in full
support of house bill one twenty
seven educational assistance can
be overlooked and undervalued
in this bill invest in this
employee group EAS are just as
important as any other employee
in a school district they
provide the support needed for
all students and their success I
agree with the Maria pulls
Sanchez novel Sanchez provided
this morning and just wanted to
make a note that many EAS have
gone on to become teachers so
what better way to make this
position valued and part of the
school district again want to
thank the sponsors and we are
full support of this bill and
appreciate the time.
Great thank you all right so
we'll come back to committee so
quick questions comments
Representative Lara please thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative spring the
support this is huge I think
this is part this is just one
part of of a package of bills
are making its way through the
legislature that are going to is
it going to vastly improve the
education of our children Mr
chair Representative C. only
concern that I have back when we
funded or we created the grow
your teacher's Act.
Of we had an issue with the a
verses hi.
And I want to make sure because
that you know there's there are
some persons who are very strict
as to what it says and they will
not deviate from that and we had
employees that were eight
weren't able to take advantage
of that because it said it
educational system so I want to
ask you Mr chair of
representatives please a lady my
concern about this that we both.
Educational assistance and
instructional assistants will be
able to qualify for this
increase Mr chair.
The thank you Representative I'm
gonna turn it over to our one of
our expert.
When but I want to.
Mr chairman and
Representative Lara yes we like
to lay your fears I'm actually
gonna turn it over to we can
give you look some more of the
technical background around this
but yes that is true.
Mr chair representative that's a
really important question that
clarification I can find is the
educational assistance through
the public education department
provided the educational
assistance license and I. A.'s
instructional assistants are the
job codes that PED uses that are
defined as educational
assistance so for example code
seventeen eleven if memory
serves me correctly it's at
instructional assistant who is
defined as an educational
assistant working in a K.
through twelve classroom and so
the change up of the language
really comes from the job codes
but the license itself is an
educational assistance license
IAD's are defined as EA's
essentially and I know PED's
here so if they have any other
comments up to you Mr chair but.
Doesn't look like there's a test
at thank you thank you for that
thank you thank you Mr chair as
long as a as long as that
frameworks in place which I
believe it is in and out the I
just want to be sure that that
that it happens that way and
that that message trickles down
to all of our school districts
because we need to make sure
that everybody gets the
opportunity because Mr chair
because I would hate for for us
to put all this effort into this
and some are left out simply
because of the time thank you Mr
right thank you Representative
Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sponsors for doing a good job I
want to set up there with me but
but I get promotional because I
am in the hi Hey and then been a
proud on aid to the level two
are risen is been money costs
these as they come to see this
bill funding be present and
future of our hi aisi ETS
they're essential they are the
backbone and I say they are the
glue that holds our schools
together because of the
interface of the community and
the respect that usually carry
within the community so I just
re iterate through the same
thing that the so Representative
laws talked about.
The language and get gallery at
the kids very much in the
treatment job code but that will
be the legality of the job code
is also lives and to arbitrate
their argument and not
sustaining and give more to
these people that are are in
these roles impact in the
classroom they are truly put
because our best substitutes
when our when we've lacked
teachers these are the ones that
they go to they go to the right
people people that can hold a
continuity of education.
So I would tell you that what
we've done a great job I go to
this needs to be a factor in
their that they continually get
more increases as we heard from
our.
The lobbies of the you you know
we talk compacts is Richardson
how do we do this to our people
and not state that would not be
responsible or we we have
responsible so we need to have
in some language that coincides
all increases and not be
dismayed one year later two
years later but rather coincide
that the increases have to have
a certain step every time we do
put increases student
educational system because they
were not going to have
shortfalls we're not going to
have these that calls to fill
all of a sudden the abnormality
of being in Miner is is what we
are getting and this pay
increase finally and we've also
hope that this is a
representative of Lagos indicate
we have other bills that are
hopefully going to help offset
these the insurance increases
that will help our these are As
keep this twenty five thousand
more in their pockets and I see
to all of you and the body.
We must not Everton to collect
these these folks to give.
Thank you.
Representative all.
Mr chairman thank you very much
my **** I had to have a few
questions here.
I'm reading here about the cost
that it is going to encourage
it's over
sixteen point eight million
dollars a year and to me that
substantially I'm not
discounting the worth of these
at instructions instructors
the the constructional assistant
I'm not diminishing that at all
I understand the importance here
what they're doing.
This is an increase it would
raise the seller of eighty two
percent of the educational
systems in the state.
To the tune of sixteen point
eight million dollars just a
state seeing the whole picture
Mr chairman and representatives
are we going to be able to
afford that Mr chair and
representative the staff I've
been working very closely with
the head of the Appropriations
Committee they are looking at
this very carefully of course
they hold their cards pretty
close as you know but right now
I think it looks very good I I
think this is a going to be
hopefully part of HB to.
Madam chair Mr chair and
representative thank you for
that explanation but I'm also
reading one of the now this is
report of what is going to.
Due to those.
These are less experienced
instructors and they're going to
make just a fraction less than
are more experienced and
structure do you think there
will be some problems there Mr
chairman.
I'm going to return to our
experts say when.
Mr Chairman representative so I
don't believe that it's a
fraction I think it's actually
half of the the starting salary
of a level one educators so the
instructional assistants are
educational assistance would be
at a minimum of twenty five
thousand level one educators
started fifty.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
in expert witness under the
house committee's analysis
report under administrative that
is one of the concerns to me
that has been raised on that of.
It Mr chairman and that's the
problem that comes with this the
insurance costs.
And that.
Right now if it is and I'm gonna
read this substantial divisions
analysis here and it states if
an educational assistance annual
salaries nineteen thousand for
FY twenty three and that
salaries right twenty five
thousand in FY twenty for the
educational system would
contribute an additional ten
percent towards health health
insurance premiums.
Have you visited with your.
Instructional assistants about
this race in the cost of their
insurance Mr chair and
representative you sell that is
also an ongoing discussion with
the Appropriations Committee
they're also taking that into
effect when they look at the
whole package so so we we have
kind of looked at what the total
cost of that would be and we
intend to that hopefully cover
those costs in the
Appropriations Committee the we
also have legislation that's
being carried by by
Representative Lara that talks
about a health insurance for
teachers so there's a lot of
moving parts to this and
we're all aware of that and we
don't intend to punish
educational institutions through
rising health care costs and and
Mr chairman I appreciate your
comment right there because we
don't want this unintended
burden to be at their expense Mr
chairman on our F. I. R. it does
at the end of the New Mexico
public schools church authority
under significant issues data
about the third paragraph it
does set the very end of that.
At twenty five thousand
educational assistants would pay
forty percent of the insurance
why the big discrepancy what
we're reading care.
I know the answer but I can't
remember now so okay okay.
Hi Mr chair representative
that's an great question so the
ten percent refers to the
difference between what is
currently paid and what could be
paid if an individual went from
making nineteen thousand to
making twenty five thousand a
year okay.
In Mr Chairman that significant
that is very significant.
Mr chairman and representatives
your liberty bid to come as snow
economic development.
Now misleading commerce second
I'm development and Mr chairman
and representatives to dates in
education.
You said that it is being
considered by the appropriations
concert Committee was that
during one of the interim
committees
Mr chair and representative sale
it was during interim minutes
also add been working and and
during the session to I've had
several meetings with the chairs
appropriations and members of
the Appropriations Committee.
Okay so my concern is I
understand the importance of
this I get it.
But unless there is an
appropriation for.
It's not gonna happen.
My other concern is Mr chairman
are we.
Going to be able to sustain this
and that that is my concern we
know where the majority of our
money comes from to pay for
teachers and that is three.
My particular industry down
there in the southeastern corner
of the state oil and gas and
agriculture.
And we know the ups and downs of
the oil industry.
And I don't want to put anybody
at risk it said yes we are going
to pay the the notice of the
funding is because that's my
concern Mr chair thank you very
much for your responses.
Great thank you Representative
made of a more.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so thank you for
bringing this bill I think it is
long overdue
as a teacher who has and an EA
we share one in our science
department I could not be here
without her.
And and giving some continuity
into it with my students that
that I'm that I left of so I
think that this is an excellent
way to show them that they are
valued
and I think New Mexico is is is
a is has been very proud of our
salary art teacher salary
increases and and and I'm so
glad that we're focusing on
these guys because
and and personally I think it
needs to be more because there
that because of the value that
they bring to our classrooms and
our schools I know in our school
R. E. A.'s are often because we
have such a
sub shortage they're they're
they they have to be ten
different hats in one day.
And so and and still be able to
go home and and provide for
their families so this is this
is going to help them so thank
you and that was just my mic my
comment I have no questions
thank you Representative.
Mr chair I move it to pass.
All right so we have a due pass
motion by Representative
Trujillo a second by
Representative Madrid madam
secretary called role on a do
pass measure house bill one
twenty seven please
Representative Papa yes.
Representative Chatfield
Representative Ezzell.
Is not like to explain Moffit.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative headed up yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative muddy bottom way
out yes.
Representative or by calling.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes ma'am.
I share correct.
Chairman yes one nine two zero
are eight nine two zero you have
a do pass Representative Ezzell
please you wish to explain about
Mr chairman thank you very much
and I will be brief I I do
support this increase in salary
for they can actually make a
living doing this my concern
though is the funding for the
continued funding and that is a
great concern thank you very
much thank you Representative
and we're in the midst of the
budget making process so
hopefully we can all intervals
to the appropriate.
And our initiatives were hoping
to get through so thank you
Representative
I don't know how much transition
needs to be made.
We are scheduled to be on the
floor all members have been
excuse but we're going to jump
into the house bill one ninety
nine so brief presentations.
Welcome back Representative.
And substantive.
You're on when you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman I I must
say that that was one of the
cool things I've got to do on
here the legislature so.
Please thank you to do that
again so thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee thank you
for community for being here
house bill one ninety nine is
actually the it's a funding
formula bill with this bill
attempts to you know as you guys
know all school districts all
charter schools receive their
money's and there of the funding
through the SCG the state
equalization guarantee.
A brief hive you overview what
one ninety nine does is actually
is going to address three areas
within the funding formula.
The first is is going to you
know increase the money's and
the a factor for the fine arts
which would then generate more
funds that can be used to
support.
The the arts theater choir
in the fine arts drama theatre
from this secondary that once
that will address is the
administrative drive okay.
One of the things as the end
from as we travel across the
state.
There was a huge
Amount of support for leadership
matters okay and that we
understand that as the demands
have been
I placed on educators as a whole
from the EA to the teachers the
administrators
that there needed to be some way
to
Basically recognize that the
these administrators just like
we have difficulty recruiting
teachers the difficulty keeping
entertaining administrators is
also an important factor and
finally the third that it
attempts to address is actually
increasing the at risk index
okay now I I'm gonna be state
that this is the biggest part of
this and this is you know what
we need to do and the one thing
that I want to emphasize is
that.
This addresses and will affect
all school districts in all
layers of the state all charter
schools it will touch all
students who can't I know that
there is a lot of legislation
out there there's a lot of
emphasis on there's a lot of
programs.
For certain groups of a students
but with this
With this attempt to do is
attempt to provide funding and
war resources for school
districts.
To look at you know the case
management tutoring of relevant
and diverse education
Also for high needs areas so
what this I do what I did forget
to mention that this is alley
just endorse LUFC endorsed
legislation and this actually
the bill and the components of
the bill actually are a
culmination of us going across
the state hearing the needs of
community hearing the needs of
our school districts are
superintendents hearing the
needs of our employees as far as
what we need to provide for our
students our schools in our
school districts so Mr chairman
I know that's a high level
I do have my expert witnesses to
my right into my left that can
actually help with the technical
aspects of the bill I'm sure
there will be some.
But with that Mr chairman of our
committee stand for questions
all right thank you for The
presentation so we will go to
our online folks and those in
our audience here those in
opposition to house bill one
ninety nine please indicate by
raising your hands either
physically or virtually.
Give it a moment wait time.
Okay seemingly none all right so
we will go to support for house
bill one ninety nine if you
would please indicate there is
your hand virtually we'll go to
my right hand side this time
those in support cool if you
could keep it under two minutes
that's much appreciated so we'll
start out in the front please
stand by for.
This is
the right thing.
Great thank you Peter record
please welcome.
MFA supports increased funding
for schools and classes and help
them succeed in the.
I we also appreciate that this
is this is an important that
that increase the minimum
compensation of our named three
years
we have a critical role in
shaping our students teachers.
For that role is but one point.
we also believe that increasing
the sellers of protection.
But other leaders are kind.
That means that this issue is
also for this.
Forward in just a favorable
consideration great all right
the next please members of the
committee made out of New Mexico
kids can we stand in support of
this bill for two main reasons
one the increase to at risk
index we definitely believe in
making sure the resources from
the state are reaching the
students that need them the most
one request that we have is that
as we move forward we look at I
reevaluating how we create and
calculate the at risk index and
that we move from each district
wide at risk index to a school
specific precise measure so we
can really really target the
kids that need the money is the
most and then secondly just
wanna applied all the work and
supporting our administrators
who we knew who we know make a
huge difference in our schools
thank you anybody else Marian
checklist Mr chair members of
the committee Matt Paul with
public charter schools of the
neck of New Mexico but to double
down on all the comments that
have been said before likely
some that will be sent to future
here thank you Sir all right
thank you appreciate that others
American side or I will go to my
left hand side.
Please welcome you have a two
month.
More members many of us and for
the teachers federation last
night I was with about a hundred
and fifty educators who looked
at the L. E. S. C. budget
muzzles and notices that
there was money for fine arts
expansion and they all express
our gratitude to the LFC and
thought that that was so
important fine arts education
for students is essential
secondly leadership matters it's
one of the number one is
according to both the teachers
and the reserves that keeps
people in schools and in the
profession of teaching so we
want strong principles thank you
for that part and then for the
at risk funding it's one of the
ways we have a little bit of
discretionary money in the
districts and on that note I'd
like to say that we need more
discretionary money for local
priorities and programs through
the SCG and I hope that soon we
can have that conversation also
thank you okay thank you others
wish because for please thank
you Mr chairman John JG New
Mexico we support this bill
would like you to as well thank
you all right.
Competing for the record other.
All right.
So we'll go to our online
comments are it says Serra good
morning Serra you of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we want to
focus our support for this bill
on the portion of it the reason
is that principal pay by
increasing the responsibility
factor grant to the Thornburg
foundation our chamber letter
research study last year looking
at how New Mexico can improve
the way it prepares compensates
for crudes and provides on going
professional development for
principles the state has a long
way to go unfortunately school
leaders are often an
afterthought in state statutes
budgets administrative code into
often they're treated like mid
level managers in a large
bureaucracy as opposed to the
transformative CDOs we need them
to be leadership is so important
and we get it right in the
school hundreds of kids academic
performance benefits and
teachers are more likely to stay
in the profession as well this
bill is an important step in
raising our support and
expectations for school leaders
and of course going forward we
do ask the legislature to
continue working with us and
other partners to reform
principal appropriation and
professional development as well
thank you
thank you all right Daniel good
morning Daniel give up to
mental.
Thank you hello my name is
Daniel here and I am the chair
of the New Mexico by the council
on arts education and fine arts
coordinator for Farmington and
school schools I wish to speak
speak in support of and directly
to section two H. B. one ninety
nine which would increase the
cost differential factor for the
F. A. A. F. A. E. A. two zero
point zero five five as
mentioned in the alley S. C.
analysis this is necessary to
help support person composition
compensation after changes to
salaries in the twenty twenty
two session and the original
change to the formula and the
two thousand eighteen session it
also provides modest increases
for artistic opportunities for
districts that may not use the
FATCA for sellers the council
has worked diligently since two
thousand eighteen for these
changes including the summer
when representatives of the
council met with doctor
Warniment and sunny lu and
connected with Representative
Harper among others to
facilitate this funding change
amending the loss that occurred
in two thousand eighteen the
arts are parity for student
success and have proved so time
and again throughout the
pandemic and still now our great
state has proven history of
supporting our young artists
musicians dancers dramatists and
media makers please to continue
to express the support by
passing HB wanting the line to
the body thank you to sponsors
and thank you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you Emelie you welcome
back given two minutes welcome.
Good morning again Mr chair
members of the committee I'm
Emily well Dallas New Mexico
voices for children we stand in
support of H. B. one ninety nine
and thank the sponsors for
carrying this bill and we
support all aspects of the bill
for a lot of the reasons
mentioned and we especially our
support if the increase to the
at risk index to provide more
funding to support students from
low income families there's
research that indicates it costs
at least forty percent more to
educate a student who comes from
poverty to the same standards as
their more affluent peers and in
New Mexico one in four children
live in poverty and so we
support increased funding of our
public schools so they can
better support and educate our
many low income students and we
ask the committee to join us in
support of H. B. one ninety nine
thank you right thank you New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
education you have a two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Melissa Candelaria attorney with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and we support.
This bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward for all
the reasons stated that
previously and also want to urge
that the committee considered
with that any increases in at
risk factor be targeted to the
students generated so that
students are I'll be provided
the necessary programming and
services to improve academic
outcomes thank you and we urge
you to pass this bill.
Great thank you all right
without seeing any other hands
will come to committee
Representative Lara please thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative
My my question is going to.
This is concentrating on the
fine arts portion of this so
we're we're we're looking to
increase the the factor for fine
arts.
Does that include instructional
materials.
Hi my day job is instructional
materials and we're always
having we never have enough
money Mr chair instruction
materials and we're having the
school districts are having to
use our operational fund says to
to purchase additional
instruction materials so of what
I would like to ask you Mr chair
representative so is in this are
we also going to receive an
increase instruction materials
as well for the fine arts or
second state level.
Mr Chairman Representative Lara
there is I think and the
proposed legislation house bill
to an increase to instructional
materials and in two ways the
LFC recommendation had I believe
it was twelve million additional
dollars on top of the forty
three million that already
exists for instructional
materials in the SCG as well as
another amount by the think it's
in the realm of five to six
million dollars in the special
appropriation section five that
would also be a supplemental to
instructional materials this
factor could should the school
district decided you can
supplement instruction materials
for fine arts and it
particularly targets elementary.
Thank you for that because this
this it's very important as I I
I live it and it's and it's
rough having to ask for more
money out of the you just to
make sure that our kids have the
maternal something in the
questions thank you Mr.
The representative I move it to
pass Mr chair.
Right so we have to pass a
motion by Representative
Trujillo second by
Representative I did have a
couple comments though
especially as it pertains to the
bills we've heard today
especially house bill one twenty
seven has the one ninety nine.
Is that we heard comments during
testimony a week and a half ago
on house bill one thirty the
eleven forty hours bill from
educators who are rightly
pointing out like why are we
getting more resources into the
classroom toward programming for
our students and.
These are the plans this is what
the interim has been.
About trying to improve our
schools where we can build the
teacher pipeline where we could
help our instructional
assistance along the way build
up that profession
so these are not to be seen
necessarily as pieces of
legislation even though they are
but part of the whole system
that we're trying to work on
through the legislative
education study committee these
are the proposals and things
that we hope to build upon
headed into this next in our
but I thought that was important
to to clarify it's not just
individual pieces of bills but
how these all work together to
support our educational system
and our districts around the
state ultimately our students at
the school level so with that
I'll take that motion is there
any opposition to the to pass
motion.
From our sponsor okay you have a
unanimous do pass on house bill
one ninety nine so that
concludes our business folks
thank you all.
Thank you guys.
