Representative Lenti.
Good morning I'm here.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
Senator.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Sweetser.
There.
Representative Jim hill.
Vice chairwoman Garrett.
Chairman Romero.
Here we have a quorum all right
good morning everybody I hope
you all are doing well on this
last Monday of our legislative
session
remember it's the IAD's of March
so don't make the seas are
mistaken think that we are upon
the IAD's of March for it it's
not done
so with that being said we will
move on to the house memorial
twenty six.
Representative meant that please
when you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning members unhappy last
Monday of the session if you
would please Mr chairman if he
is in the attendees list
pullover and summons in the mode
Mr president such as
four of my expert witness all
right Mister Sanchez if you're
with us please raise your hand.
And it is not there that's fine
and I can I can continue with
the.
It it doesn't look like
Representative that's fine
that's fine okay thank you Mr
chairman house memorial twenty
six is a memorial that requests
the public education department
to develop a comprehensive
education plan to address the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit in which
the court again found the public
education in New Mexico to be
inadequate and efficient in
meeting the needs of our most
vulnerable children in very in
four very distinct student
groups that include native
American students English
language learners students with
disabilities and low income
students I I know that I've been
of honor to be part of this
committee and have heard the
discussions throughout this this
session and often times many of
us are leading the charge on
Yazzie Martinez efforts I don't
want this to become just a
tagline I don't want this to
become an effort I want this to
be a true transformative measure
that has taken really a
watershed moment in the history
of education in New Mexico and
make it something that should be
true equity for all of our
children in education so what
we're looking for is a
comprehensive education plan to
include.
Short and long term goals action
steps timelines funding staffing
and accountability measures
prepared by PED in conjunction
with those that are a part of
the lawsuit in those that been
active in in the creation of how
to remedy these issues the plan
must be developed in
consultation with the Yazzie
Martinez pleaded municipalities
school districts that will
hopefully lead to a resolution
of this case I don't think any
of us want to continue to
litigate this case for years and
years of losses are costly
obviously and those resources
are better spent investing in
our children's education.
And we've heard many bills this
session that attempt to do this
including several of mine that I
have proposed but yet
unfortunately many of those have
scenes stall again this
legislative session what remains
lacking in the plan that we can
act on immediately to address
the twenty eighteen court
decision and order I believe in
and Mr chairman and committee
members that we cannot wait for
another sixty day session we
cannot wait for another two to
four years before we start to
transform our public schools we
have to we have to currently
solid blueprints what we know
exists one would be the tribal
in the frame of the other is the
awesome remedy platform
developed by the people the
parents the communities and the
tribal governments and schools
that that many that I represent
and while we have heard that the
public education department does
have a drastic to plant a
memorial calls for a building
upon those strategic plans again
with the plaintiffs and
education stakeholders.
In the ruling the judge realized
that up it would be hard in a
complex process and to this for
this to be remedy but really at
the end of the day it is our
responsibility it is our
responsibility as a state as a
legislature as as a as an
executive body to really make
these changes happen on our own
we cannot wait any longer our
kids deserve a quality education
now and I think that they're all
counting on us to make those
type of changes so with that Mr
chairman and committee members I
will choose the questions.
Right thank you Representative
so we'll go to the attendees
list those in support of house
memorial twenty six please
indicate by raising your hand.
If you wish to speak.
I'm moving to pass Mr chairman.
Well we'll hold off on that
Representative Stapleton will
attendees lists have their say.
You never know they may change
your mind Representative
Stapleton.
Thank you Representative.
All right so we'll go to
Pearson.
Good morning person you have up
to two minutes welcome thank you
appreciate a good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Kristen
sire I am the first in a
government public back what.
I imagine this committee is that
what the problem was poor house
memorial twenty six since two
thousand eighteen thousand
Martinez court decision the
bubble back was called upon the
state and PED for many
meaningful collaboration
consultation with publishers to
discuss detail plans to address
the American teachers shortage
cultural relevant curriculum and
the lack of social behavior
health services all of which are
our end we are willingly he
noted in the court findings of
fact.
While the state has increased at
risk funding over the past two
legislative sessions and modify
programs for English language
learners native American
students low income students and
students with disabilities it is
still not sustainable enough to
comply with court orders what's
needed is a comprehensive plan
which action steps that called
for a meaningful shift in
education part paradigm for
native children and other
students Mr chairman and members
of the group of the committee we
ask you support the memorial
with a do pass thank you Sir
that concludes my.
Great thank you lieutenant
governor.
All right so but three Sierra.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Patricia he
minutes late them and I am the
project manager for transfer
education New Mexico as noted
it's been two and a half years
since the Yazzie Martinez court
decision and we still do not
have a comprehensive plan for
education to meet the mandates
of the judge's ruling to resolve
the lawsuit.
Currently the public education
department is in the process of
drafting the strategic plan with
the student groups identified in
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit the
department recognizes the past
failures of New Mexicos
education system legislative
equitable education for its most
underserved students in a draft
in introduction to the strategic
plan the pedig knowledges that
native American students English
learners students with
disabilities and economically
disadvantaged students do not
have or receive inadequate
treatment in the system that
stigmatizes low academic
achievement and treated as
impediments to those qualities
we should see as unique and
crucial assets we are all in
agreement the student groups
have been underserved but we no
longer have the time to let
another year or years go by we
have the data the experts and
current New Mexico research to
move forward House memorial
twenty says axe asks is me the
joint plan in collaboration with
plaintiffs built from existing
plans and recommendations
already developed by education
and tribal experts across the
state transformation cation is
in firm support of this bill and
we thank representative Lente
for sponsoring house memorial
twenty six we ask this committee
just to support the Morial so
that we may ensure an equitable
education for all New Mexico's
children and families thank you
for allowing me to speak Sir
right thank you for being here.
Right so we'll go to bill.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children
Patrice you said pretty much
everything I was going to say I
just want to thank the sponsors
of this memorial you know this
is a pretty historic lawsuit and
yet they're still in the to
bring people together and build
a comprehensive plan to address
the ruling of the court we
encourage your support and move
this process along I also want
to just say you know sometimes
we passed memorials and not all
of them get implemented and so
we really encourage Andrew this
is passed to make sure the
Legislative Council or whoever
needs to convene and bring
people together if this actually
happens and that we come away
with the plan that we can all
act upon thank you.
Great thank you for being here
all right so we'll go to
jasmine.
Morning jasmine you about two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep that and I am the
representative of the tribal
remedy sorry the tribal
educational I. X. I'm here this
morning to speak in support of
house memorial twenty six
as it has been three years from
the decision in order of the
Yazzie Martinez.
Lawsuit.
And we know that this state has
taken steps as well as the
Legislature to funding to
increase funding for students
and in the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and we're very thankful
for those steps however I'd like
to point out that one for a few
particular points we know that
folks have seen of Sir in
initiatives of the of the state
such as the equity councils as
making immediate or substantive
steps to remedying the the
lawsuit and the large gaps of
inequity in our state however we
know that many school districts
perhaps are still having trouble
even putting those councils
together and having the
council's folks of those
councils even begin that work
during the pandemic so lots of
work still needs to be done
there pilot programs.
Highly programs that are engaged
in multi cultural indigenous
learning.
Don't reach all students those
are pilot programs and they're
still in the very beginning
stages of reaching all students
across our state and many native
American students.
We know that this the page
strategic plan.
Also was a step in the right
direction however the lack of
diverse membership on on that
strategic planning team.
I believe did not serve the the
plan well there were not enough
details on implementation steps
in that strategic plan as well
as important benchmarks and for
those few reasons as well as the
reasons stated before me from
others we believe that tribal
educationally and believes that
it is time that the state put
together a comprehensive plan
bringing all of the stakeholders
together and even working with
the plaintiffs in the lawsuit we
need to and this is your time
jasmine thank you for being
here.
All right so go to Norman.
Good morning Norman you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Norman
creati the former governor for
the pueblo of Zuni I currently
work at the university of New
Mexico Center for native
American health as a tribal
relations liaison and for all of
the predecessors who have stated
I just want to support what they
have said but also to sort of
reiterate what representative
Lente has said there was a
decision that was made by the
third branch of the government
and that's judicial who has.
Sort of indicate what the
outcome to the legislative and
executive body should be in
addressing the Yazzie Martinez.
It has been for too long just
like those who need lost lawsuit
on impact aid which has been
going on for multiple years
which seems to have no
resolution to it I hate to see
this lawsuit be dragged out and
cost money in trying to defend
that the state is not
constitutionally obligated to
fulfill what the judicial side
of the three branch government
has already stated so for that I
think representative Lente P.
for trying to address this since
all the other efforts to the
stride has stalled with this
legislative session and I ask
for your support in this
committee thank you very much
right thank you.
All right New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty I've come to
learn that appreciation could
you identify yourself good
morning you have a two minutes
yes good morning thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lisa deal
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center online poverty and
then a member of the legal team
for the Yazzie play destiny as
Martinez case.
We are in full support of this
legislation for the many reasons
already given here today so I
would just add that.
The plan is essential here and
we really want the legislature
to make clear that the PED has a
constitutional obligation to
these children but it has still
failed to for fell I we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
really important memorial we
encourage the full support of
the committee today thank you
right thank you.
All right Steve.
Good morning Stevie of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
ceiling is any eighty New Mexico
government relations director on
behalf of our members we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward and full support.
This is a common sense bill
founded upon the principle of
the fierce urgency of now to
borrow a doctor more than Martin
Luther king's words
we urge the committee to invest
and our legislators and the
state to invest our time
constructively and tackle head
on.
The issue of the ratty Katie
unacceptable educational
problems and the cat and the
academic achievement gap with
all speed we echo the sentiment
of public support and we ask
that the committee voted in
favor of HM twenty six thank
you.
Thank thank you.
All right when about.
Good morning when you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning can you hear me we
can yes good morning everybody
my name is quite about Martinez
and I'm a professor here you
would have in the college of
education.
Also member of Taos Pueblo and
and the Navajo Nation.
And I just wanted to thank
senator went Representative went
to for work in producing this
memorial bill and I would also
like to provide my support for
the passage of this memorial it
is crucial that we work together
collectively as well as provide
a critical perspective of what
we need to offer our youth and
families in the state of New
Mexico so thank you very much
and I hope that this I hope
committee hears all of the
presentations provided so far
thank you great great thank you
going about.
All right so go to Christine.
Good morning Christina of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee
my name is Christine Sims and I
direct the American Indian
language policy research and
teacher training centre
University of New Mexico I'm
also from Aqaba Pueblo I would
just like to state for all the
reasons mentioned that we really
do our request your support of
this memorial and because it is
true it's time to to work with
closely with the people that no
of
the issues as well as the
solutions that need to be
brought forth for up addressing
these problems of inequity in
education and we cannot afford
to lose time there's already a
whole generation here that will
exit our education systems and
we have not done right by them
then then we have not done our
job as legislators disclosed
educators so I hope that this
committee will vote in favor of
this house memorial carried by a
representative Lente T. thank
you very much right thank you.
All right so we'll go to a list
the.
Morning in the state of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning representatives my
name is Alyssa Chavis loan the
education director for the
public simply being we stand in
support of house memorial twenty
six we believe that there have
been some steps taken towards
establishing a strategic plan on
behalf of the plaintiffs of this
the Yazzie Martinez case however
you know it has been
Right quite a bit of time and we
cannot spend any more time any
longer because these are these
are lives of our children that
we are considering you know we
need to set them up as best we
can and if we have a the push to
have that strategic plan put
into place that'll better equip
us in order to meet the great
dire needs that we have for the
children in our communities so
that maybe they meet may be
successful and come back and
contribute to our community and
our state as a whole so that's
what I would like to say thank
you very much right thank you.
All right so I don't see any
other.
So we'll go over.
Take care.
Good morning at up to two
minutes.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee may
take us on the honest registered
lobbyists for the Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president we stand in strong
support of house memorial twenty
six for all the reasons stated
we want to thank Representative
Lente for bring in the memorial
forward president now as
strongly supports public
education department to develop
a comprehensive strategic plan
to address the systematic
education inequities and
deficiencies identified by the
court in the consolidated Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and address the
ruling of the court Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you.
Thank you.
All right so we will go to
opposition.
Is there any opposition to house
memorial twenty six.
All right seeing none will come
to committee first in my left
state is Representative Sweetser
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative I think you know
I'm new to the Education
Committee and new tat to
studying all of this information
but when I first saw your
memorial I was.
Family disappointed that you
felt the need that you had to
file such a memorial I mean as
an outsider looking and I would
just assume that we have a
comprehensive strategic plan and
so so I guess I share in your
disappointment that we're not
moving forward with that and
then as I've heard comments
today it sounds like we have a
strategic plan we have the
Yazzie remedy we have the tribal
remedy framework and so Mr chair
representative I I guess I feel
the need to ask you do we have
such a piece meal response to
the lawsuit going that it's not
moving forward is is that your
interpretation reference
Representative.
Mr chairman and and and the
Representative thank you for
that question you know you you
you hit the nail on the head we
talked about a piecemeal
approach don't get me wrong I I
don't think that the PED's and
other hands hoping that the that
the law is going to fix itself
but maybe as as as you mentioned
they do have a draft plan but
it's it's in draft form we have
some other other
ones that are in in better shape
at the time running frame and
others but you know at this
point in time we cannot have
this piecemeal approach as
something so important as as our
children's education as the hope
that it's going to somehow come
together if we all put bits and
pieces in it because in this
committee amongst any others I
I've I've seen we've all seen
that there are there are
competing interests that well
this this this through a little
bit in for disabled children
this to a man for the Americans
by panics it should be that we
we should all come together as
as New Mexicans and and fix the
problem I mean as was mentioned
three years four years at this
point in time is a long time
does that go and that we can't
afford just to throw up pay more
attorney's fees just to try to
get this thing solved so thank
you for the questions you
chairman and Representative and
thank you Representative and Mr
chairman I agree completely and
it's frustrating I guess that
that we're now three years into
this and we're not there yet and
so one thing I noticed in your
legislation is that your
requesting the legislature be
provided with an annual report
on the implementation of the
plan and to the best of my
knowledge we have and we've not
received anything as far as
PED's.
strategic plan or draft plan are
moving forward the legislature
officially hasn't received
anything in my correct you're
correct Representative.
All right so thank you Mr chair
and and Representative I guess I
would just reiterate that I I am
profoundly disappointed that we
are here I support your memorial
completely I hope it's not just
another memorial that goes on
the shelf is one of the speaker
said but it is taken very
seriously by path that we are
looking for a comprehensive
strategic plan involving all of
the stakeholders that will be
implemented so thank you for
that thank you Mr chairman.
Great thank you Representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lente
Representative Sweetser asked my
questions verbatim and I would
just like to add the point about
a memorial on a shelf I
discovered with my first
memorial that I was the one that
had to make it get off the shelf
so I would just encourage our
committee
as a committee to make sure it
happens thank you very much Mr
chairman that is that.
Right thank you Representative
Madrid please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative Lente for
continuing the quest for our
people of the state of the north
and I will continue to support
you in this effort and
understanding that it's a joint
calls that we have that we must
not let rest you know I I I
agree I think PED is is trying
to to make something go away the
cat and we can't let it go away
because this is in regards to
our kids your betterment so
thank you and I support to do
thank you chairman.
Right thank you Representative
Roybal Caballero please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
The only thing that I would like
to encourage us in as we and and
you're right we absolutely have
an obligation as a legislature
to request
not only requests to.
Right monitoring and oversight
of the educational process is
but more importantly because as
I've said over and over again we
have a in order
to in order in place that has to
be met and conditions in that
order but I think more
importantly Mr Chairman
representative it's important to
understand that I don't think in
all of the testimonies that
we've heard over the past few
years in the in term and the
route that.
That we can address this
Yes the components of Yazzie
Martinez.
without understanding that what
we're focusing on what we hope
to see at least in those and the
court after the discussions that
we've had is that we want to
elevate the importance of
community centered and
culturally and language relevant
education we don't want another
report we don't want another
comprehensive approach that
attempts in my opinion
to.
Include our native and is
planning populations from an
inclusionary process a process
but one which highlights the
differences and creates the mole
brought models for understanding
these differences honoring the
disk differences and respecting
them in such a manner that we
then incorporate them into our
curriculum.
Our services and our
comprehensive and holistic
approach to education so it's
not just another report that
we're asking for Mr Chairman
representative it's.
A way of looking.
Away.
Incorporating integrating but in
a manner that highlights on
equity and just approaches to
education which wouldn't really
benefit our students more than
what we've been traditionally
exposing which attempts to erase
or diminish or minimize
the histories and the cultural
traditions and cultural
preservation of our community so
I think that's really what I'm
hoping that not just this
memorial but the approach that
PED should be taking because.
After all that's the very
essence of what the court order
and with the lawsuit was all
about thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative for
presenting your Memorial.
Eight thank you Representative
all right so we did have a
motion for do pass by
Representative Stapleton also in
the oh oh sorry to hear
Representative Roybal Caballero
however I do I did want to make
a comment about this is because
I I think in the past couple
years we we've had some
initiatives go through and and
certainly others that are on
proposed and I agree with the
committee that you know it's
about time that we we really
bring in the the various
stakeholders and the community
is and those that are all
involved in in the lawsuit in
I know that obviously you
representative Lente that have
brought a lot of bills fourth on
behalf of the Ozzie plaintiffs
and then Representative Trujillo
had a bill on behalf of the
Martinez plaintiffs and and and
jointly so because there's a lot
of cross pollination between the
two but I think it's it's about
time that that we do that and
certainly that's the the
seemingly the sentiment of of of
this committee in in moving
these initiatives forward so we
can find the students which are
and rightly so representative
Lente that our New Mexico
students right we're not just
talking about the percentage of
students were talking about all
of our students on because
that's the complexion all of our
communities and I think that's
super super important but with
that except the motion on madam
secretary if you call the roll
on to do passed motion please.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative figura.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes and.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative I'm excuse me
vice chairwoman Garrett.
Yes and chairman Romero.
Yes I have fourteen zero all
right so you have the unanimous
do pass on house memorial twenty
six thank you representative
Lente.
Thank you.
All right so do we have.
Senator souls maybe starting his
committee I am trying to work on
getting him there is only.
Okay.
The little bit of a holding
pattern.
What's he gonna be able to be on
his way Taylor.
Was on the phone with his
assistant just now but the email
she gave me isn't going through
still.
Okay maybe it would be safer if
we take Senator pope first.
Move on to Senate bill eighty
eight believe in.
I heard a version of this before
very very early on
so Senator pope if you're with
us could you please raise your
hand in the attendees list
thank.
Did you to our panel.
We just text them to other areas
right.
All right Senator pope good
morning.
Your muted Sir.
My apologies good morning Mr
chair all right did we need to
promote anybody for you this
morning
no there's no need for that this
morning all know I don't know Mr
chair how much The presentation
you wanted this Senate bill
eighty is the exact same bill as
house bill twenty nine that was
amended
and just coming from the Senate
side we ran the the same bills
so and so and so Senator that
was exactly my question so
nothing has changed from what we
may have heard this is pretty
early on in the session.
Are there there were some
amendments made and and I and
there were changes for example
of from.
The shares Burbage in there
about Burke as and we changed it
to his job but that was really
the changes that we have made
just basically reflecting
religious and cultural
headdresses.
Okay great that was the
amendment that we had adopted in
this committee as well so great
all right so with that being
said.
I will go to the attendees list
attendees those in support of
Senate bill eighty please
indicate areas.
All right to give me a moment.
All right Meredith.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee you heard me
testify on behalf of the house
version of this bill and I'm
testifying on behalf of the
league of women voters and the
American Association of
university women both
organizations stand firmly in
support and thank the sponsors
for bringing it forward it's
high time I think this is
actually of one of the things
that New Mexico is going to
shine and we have so many things
that we don't shine in terms of
diversity and inclusion but I
think this really is a wonderful
statement
did that we just will not
tolerate any discrimination.
Yes Sir cultural discrimination
so I think the Sanchez and urged
the Canadian passes through
quickly.
All right thank you.
Right.
Good morning Friday you have up
to two minutes please good
morning chair and members of the
committee my name's precarity
student intern for lobbyist
Julianna Koob and I'm here this
morning to stand in support of
Senate bill eighty on behalf of
Planned Parenthood for the
protection of civil rights and
human rights in New Mexico thank
you for your time.
Thank you.
So go to bill.
Good morning bill you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Back thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank
senator pope for bringing this
bill forward you know children
have a right to attend school
without fear of discrimination
for wearing their natural hair
protective hairstyles or
cultural headdresses
this change represents an
important anti racist policy
will prevent instances of racism
and cultural bias from harming
black and indigenous students
and others supporting their
value and self worth by
affirming their culture.
All of our children are
beautiful let's protect them
let's protect and honor their
beauty and allow our students to
learn and thrive without fear of
racial and cultural
discrimination thank you.
Right thank you.
Right may take at.
Good morning to take a of up to
two minutes.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members of the committee my take
us on the honors registered
lobbyists for the Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president.
We strongly support Senate bill
eighty and thank senator pope
for bringing the bill forward.
We support the prevention or to
prevent school districts and
charter schools from imposing
discipline discrimination
against a student based on race
religion or culture or due to a
student's use of protective
hair styles and cultural and
religious headdresses
we appreciate the opportunity to
be with you today and ask for
your support thank you.
Great thank you.
One of a.
Compact when value up to two
minutes yes good morning I like
to think Representative poke for
presenting this legislation this
is very important as I know is I
do research in high schools
working with indigenous youth as
well as all you it's critical
that we legislate the any kind
of challenges to any kind of
racial micro aggressions that
take place as we saw
unfortunately that happened in
many schools not only across the
state but also across the state
at the the nation on and why so
thank you very much for this
bill and I as this legislation I
hope it passes thank you right
thank you.
Deborah.
We need a very of up to the.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee our public charter
schools of New Mexico support
Senate bill eighty as the
statewide membership association
for charter schools
we represent dozens of schools
were formed by their communities
to fight against racial and
socioeconomic injustice this
bill contributes to that mission
by contributing to a society
where students have the right to
feel safe in school regardless
of the race and culture we
support this bill and would like
to thank senator poke for
bringing this up to the
legislature this year.
Great thank you.
Warning warning you about two
minutes.
Good morning chairman Romero
members of the committee and I
think Representative pope for
presenting this bill on behalf
of.
The diverse cultures in our
state's.
Our people.
The people that just have deep
religious beliefs and part of
that.
Is
Tied to our hair and I went to a
Catholic school we're we were.
Required to cut our hair and
especially if we wanted to
participate in sports and now I
see NFL teams with guys their
hair sticking out of their
helmets and the I think that
this is just one of the to be
all things that we overlook
sometimes but there are some.
Cultures that really do.
the curse things like growing
your hair so we appreciate it
have a good day.
Right thank you.
I don't see any others that wish
to speak how about this okay
Christine if you would please.
Keep your hand up.
Christine please have up to two
minutes yes thank you Mr chair I
would also like to
why support for this bill
from apple pueblo and I'm also
equity in the college of
education and directs the
American Indian language policy
research in teacher training
center I think this bill is
needed unfortunately in this day
and time you would think that
they would be open acceptance of
our children in terms of how
they have been raised you know
how how they dress how they
carry themselves in terms of you
know their hair and other other
aspects of their identity but
because there is so much
Misunderstand and misinformed
kinds of actions that we've seen
in the past we come to this
point where we gonna need this
kind of bills so I hope that
this committee will support
passage and I think senator Kohl
for bringing this forward thank
you.
Right thank you.
Do you.
Steve you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee CCRB is
setting a New Mexico government
relations director all be brief
on behalf of our members we
thank the senator for bringing
this very important piece of
legislation forward we echo the
voices of public support and
asked the committee to build
your fate thank you great thank
you.
So we'll go to opposition answer
opposition to Senate bill
eighty.
All right C. line we will come
to committee comments questions
concerns committee.
Mr chairman I move a do pass.
The chance so we have I do
passed motion a second by
Representative Roybal coming
into madam secretary if you call
the roll in the past motion.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative figura yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Joe hill yes.
Vice chairwoman Garrett.
Yes.
Chairman Romero.
Yes I have fourteen to zero all
right Senator pope you have the
unanimous do pass on Senate bill
eighty thank you thank you thank
you Mr chair committee members
also like to recognize Majority
Leader stable to and and
Representative Roybal Caballero
for their sponsorship on these
bills as well thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so do we have Senator
souls Taylor.
The email was sent on.
I.
I just haven't heard back from
them I can give them another
call.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Paypen is yes this is
the vice chair so now that he's
back.
Senator so should be able to
come okay.
Mr chair.
I'm.
On my phone.
I have Sierra.
He's having a conversation with
our Representative Lundstrom so
I know that was started.
So you should be on earlier okay
what we do have I seen Senator
Stewart on.
On.
So we can Senator Stewart and go
to Senate bill one forty eight.
Senator Stewart good morning are
you with us.
Good morning Mr chairman I am
all right do I need to.
Demote anybody to our panel for
you.
Mr chairman we have a Chelsea
Canada from L. E. S. C. that's
here for a technical questions
and I believe that's all.
All right so Chelsea if you're
in the attendees list can you
raise your hand please.
Promoter.
All right so we're all set when
you're ready Senator right thank
you so much Mr chairman members
of the committee Senate bill one
forty eight set up a commission
on diversity equity and
excellence in education.
This bill that came out of our
legislative education study
group we've
Try to pass this bill for a
number of years this year.
I continue to meet with
stakeholders on this commission
so we have made some changes to
the bill
But let me say that we've
In addition to requiring that
the vice chair of this
commission is chosen from one of
the for tribal leaders well
we've also required that there
will the subcommittee.
There will be some of the
committees that will include
bilingual professionals Indian
education experts you LL
specialist special education
teachers structural support
providers and students at risk
of by the is made by the martini
I see losses we've also added
that this commission will begin
by reviewing the findings of
fact and conclusions in the
Yazzie Martinez and then we'll
review all the numerous plants
that have come out with that so
a representative Lente talked
earlier they're certainly a
tribal platform there is a group
cut transition a New Mexico that
has a plot for the plaintiffs
have one.
So this this idea came about
after our study of no time to
lose on the L. E. S. C. there
are a number of states
California Kentucky Maryland
Massachusetts that after a
lawsuit in their state they set
up this type of commission there
are there's just a lot of people
who want to help us that could
be a really good thing it could
also complicate matters this is
a twenty eight member commission
as a service for tribal leaders
and stakeholders from across the
state including some business
and.
The organizations that want to
be involved this the job of this
commission would be cut to come
to the legislature every year it
has a five year sunset
and look at
Specifically how we are.
We are using our funds to
improve education another
amendment that was put on with
the continuing work with
stakeholders was to specifically
say ask the commission to look
at annual appropriations and
adequate funding for to improve
the achievement gap we have and
to improve student learning for
all students.
So it's been a it's been added
to and worked on for years I do
believe you know you can never
get a commission or task force
or anything else you you can't
ever include everybody that
everybody wants I do believe
with the addition of is it
mandatory subcommittees we will
be able to include more people
than we originally thought so
but that's in general what this
does Mr chairman I'm happy to
stand for questions after you do
your other procedures.
Thank thank you senator so we
will okay the lower hands right
away so we'll go to support are
there those in support of Senate
bill one forty eight.
Indicate by raising your hand at
at this point I should say
please.
All right really may.
Good morning Willie Mae of up to
two minutes please.
Mr chairman thank you willing
more TV's representing the New
Mexico school board association
Mr chairman members of the
committee and it must be a
strong supports the objectives
of this bill to develop a long
term plan transform the public
at in New Mexico this
legislation follows closely with
no time to lose initiative for
state and and I'm SB has been
working closely with Senator
Stewart in this regard we
appreciate all her work to to
work towards improving the
achievement gap and making our
students successful this work is
a long term consistent role
Matt Matt and leave this
commission will build upon the
achievements that have already
been completed NMSA also
appreciate soror elements and
appropriate diverse group named
to be on the commission Mr
chairman members of the
committee we thank the sponsor
we ask favorable consideration
by this committee and we thank
you for allowing us to voice our
position.
Right thank you.
All right Meredith.
Good morning then if you have up
to good morning chairman and
members of the committee I'm
speaking on behalf of the legal
women voters and the American
Association of university women
and we strongly support this
legislation we think this
sponsor for working through all
of the different variations
we've heard a lot of discussion
of the principles in the LFC
inner meetings and and various
committees there are other
commissions for sure that are
being proposed in this session
as well as
in the we have a lot of other
attention and many other bills
but this one is over arching
because it's so inclusive of so
many different diverse groups
and I'm sure that having a
sunset provision will also help
to focus the efforts so I think
the Sanchez for working on and
everybody else and certainly if
you want an organization's legal
voters I can speak as education
chair of that organization we
would be very I would be very
very happy to serve thank you
very much right urged support of
this committee.
Right thank you.
All right Patrick.
Good morning Patrick it looks to
me.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Patrick Killen register lobbyist
for chevron we support SB one
forty eight we appreciate
Senator Stewart for bring it
forward chevron particularly
appreciates the inclusion of a
representative on the commission
from the oil and gas sector
located in the state which is a
large contributor to education
as well as representatives from
the business community to be
designated by the New Mexico
chamber of commerce Tehran is
committed to fostering diversity
and inclusion at all levels of
our company as well as in the
communities that we support
we're a strong supporter of
improving education in the
communities that we support and
diversity equity inclusion or
cornerstones of our corporate
values of high performance
integrity trust partnership
protecting people the
environment
we support the goals of the
proposed commission ensuring
equitable access to high quality
curriculum instruction resources
and ensuring a diverse and
culturally competent educator
workforce I ensuring coordinated
and effective governance
structure.
So chevron is is proud to stand
support Senate bill one forty
eight and we think the committee
for the time.
Thank you.
Right.
Good morning two minutes thank
you chairman committee members I
am greedy Garrity student intern
for lobbyist Julianna Koob I'm
here to stand in support of
Senate bill one forty eight on
behalf of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
service providers thank you for
your time.
All right thank you.
Any others in support.
All right so we'll go into
opposition those opposed to
Senate bill one forty eight
please indicate parents here
and.
In a moment all right so you
have up to two minutes.
One of the.
Welcome back when about.
Yes good morning a good morning
article chairman and senator
Representative my name is going
to be a Martinez and I'm a
professor College of education
and director of the institute
for American Indian Education
I'm here to express my
opposition to this legislation
as it is currently drafted and
just just committee to amend
this bill as we all know the
Yazzie Martinez really requires
a state of New Mexico to address
the systemic issues of
educational injustice I would
like this committee to consider
re framing are many the current
draft of the legislation to
include key tribal leaders and
date of school district leaders
for too long these critical
perspectives have been
marginalized and as I read the
current proposed legislation I
see this continual practice of
marginalizing key perspectives
in the proposed commission I'm
calling for a racially
culturally socially economically
diverse commission that action
accurately reflects our
demographics I am asking for
commission that not only
acknowledges the perspectives of
tribal nations and peoples what
a commission that does not
reproduce to racial hierarchy
where indigenous peoples
continue to be at the bottom
this is store called process of
maintaining the status quo has
to end as currently written the
commission does not guarantee
authentic representation by the
twenty three tribal nations and
other communities of color I'm
asking your committee to
exercise your legislative muscle
by acting on the testimony this
morning I am sending this
legislation to include as part
of its commission indigenous
leaders adequately represented
twenty three native nations of
New Mexico now is the time to re
frame the history of the state
and to and micro and macro
aggressions in the state's
racial hierarchy thank you.
Thank you gonna.
Rebecca.
Good morning Rebecca you have up
to two minutes please good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee thank you very
much for giving me time to talk
my name is Rebecca blue Martinez
and I'm a professor of bilingual
and ESL education in the
department of language literacy
and sociocultural studies in the
college of education and human
sciences at the UNM.
I also was an expert witness for
the I. C. K. in the Yazzie
Martinez versus state of New
Mexico court case.
While I applaud that the
legislature is finally looking
to address the serious issues in
the case with the establishment
of this commission.
I am troubled with several
aspects of Senate bill one forty
eight number one it is
unconscionable that the
commission is given five years
to study the very issues
outlined in the court case.
It has already been is three
years since judge singleton's
decision and now the proposed
bill would add another five
years that would make a total of
eight years before the children
of New Mexico good finally
expected sufficient education.
Everyone knows of the terrible
injustice many rural children
especially native American
children have already suffered
due to a lack of technology
during this pandemic.
By the time this commission
gives its recommendations and
those are put into place a whole
generation will have continued
to suffer from insufficient
funds underprepared teachers and
administrators and a curriculum
that ignores and disrespects who
they are what message are you
sending to the children and
their parents.
Number two the membership of
this commission is also very
troubling there is an over
Representative twenty seconds.
And business interests.
I'm an under representation of
teachers teacher educators and
parents were critical
stakeholders in education
further there is little
transparency in the selection
process when the legislative
leaders and the governor are
allowed to make appointments
with no stated Craig W. Martina
that was that was two minutes
thank you.
All right well just.
Good morning well just you have
up to two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Lois
Meyer I'm a professor of
bilingual education and second
language instruction recently
retired from the college of
education at UNM I wish to
express strong opposition to
Senate bill one forty eight as
it currently is written and to
urge significant revisions the
bill says it will create a
commission on diversity equity
and excellence in education for
New Mexico yet it's proposed
voting membership at fails to be
either diverse or equitable
proposed members include six
legislators appointed internally
three state secretaries and
eighteen others who supposedly
represent the ethnic cultural
linguistic and geographical
diversity of the state the bill
stipulates that the eighteen
additional members will be
appointed by organizations not
local communities or tribal
nations organizations such as
teachers unions and school board
association three business
representatives once
specifically representing oil
and gas interests are appointed
by the chamber of commerce or
the house Republican Party
universities in teacher
education program to point three
more significantly only for
tribal leaders appointed
internally and one member
appointed by transform education
New Mexico round out the
eighteen where are the voting
voices of New Mexico's diverse
local communities and tribal
nations or the students parents
and the teachers and schools for
struggle to serve the students
needs local education experts in
New Mexico organizations not
named in this bill such as the
all pueblo council of governors
and others already have analyzed
New Mexico's educational needs
and proposed effective remedies
these organizations do not need
for more years they are ready to
work now I
You need to amend this bill to
create a truly diverse and
equitable New Mexico low just
that was two minutes thank you.
Care center.
Good morning person you have up
to two minutes please review
good morning good morning again
Mr chairman members the
committee my name is person
style first and governor for the
public back on after the alleged
this legislation act Republican
I support SB one forty as ran.
Any effort to create diversity
requires input and involvement
of New Mexicos communities of
color and tribal leaders the key
to build a better education
system.
Straw Representative
representation by families
educators school districts
leaders from Hispanic African
American and tribal communities
the people.
Who have the most direct
experience and expertise what
about them our children will
marginalize yet again.
Currently this legislation does
not guarantee adequate
representation by New Mexico
tribes in other communities of
color nor this is get nor does
it guarantee that local
education experts.
We'll have any decision making
authority over the education of
native children who are most
impacted by the two thousand
eighteen thousand Martinez court
ruling Mr chairman members the
committee eco public and I
support SB one forty as is and
urge this committee to bow down
or amend this bill thank you Mr
chairman this concludes my
comments great thank you.
College horizons if you could
identify yourself personally and
you'll have up to two minutes
welcome.
Hi good morning chairman and
committee members my name is
Carmen Lopez I'm director of
college raisins and I'm also a
parent of three native American
children in our schools in New
Mexico I hate to stand in
opposition as SB one forty eight
is currently drafted and asked
for the agency to amend it the
two primary concerns as others
have mentioned is that it does
not include an authentic
representation of tribal nations
for tribal educators or from my
perspective in college access
work high school counselors that
are preparing our students for
college career and civic
readiness I'm also concerned
over the time of the study for
forty five years and we need to
act with urgency with as many
people many of us have worked on
diversity equity inclusion I
want to read a couple of points
that we often get in our
trainings the first one is
diversity asks who is in the
room equity response who is
trying to get in the room but
can't whose presence in the room
is under constant threat of the
erasure inclusion asks how has
everyone's ideas been heard
justice responds whose ideas
won't be taken as seriously
because they aren't in the
majority diversity asks how many
more minority groups do we have
this year than last equity
responds what conditions how we
created that maintain certain
groups as the perpetual major
here and finally inclusion
celebrates awards for
initiatives and credits itself
for having a diverse candidate
pool justice celebrates getting
rid of practices and policies
that were having disparate
impacts on minority ties to
groups thank you.
Thank thank you.
Can.
Good morning can you have up to
two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I name
is Dr can the staff on the
tribal administrator for the
public via I stand to oppose
this legislation is drafted
interject this committee amend
this bill the Yazzie Martinez
will be required to the state of
New Mexico to act with greater
urgency currently the
legislation business
commissioner of the five years
to develop recommendations but
does not require any action of
guarantees that changes will be
made it only saw the progress
we've made already we need the
state legislature in the PED to
work together with greater
urgency to fix the systematic
issues that have caused many
generations of our children
develop academically.
Keys to building a better
education system is to build
community trust we need a
diverse group of community
leaders working together to make
decisions and improve our
education systems statewide this
legislation however did not
include significant New Mexico
communities it excludes P.
tribal leaders Hispanic leaders
in African American leaders and
also exclude school district
leaders instructors students of
diverse communities daily
without strong representation of
you families educators school
districts and community and
tribal leaders the people who
have the most direct experience
and expertise with the education
system it will be more they will
be marginalized again because
our state local and community
education experts already know
what is needed to provide our
students with the education that
is there this commission does
not need to study the problem
any further the commission needs
to build on the work and it's
already been done for example
the tribal entity framework
which is created collectively by
tribal community members and
indigenous education experts
mentors by the leadership of the
twenty three nations tribes or
pueblos that's out duties
exclusions that place native
students at the center of
education programming and
infrastructure another example.
If the transition transform
education New Mexico developed
would develop a detailed
platform of actions necessary to
transform the education system
and to address the Yazzie
Martinez court findings the
legislature should fully funded
implement the recommendations
provided by local education
advocates experts in communities
stop wasting time and resources
on another bike you can that was
two minutes thank you.
Julia.
Good morning to you Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is William Earl silo based
simply and I am a member of the
Hispanic age of eight education
advisory committee and also a
member of the coalition for the
majority and as mentioned by
other presenters I believe that
this bill needs to be amended by
the committee so that the
urgency of the situation is
addressed and not because the
way the bill reads we would have
to wait maybe five to eight
years before any of the the
recommendation would be
implemented and as others have
mentioned I believe that there's
needs to be our strong
representation of meals families
educators and school districts
and community and tribal leaders
those are the people that are
directly working with our
communities and our the most
information to inform the the
the commission thank you.
Great thank you we address
excuse me for mispronouncing
your name.
All right so we'll go to and
only.
Good morning Emily you have up
to two minutes please good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm and we will
Representative in New Mexico
voices for children we
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill and we if the
commission like this were to be
established we believe it should
guaranteed greater racial and
ethnic diversity and its
membership in additionally while
we appreciate the intent of SB
one forty eight the committee
would create a timeline for
recommendations that is out of
sync with the urgent needs of
New Mexicos children for these
reasons and all of the other
reasons you've heard today we
asked the committee to join us
in opposing SB one forty eight
as it currently stands thank you
right thank you.
Sen Christine.
Christine good morning you have
up to two minutes good morning
Mr chair members of the
committee I also want to state
my opposition this morning
against this bill I'm from
Michael Pueblo and I'm also a
faculty in the department of
language literacy social culture
studies at UNM college of it
and directs the American Indian
language policy research in
teacher training center I really
feel that this of commission
this idea for this commission
came from a whole different set
of
I'll have to say uninformed
expectations about what is going
to take to address these
critical issues stemming from
the Yazzie Martinez case it did
not include the input of tribal
communities all tribal nations
in terms of the representation
in the organization and also the
proposed activities for this
commission on I think it's in
the front to the tribal
communities in New Mexico and
it's an affront to the native
educators who have been working
in this field for more than
thirty four years and so I would
hope that this committee will
consider.
We amending or amended this bill
and making it work better for
all of our citizens and all of
our on tribal communities as
well as all the other student
groups that are represented in
these cases in this case the
Yazzie Martinez case and I also
hope that this committee will
of also dear fellow colleagues a
feet to the fire in terms of
making sure you get this right
and so I stand in opposition of
this bill as it stands now thank
you.
Great thank you.
All right hand agency education
if you could please identify who
you are personally and you have
up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is Kevin
Shendo on education director for
the public in this and on behalf
of our governor to legal and the
tribal administration we
respectfully oppose Senate bill
one forty eight a lot of the
things have been mentioned today
but more the tribal and
representation of those
communities directly impacted by
the Yazzie Martinez case is a
big one and also that
Some of these remedies have
already been determined by local
communities and key stakeholders
from these respective
communities and those should be
promoted and highlighted.
I think it's.
Be on time all that actually
used to be taken and
respectfully you know we're not
asking to be safer to be made
into another study but our
communities need to be in power
to directly make the impacts and
changes that are needed to
positively affect education but
then not only are tribal
communities but also the under
represented communities
throughout the state and so with
that the public strongly opposes
Senate bill one forty eight.
Great thank you.
All right madam vice chair.
Naturally okay we'll continue on
president.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Preston center I am indigenous
justice attorney for the ACLU of
New Mexico and on behalf of the
ACLU we oppose this bill as
drafted for the simple fact of
the proposed diversity
commission does not adequately
represent the indigenous voice
now as you all know as members
of this committee members of the
state legislature adequate
representation matters so there
are twenty three tribal nations
in New Mexico including a very
large Navajo Nation nineteen
pueblos and three Apache nations
get this legislation allows for
only up to for tribal leaders to
participate I suspect that that
that one of those members would
represent the entire Navajo
Nation one member would
represent all nineteen problems
and possibly to members with
Representative three Apache
nations.
Not to mention there's no
description of any requirement
for school district leaders to
be part of this from those
school districts that serve
predominantly native children
now the Yazzie Martinez case
highlights a devastating history
in which the United States
attempted to terminate native
culture native identity in
native languages using education
as its economic and that history
still affects tribal communities
today so to avoid repeating
history it is absolutely
necessary that native children
who are subject to the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit have adequate
representation of tribal leaders
native experts and community
folks at the table making those
decisions that will affect your
future and for that reason Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you so you
oppose this legislation and asks
that this committee legislation
in a way that provides for
adequate representation of New
Mexico's indigenous people thank
you.
Right thank you.
All right so we'll go to.
Laurie.
Morning learning.
Two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Laurie Martinez of the
executive director of engaged
Mexico Dona Ana County and we
are the primary support
organization for the success
partnership which is focused on
local educational outcomes we
also stand in opposition to the
bill as currently written many
of stated we can't afford to
have a complacent timetable
around getting it's very
comprehensive plan in place
particularly when judge
singleton's really make clear
the state was to act immediately
and urgently the bill is written
undermines the judge's ruling
the time line of particularly at
a time when the state will face
the challenge of recovering from
a pandemic as well the bill as
currently written duplicates
work already done by
stakeholders have been involved
in education transformational
years and understand the context
and needs in New Mexico
education particularly around
the students AT lawsuit.
to the most at risk English
language learners native low
income students but the students
of color especially at on that
note the make of the
commission's not reflected their
priority around the students
And around those communities we
cannot just hope that the makeup
of the commission adequately
prioritises the needs of the
students that intentionally
requiring that it does so the
subcommittees may help with that
but it's not clear in the bill
as currently written there's no
requirement to engage local
communities around the needs and
solutions and this bill seems to
continue with the peace and all
kind of just find an approach
that we have seen and the
response the lawsuit the
commission is charged with a
long term vision plan version of
the plan with goals action steps
and accountability metrics but
there's no
clear accountability structure
process outlined in the bill for
insuring that the commission
does just that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right so go to jasmine.
More welcome back to as many of
up to two minutes.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is jasmine yep
by and I represent the tribal
education like ends we
respectfully stand in opposition
to the bill as written the bill
overlooks the urgency of the
situation in our state and the
need to fix our public education
system now other groups have
already done this same work they
have looked at the decision
order the fact the findings of
fact and conclusions of law from
the Yazzie Martinez K. as
guiding posts to make policy
recommendations the tribal
remedy framework also aligns
itself with the lawsuits
documents as well as the Indian
Education Act it's time for our
state to adequately fund these
plans that have already been
created that so many have worked
on and the plans endorsed by the
twenty three nations tribes and
pueblos for these reasons the
tribal education allowing its
must respectfully oppose this
legislation or ask that the
committee make the necessary
amendments for it to go forward
thank you.
Right thank you.
Steve.
Good morning Stevie of up to two
minutes please good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
Steve see ideas and the New
Mexico government relations
director on behalf of our
members we thank the sponsor for
offering an approach to the
pressuring issues of Yazzie
Martinez however we oppose this
bill in its current form the
bill though well intended Laxey
impetus and diverse city of key
stakeholders that our students
educators and community members
the man in approaching the issue
of a just and equitable public
education system.
Perhaps without intent the bill
reinforces a top down approach
and prolongs an urgent solution
to Yazzie Martinez.
For now we cannot support this
bill and asked that this
committee consider making the
changes to the bill as expressed
by the public we can do better
and we need to do better for
students thank you for.
Thank you.
The minutes late the
You have up to two minutes
welcome.
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee my name is Mattis
late them I am the project
manager for transform education
New Mexico the transform into K.
New Mexico coalition
respectfully stands in
opposition Senate bill one forty
eight as currently drafted we
agree that this state needs a
comprehensive plan for education
but Senate bill one forty eight
is missing critical components
and next steps to get us there
instead the commission creates
another body the could slow down
important work that is already
progressed it also lacks the
authority or power to ensure
adequate funding and
implementation steps living the
same problems that have plagued
the education system for decades
in our state.
Our state local and community
experts already know what is
needed to provide our students
with the education they deserve
this commission does not need to
study the problems any further
the commission needs to build on
work already done such as the
tribal remedy framework.
In twenty twenty created
collectively by tribal leaders
community members and indigenous
education experts transformation
cation New Mexico twenty twenty
platform of action created by
local education advocates using
community members learning
policy institute twenty twenty
improving education The New
Mexico Way New Mexico voices
kids count report twenty twenty
the tribal education alliance
pathways to education
sovereignty taking a stab for
native children twenty twenty
and the current working draft of
the Public Education
comprehensive plan twenty twenty
one foundational work has
already been done it has been
almost three years since Yazzie
Martinez ruling it is time to
bring the state New Mexico
Public Education Department and
critical stakeholders including
the Yazzie Martinez plaintiffs
to the table to create a
preliminary joint plan to
resolve the lawsuit and a plan
that provides a framework for
planning funding and sets the
course of on going
implementation work the key to
building a better education
system for New Mexico is to
build community trust we need a
diverse group of community
property said there was two
minutes thank you.
All right Adrian.
Good morning Adrian up to two
minutes please good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
all agents on the line director
Center for the education study
of diverse populations for me
working toward equity is part of
the commission is a silent
effort or we can very easily
just say oh that's that's that
group's responsibility we should
not allow the sense of urgency
we feel wrong as Martinez to get
in the way of how complex and
systemic this work really is
this bill treats the notion of
diversity equity and excellence
is a series of tools strategies
and recommendations versus a
whole person our system change
processing to culture identity
and you it's not about simply
recommending equity is about all
of us living in for these and
other reasons I oppose SB one
forty eight is drafted thank
you.
Right thank you.
Vernon.
Good morning learning you have
up to two minutes.
Chairman Romero members of the
committee
Just moments earlier on one of
the other bills she's not a bill
eighty my name is Vernon Lujan
and president of the task public
board of education and after
reviewing the legislation as
proposed we can not.
Supported we are in opposition
of it
I do want to thank
Representative Stapleton for
acknowledging the some of the
shortcomings of this bill she
mentioned earlier at the outset
of this hearing and tension to
amend that to address those
issues but
in about it further I feel like
she this was an afterthought
and.
Where again applying a band aid
to the problem I want to make
sure that
You know we are hurt yes has
urged the state through its
public education department to
take immediate steps to adopt
policies to address the systemic
deficiencies and educational
equities identified by the
Yazzie Martinez case and for all
the reasons that my colleagues
have given and for the fact that
we still feel.
Representative.
Our system hello I appreciate it
the committee is both to run not
pass this bill thank you for
your support have a good day.
Thank you very much.
All right some tree.
Good morning some tree of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is some
GPO Gee I am yes loan program
and the code that I am the
mother of to special needs
children a parent advocate and
member of the Aztec Indian
Education Committee.
For all of the reasons stated
before me regarding the time
table in the chapel
Representative to lack of tribal
representation of a twenty three
tribes nations and peoples of
New Mexico
I also know want to note that SB
one forty eight also Max Boyce
from what I've read there's only
one spot for period into me this
drowns out and does not honor
the struggles of voices
especially during this last year
good policy cannot be created
without all the voices at the
table when equity councils were
created I was so excited me and
other parents were so excited
and expressed written interest
become part of that effort
however the outcome was school
administrators wearing hats that
should be voices of parents in
order to meet certain mandates
in my experience
where I serve on Indian
Education committees for the
last five years there is little
to no presence of school
administrators board members
At these meetings so the
emphasis
So my so my emphasis is that
this commission would lack
True parent voice in the
experiences and struggles that
we go there I appreciate the
work of the sponsor of this bill
ask for and maintenance to
consider to parent voice tribal
representation and the timetable
I oppose this
Bill as it is written thank you
for your time and your service.
Thank you.
To Alyssa.
Morning or state of up to.
Good morning Chairman
representative my name is Alyssa
Chavez loan and the education
director for the public simply
be we respectfully oppose this
legislation as written urge this
committee to amend SB one forty
eight the tribal remedy
framework was developed with a
very diverse group of community
experts in various educational
feels and included parents
students and community voices
framework outlines clear steps
that can be taken to address the
vast inequities experienced by a
majority of students of all
cultures in New Mexico our
children cannot wait five more
years to receive the education
they have a right to receive so
they have a chance to pursue
higher education training or
employment secure in the
knowledge they came to the
public schools.
The committee has proposed now
leaves out critical stakeholders
such as tribal leaders Hispanic
leaders and African American
leaders and also.
Representation by us school
leaders from the districts that
serve diverse populations.
In order to be truly
representative of the
of the communities in New Mexico
that are impacted by the current
education system this bill needs
to be amended in order for it to
gain support by our community.
So for now we do respectfully
oppose this legislation thank
you for your time.
Thank thank you.
Norman.
Welcome back there many of up to
two minutes.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Norman
creek in the former governor of
governor for the pueblo of Zuni
I currently work at the
university of New Mexico Center
for native American health is a
tribal relations years on I'm
also here on behalf my
grandchildren my
As as a parent and also as a
mentor and the student our and
with all due respect to Senator
Stewart for initiatives that
she's trying to do with the this
bill I cannot stand in support
and for all that has already
been said.
I stand in support of their
testimony this morning an Irish
to committee to either consider
a do not pass or to make
amendments to Senate bill one
forty eight thank you very much.
Great thank you.
All right.
Jeremy.
Good morning Jeremy of a.
We're chair members of the
committee German thank you
speaking on behalf of governor
to every of Senator bubble I
also serve as chairman of the
Education Committee for the all
public council of governors
Senator opposes this bill as
written as many of my colleagues
to set the urgency is lacking
and does not contain adequate
representation of tribal
communities or other
marginalized communities
identified in as it Martinez we
do believe that there have been
precedents set for
representation through the
Indian Education Act Hispanic
Education Act and even the
bilingual teachers by legal
multi cultural Education
Advisory Council that was passed
by this committee in house bill
fifty two earlier this our
session with that you know
before we look at creating new
laws you know as you as you
Martinez said we need to adhere
to the laws have already been
created you know with that
Senator public public houses
built right in and ask for
minutes thank you chair.
Trump great thank you.
We will go to.
Elisabeth.
Good morning with you about two
minutes please.
Good morning my name is
Elizabeth and a canny and the
director of education at less
than you would center.
I just want to our echo many of
the comments of my colleagues
here today the time line laid
out by this bill of five years
does not reflect the urgency of
making changes in response to
the LFC martini Martinez ruling.
Additionally state local
community experts have already
identified necessary changes and
solutions and the tribal remedy
framework endorsed by all twenty
three tribes and pueblos and
it's transformed Education New
Mexico platform.
Rather than a commission to
studies systemic issues need to
fund and fully implement the
strategies already established
in honor of the groundwork laid
by community and tribal leaders.
In order for this bill to
reflect the expertise of local
leaders and the urgency of
fixing systemic issues it must
be amended.
What food center opposes this
legislation is drafted and urged
committee to amend this thank
you.
Thank you.
All right so we will go to the
doctor Sanchez Griego.
Good morning.
Good morning chair members of
the committee Karen Sanchez
Griego superintendent to the
Independent School District
respectfully stands in
opposition of Senate bill one
forty eight due to what some of
our colleagues have already said
the concerns of the the
committee not being diverse
enough it lacks adequate
representation by community of
color especially as CENIC
African American tribal
communities that are most
impacted by the court's ruling
representation of the community
as well of I'm sorry of the
committee also needs more
parents and families as spoken
to by one of the parents earlier
on this committee
we strongly urge the committee
to amend the bill I do want to
thank you for allowing me to
speak this morning.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to Claudia
Act Valeria.
Good morning you have up to
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman.
My name is Claudia being only
needs are representing he could
have to nation.
Well we do not support SB one
point eight as as it is written
and as stated by my colleagues
on the lack of diversity.
we respectfully ask that you
consider the time when the
framework which has been worked
on by.
Members of the twenty two
nations tribes and bubbles.
And we support like I mentioned
we do not support this bill
thank you.
Right thank you.
All right.
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty.
Please.
Hello good morning again on Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Lisa deal
and I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center online poverty and
a member of the legal team for
the Yazzie plaintiffs in the
Yazzie Martinez case
unfortunately respectfully we
continue to oppose this bill we
stated our concerns about this
legislation in previous
committees and unfortunately
most of our of them remain
unaddressed most critically we
need a comprehensive plan that's
developed by the PED in place
this.
We see this is the fastest and
best way to reach a resolution
in the lawsuit and foundational
to overhauling the education
system we believe this is what
creates a collective ownership
of the path forward and enters a
high quality plan that addresses
the needs of all four categories
of at risk students protected by
the court's orders in the case
unfortunately we do not believe
this bill will result in that
plan.
But instead will create division
and only delayed action by many
years time our students just
don't have.
This is been a concern we have
wasted every opportunity.
Expressed by other organizations
here today about the membership
and the for better
representation on the commission
are also concerns we share for
these reasons we propose a spell
thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
So we will come to committee
first on my list is
Representative Williams
Stapleton.
Then for later please.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman and senator still what.
I'm.
I have a question.
I'm.
I think.
Mr Lujan that made a
presentation.
Thought I was the one
Carrying the bell I guess but
I'm.
My question is.
With all the advocates and the
groups the stakeholders and
interested parties.
That this commission will
represent.
Seems to be propose in.
The there were there were that
bail the way it is.
Written and presented so did you
hear all of these opposition so
this piece of legislation in the
Senate and all the advocates
common for making these
statements that that have made
today especially the ones that
will be.
I'm directly affected by this
piece of legislation.
And if you did did you adhere to
any of their changes of
recommendations that they
requested.
Mr chairman and representative
a good question
I did meet with a transform New
Mexico and some tribal leaders
Regis Pecos
Tricia lay some the changes we
made were to ensure that for the
for tribal leaders among the for
tribal leaders one of them would
be chosen as vice chair
I put in place the the
commission would have to first
go over the plans that have been
presented to us transform New
Mexico tribal remedy and the PED
strategic plan I put in place
that there would have to be
subcommittees formed at cover
anyone that was not mentioned as
a membership in the commission
as you thank you see it's it's
very hard to set up a commission
that everybody is happy about
and I certainly did not here
all the all the tribal leaders
in the Senate.
Come out against the bill I
don't you know there's fourteen
percent of the commission now
our tribal leaders
Mr chairman with so much
opposition to this I'm fine for
you just table the bill and we
can move on.
All right.
If if that's so wish Senator we
do have I move Representative.
All right so there's a motion to
table
thank you madam secretary if
you'd call the roll on a table
in motion.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield it.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative figure or off.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative plenty.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes I'd like to expand my both.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Vice chairwoman Garrett.
And chairman Romero.
Yes twelve to zero.
All right so it's been table
Representative Williams
Stapleton to explain Oakley's
first Mr Chairman the advocates
and stakeholders
I'm not likely mostly interested
in canceling out the concept of
a commission they they want the
changes and they want the
They want their representation
being heard in the direct man of
that would affect them and so
based on that I I was hoping
that that that Matt Madam pro
temp would have.
We willing to continue working
with them to change our.
On it that would create an
atmosphere of agreement with the
community at large and the
people that are interested in it
but the madam chair Madam pro
temp said table the bail and so
based on that it is stable thank
you Mr chairman.
So Mr Chairman can I respond
Senator please.
You know I've I've been working
on this for three years.
it's just very difficult to
please everyone we put for
tribal leaders and their you can
have a commission that sixty
people so you know we tried as
hard as we could I just don't I
don't think you know the
commissioner's post that was
supposed to come to the
legislature every year certainly
wasn't going to think that it
was going to take five years but
no matter how much I tried to
explain this it's still not not
good enough for a huge majority
so you know I I'm I could I
could just turn it into an
entire a tribal commission
that's that's what you would get
if you had every tribe and every
reservation that's twenty three
members but it's only twenty
eight members I was trying to
have everyone impacted so if you
read it you know there's.
There's not enough room for
everybody which is why we then
did the sub committees and
required those subcommittees so
I'm I'm very disappointed but I
just don't believe that I can
amend it to the point where I
will make make all these people
happy I don't know how else to
amended I could add another
tribal leader or to you know
once you get six or seven you
know then you know you've got a
commission that's that's a
little big
you know good commissions really
have twenty five or fewer so I I
just don't see what the options
are now this late in the game
when I put the new amendments on
their for ensuring that tribal
leader would be a vice chair
requiring the subcommittee's
requiring the committee to the
commission to come forward every
year to talk about the adequacy
of funding and what the
legislature is doing that's
really the focus when I required
the commission to first go over
the tribal remedy the transform
New Mexico the PED strategic
plan when I made all those
changes then I lost about half
of my support in the Senate so I
just don't feel like I can
please everyone I just don't
think that's possible I would
like to do it I met with
transform and as I say Regis
Pecos and Patricia they had
three or four pages of
amendments I took as many of
those decide order of I also
think that people just don't
trust
that a commission like this you
had I felt like I had to have at
the business community the
business community has ideas
they have funding they won.
To help us with our education
system yes they're not tribal
there there's plenty of tribal
businesses so I just I just feel
like they're with this kind of
opposition which I did not hear
in the Senate that there's not a
path forward I wish there were I
wish there was a simple solution
there is not a simple solution
so I I'm just trying to put all
of us out of our mystery and put
the bill aside.
Representative Trujillo to
explain her about yes thank you
Mr chairman thank you Senator
pro tem Stewart
you and I have worked on a
variety of different things for
many many years one of the
things that I felt that we've
always struggled with this
trying to get this huge
conglomerate of of people
together to to try to work
differences out and try to move
forward and many times I mean
over the last thirty years that
I've been involved thirty five
years not all of them have
worked we try to bring a lot of
people together and the outcome
seems to be a lot of busy work
sometimes with no actual
solutions and with this
particular bill.
I know.
As we move forward to try to
ensure that there is true not
just equality but equity.
There aren't going to be enough
people at the table as you heard
today and and I felt missing
twelve the players because we
want to be more inclusive we
want to ensure that everyone
gets a fair shake that you made
the right decision to move to
table it I was going to move
move it anyway tabling it just
because there's so much non
support but I appreciate that
you brought it we live send and
we just need to think of a
different way to bring people
together because in the past you
know has it worked so I thank
you for bringing it has allowing
us to have that discussion thank
you Mr chair.
Great thank you thank you
Senator Stewart.
All right so we will bring in.
Senator souls.
Been waiting patiently.
Mr chair.
Chairman there you are welcome
please when you're ready thank
you
all I'm trying to that still got
it will be going on on the other
committee let me get completely
with you
thank you the I'm here to
present I believe it's Senate
bill forty three.
That right yes Sir that is
correct thank you you are not
just.
In mind and body.
Thank you Senate bill forty
three is a bill that comes from
the New Mexico facilities
authority and the public school
capital outlay commission of as
many of you are most of you know
The New Mexico facilities
authority is responsible for all
of our school buildings up for
new construction for maintenance
of those working with districts
on keeping the buildings in good
order for children this
particular bill is almost the
exact opposite it's not about
building schools it's about
tearing them down and I've been
teased a little bit how can you
be an educator when you want to
tear down school buildings and
certainly that's not the intent
of this for many many districts
they have old buildings that are
no longer functionally usable
but because they.
Still require that the district
ensure them do some maintenance
on them do security on those
buildings they are trained on
the the general fund of those
districts what this bill does is
it makes the demolition of
buildings that have been deemed
by the district and with the
approval of the New Mexico
facilities authority and the
public school capital outlay
commission provides for full
funding for the demolition of
those buildings I pooled funding
beating that there is no
requirement for the state local
match up for districts to get
the money to do the demolition
on their own operate buyers that
they go out to their community
for a bond issue and it's hard
to pass a bond issue to tear
something down and so what this
does is it helps districts get
those unused buildings that they
are happy to pay insurance costs
and other costs get them off of
the rules so that they are no
longer a drain on the general
fund or on their operational
funding and grant allows monies
to be freed up to go back into
the classroom and so that's what
this bill does and I'd be open
for any questions.
Great thank you chairman so we
will go to the attendees list is
anybody in support of Senate
bill forty three.
Right.
We we make good morning you have
a to two minutes welcome.
Chairman good morning thank you
so much really more tisa
representing the New Mexico
school board association Mr
Chairman our membership supports
this legislation the state of
New Mexico currently has seven
hundred fifty thousand square
feet of all buildings around the
state and box of fourth of those
twenty five percent or districts
have these vacant buildings it
is not cost effective for school
districts to hold and maintain a
vacant abandoned facilities that
are under utilized and have no
practical use the passage of
this legislation will allow
school districts to save
operational funds as a sponsor
mention that are currently being
used to insure vacant buildings
and shift those dollars into the
classroom towards the education
of our children where they
belong New Mexico the school
board association supports
expanding the eligibility
provided for school districts
and this particular bill we
thank the sponsor for bring in a
forward we ask this committee to
look at.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank thank you.
All right so go to Chris good
morning Chrissy of up to two
minutes welcome good morning
members the committee Chris
balls on a on the register
lobbyist with Los crucis public
schools we are one of those many
districts that were described
previously by the school board
association testimony and we
appreciate the sponsoring this
piece of legislation this is
going to help our school
district all region with for
several of our buildings but
also again shifting the dollars
to the right direction and
bringing accountability and also
helping us save funding and it's
something that we really need to
the so we appreciate the
sponsoring this to help our
state thank you so much.
Right thank you.
Others in support.
All right opposition to Senate
bill forty three.
All right we will come to
committee committee members
comments questions concerns.
Mr chairman.
Yes.
Both well jinx all right so
right Representative doubt I
will give you to do pass in the
second by Representative
Trujillo Majority Leader
Stapleton please Mr Chairman
Senator souls this the buildings
that would be taken down
would be in agreement with the
school districts state sending
the request how would this work
with their requests go through
to the DFA's state saying these
other buildings that we would
like taken down what's the
process would be.
Mr chair and and Representative
that's exactly right the school
district would have to certify
these are buildings that are no
longer in use they nobody wants
to buy them they for all
practical purposes are abandoned
and just a drain on the local
district The New Mexico
facilities authority and the
public school capital outlay
commission would have to agree
that yes this these buildings
don't have practical use whether
questions came up in the Senate
on a similar thing is what if
it's a historic building out
that would not fall under this
people would not be trying to
abandon a building that had
historical significance there
that would still have some form
of use and so this is where
everybody is agreed that these
are just a drain on the district
in on insurance costs and bus
they would qualify for pool
funding through the the public
school capital outlay commission
and not require the state local
that.
Mr chairman and senator chairman
sold is that
Is this what the school district
who would pay for the taking
down of the buildings would it
be the school districts
themselves that would provide
the funding to the commission of
the commission would be the one
I'm guaranteeing the funding to
take them down.
Mr chair and and Representative
that's why there is no state
local match all of that would
come from the public school
capital outlay Commission The
New Mexico finance authority.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you chairman sells.
Great thank you other questions.
All right so we have a due pass
motion by Representative Dow the
second by Representative
Trujillo is there any opposition
to the past motion.
Okay I will miss your picture
there Representative Baldonado
is you giving the four horsemen
sign.
Okay I don't know if anybody
watches professional wrestling.
In reference okay so looks like
it anyway all right Senator
souls you have a do pass motion
are you have a do pass on Senate
bill forty three.
Thank you title as the educator
wants to tear down schools
continues thank you Sir Hey
we're ready for you over
incentive that you get there
yeah just not my bills all
right.
All right so that concludes our
meeting for today everybody
thank you all you could probably
expect another eight o'clock
meeting on Wednesday
as we have plenty of Senate
bills since you all have seen
making their way over that we're
gonna be working with
but with that being said have a
nice rest of your day we'll see
you all on Wednesday well on the
floor leader but when zinc
Committee by regular today.
