Madame chair I I have a problem
with this we have.
Take audience
for comments and the audience
for comments and then a mandate.
Yes okay
I have one thing is there.
She's she's kind of on a role
today so I think she can handle
this
okay
all right now that we've got
that settlement representative
that a ficed your gear would you
put your bill on the table
thank you man of chair and
committee the senate joint
resolution nine would require a
constitutional amendment to go
to the people if past just to
let you know a headed time so
it's a joint resolution it
proposes in amendment to article
twelve of the constitution of
new mexico which totally refers
to everything education by
repealing section six and adding
a new section six to replace the
public education commission
which we currently have a ten
member board with a state school
board to set policy have control
management in direction of
distribution of square funds and
financial accounting for all
public schools as provided by
law and to direct the public
education and a few highlights
section one a the state school
board and the public education
department are created the state
school board will determine
public square policy and career
and technical education policy
the board shout a point a
qualified experienced education
administrator to be known as the
superintendent of public
instruction who is subject to
the policies established by the
board will direct the operations
of the public education
department.
Ten insection b page two
ten members of the state school
board shall be elected for
staggered terms of six years not
four years six years is provided
by la
a board members shobby residents
of the state board district that
they are elected from and then
see five members of the state's
school board who shall be state
officers shall be nominated and
with the consent of the senate
appointed by the governor for
staggered terms also of six
years and there's some
qualifications about that in the
bill talks about vacancies and
in section e on page three after
the adoption of this amendment
all elected members of the state
school board shall be elected in
the twenty twenty sixth regular
election for staggered terms
section for public education
commission districts shall be
the state school board districts
until redistricted based on the
twenty thirty of federal census.
And
the public education the current
at that time the public
education commission shall
continue its powers and duties
until replaced by the elected
members of this state school
board on january first twenty
twenty seven and then just a
final reminder if the house pat
has been passed by the senate if
it's passed by the house of
representatives signed by the
governor it was been be
submitted to the people for
their approval or rejection the
next general election so that is
the bill and with that
madam chair we stand for
a public comment
I wondered how you're going to
do that right
so I would ask the audience do
we have anybody in favor of this
bill.
Do they have anybody opposed to
this legislation
okay we'll start with this
gentleman okay amount I
understand
that about ten minutes with the
testimony but i'm gonna try to
get it done in two minutes my
name is
I am the three time past
chairman of the great
and i'm here today as a
committee chair for its own
education representative
i'm really appreciate the
secretary of test
we respectfully oppose a joint
resolution house joint
resolution
we're extremely familiar with
this form of governance because
in two thousand great robert
chamber formed or land a
bluetooth and task force that
was made up of representatives
at the stage to take a look at
our education system in the
mexico because we felt like it
was failing a lot of students we
have been all about for the last
two decades trying to make sure
that all of our kids have an
opportunity a chance to succeed
in this world in a closing that
achievement so at that time we
formed this this task for excuse
me at that time in when governor
richardson was elected he
reached out because we had just
completed that study where we
learned a lot of things reform
ideas to the legislature and in
fact the legislature passed some
of them including increasing
teacher salaries and some other
things that we have worked very
hard for but one of the things
that that governor richardson
wanted was for us to help him
because at that time the state
school board was in was in real
trouble I mean there was it was
not work or schools dropped the
and there was a lot of issue and
again because i'm limited I
can't go into that but
we came back when we probably
said study it was called every
child and with regard to
governance what we learned in
governance was that.
When a school board is separated
from a particular area it is
very hard to govern in most
people across the united states
we're going to wait from this
type of form of government and
we we found that to be true and
and of course it was occurring
here in new mexico so
we we we health governor
past the constitutional
amendment.
That's my train
you're very eloquent but that's
how this two minutes ago we
thank you very much
okay my goodness could I say one
I actually was the last chairman
of that state school and I can
tell you that the idea is a
great one because you think
we're going to get all this
representative from all over the
state but it doesn't work that
way and we really need to be
focused on what's desperate kids
and this will be a major
disruption thank you thank you
very much.
Secretary.
Hi good morning madame chair
members of the committee i'm
elizabeth kaginski secretary for
the new mexico early travel
education and care department
the department opposes senate
joint resolution nine as amended
and urges a no vote removing the
public education department from
the governor's cabinet to an
elected an appointed stay hort
would create barriers to
consistent and effective
collaboration with other state
agencies and our twenty three
tribes
in mexico has established a
strong cradle to career
governance approached education
that is nationally recognized we
work to improve student now
comes and improve the pipeline
of educators from early
childhood through
easy ecd administers a robust
mix delivery for new mexico pre
k that honors in respects parent
choice by offering precaution
traditional public schools
charter schools community based
programs headstore family
childhood and tribal communities
easy ecd and ped work under the
leadership in direction of the
governor coordinating and
collaborating weekly to ensure
that all new mexico pre can had
start students received the high
quality education they walked
in july twenty twenty fourth
pretty six nineteen special edge
of court education coordinator
and it's related
responsibilities will transfer
from PED to easa ecd our
agencies have worked diligently
collaboratively to finalize an
move outlines each department's
roles and responsibility
ensuring that educators families
and pre school students with
special needs receive the
coordinated support and services
they need to try it is critical
to the success of our students
educators and families that are
states education system
continues at strong cradle to
career approach under the
leadership of the governor and
equitable and high quality
education system requires
effective collaboration removing
td from the governor's cabinet
to an elected appointed state
board would create barriers to
consistent and effective
collaboration with other state
agencies we urge anovo thank you
for your consideration thank you
secretary.
Yeah.
Good morning matter members of
the committee living there tease
representative then you mexico
association and the new mexico
association does not
position in this regard
we have not agreed on a
constitutional moment in the
past for the mixed close
commercial association now
believes that it is time to look
out and consider the possibility
and the benefits of a state
school for associated so we
thank you for the opportunity to
comment on this thank you
could I see how a shop.
Good morning madame chairman
members of the committee my name
is mandatories on the education
reform mexico
we seem to post to this bill
because we believe this it is
not the right solution for a
schools on our students while we
share in the frustration with
instability at the highest
levels of this system the
structure of the level farthest
remove the classroom is not
where our focus if you want to
get our students moving we must
focus on a level that's closest
are we providing adequate
cricket materials to teachers
the teachers have a support they
need and the form of human
resources like mental health
counselors behavior specials
certified nurses social workers
and highly trade principles and
superintendents have recreated
the best learning environments
in regard to class size and does
every student have a teacher
adequately trained and supported
in sell and culturally in
linguistically responsive
instruction it is at the
classroom level we can truly
make a difference.
And we need accountability for
such efforts when you spread the
accountability more people with
an elected board more politics
get in the way and we waste even
more precious time that our
students just simply do not have
bringing back and old system
that has already failed their
students once it's simply not
the answer we must move forward
with better ideas and more
accountability all of this
system thank you thank you very
much now a government to this
site again correct you show I
think.
Chair members of the committee
every
secretary I think made it
secretary and twenty twenty I
was hit across the face with HB
two fifty one higher education
coordinating council I spoke to
many of you I spoke to the
legislature I spoke to anybody
who would hear my voice they
said give me your show you the
improvements that we can m.
Within that year and now we have
increased college access to the
opportunity scholarship by
nearly seven percent over the
last year's more women students
the color pilgrim recipients are
worlding college more than ever
before the street new mexico
more high school students are
making the decision to stay in
new mexico more students are
staying in school from the fall
to spring semester under lottery
and opportunity crease the
reason rate since twenty
eighteen from forty one point
seven to thirty one point four
and the increase the total
number will work by nine percent
last year you gave me a point
that is my you gave me a chance
that's my point we have a new
public education secretary I
only have a hundred ten thousand
students twenty five thousand
facilities members have staff
and thirty two governing works
want to play that by three or
more
additionally we have to public
act a week.
Yeah.
The public education department
has a cabinet level agency is
key to entering a unified vision
and continued strategic
collaboration across only
childhood k twelve higher
education in the workforce
alternative altering these
government structures with peak
focus and resources away from
our agencies and crazy very
bureaucratic system for us to
work in.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Oh i'm sorry.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me here today my name is
are senior middle and the
correct cabinet secretary for
the public education.
I think everyone for been here
today especially my my appears
here that are make a my common
secretaries in education we have
been working extremely hard to
align the efforts that for our
students are crossed in mexico
you've heard cradle to career
and we are seeing that happen
now we've been able to see some
positive comes over this last
year i've been in this job now
for just about it and in this
time we be able to see some
alignment when it comes to
special education when it comes
to a literacy for a students
when it comes to innovation
zones when it comes to create
technical supports across the
all districts in new mexico.
I want to be able to have the
chance to be able to see my
goals happen I continue to
become a reality.
We've been able to see that that
some positive change over the
last year for i'm not anywhere
close to where we I want us to
be.
Because of the positive
relationships I have with my
fellow cabinet secretaries were
able to do that.
I am very concerned that if we
go back to a archaic way in
which we know results that
that's going to be it's going to
slow brown down products and if
in fact in some of the specs I
feel like this is purposeful to
be able to slow down progress
are forestroots of cross new
mexico we are
really supported by the work in
front of us because of martin is
we know what needs to happen and
it's hard work to do that I am
willing to be able to do that
i've been able to do this hard
work in multiple districts and
multiple sizes with multiple
students of color we students to
come in from poverty students
that are not having positive
outcomes and when I left they
had those positive outcomes I do
not I expect myself to be able
to do the same work here and
we're doing that so please allow
me to have that chance to do
that.
When I first kind of this job I
had so many wonderful
conversations with so many of
you on this on this committee
and other communities were you
challenged me to make sure that
students are coming to school
that we are implementing change
that you want to ensure count
abilities and ensure cooperation
between agencies that's
happening now allow me to be
able to finish that work thank
you so much thank you secretary
hands on this side.
Committee scott against the
definite secretary of the next
part of work for solution the
department of possibility or
nine energies and no vote on
this referendum.
Establishing a statement of
education to control the public
education department and replace
the governors authority because
incoherent and inconsistent
state key to all education
priorities policies funding and
governments I splintering
executive branch administration
causing far reaching negative
outcomes from early child
steve worth block the governor's
ability to provide the system
leadership messaging a priority
setting an education and
fractured states efforts to
support student success rating
your key twelve critical
connections to prescore higher
education and work worse
separately from the government
officer with silo hour
departments coordination
clappers
on important issues and support
students work for opportunity
career technical education free
kind of ships and high school
for a countly.
We've seen this problem in other
states were independent state
work that convinces
department to policy and funding
priorities different sometimes
conflict with the priorities of
other related departments
interim the states work on
crosscoming issues such as
preschool to kindergarten
transition dual credit programs
or pathways to job skills
harming students access to
cradle opportunities.
Green separately like to keep
twelve words unnecessary because
the legislator should self
appropriate check of the
governors no other mexican
apartment has a structure for
good reason state wars and other
states have further politicized
education governance because of
decent disagreement it's elected
members adding to confusion and
I can system see the people like
the governor to minister public
programs including education to
vike their policy direction the
state word or trying to
administration of education and
work force program slow in the
state's progress in success
we're to know about thank you.
Thank you so much.
Good morning
committee.
My name is working please accept
these comments of my personal
testimony and understanding i've
only been a member of the public
education commission.
For one year i.
And I can only say it's been a
wonderful example of a quality
public bike with selfless
community commitment to bringing
excellence to the charter school
model in new mexico.
I have heard personally
witnessed how much serious work
is involved.
In authorizing charter schools
it is rewarding to see our
efforts make a difference in
academic performance with
charter schools and how through
our efforts
boards and administrators are
unable to run their schools more
professionally I know our
commission is appreciated and
respected by the schools and
organizations that support
charter schools I know that the
charter school movement has
proven to be a highly effective
and efficient model for public
education I believe that
traditional public education
will be transformed by practices
proven in charter schools.
You all receive for me and the
amendment that was proposed by
the public education commission
to remain the authorizing body
for the states wanted to respond
as an independent commission
this man was not acceptable to
the.
Home legislative body so I was
recognized that there are many
considerations I personally
have are not within my personal
understanding but I must do that
if the PE c is dispanded.
And his duties were mandated to
the new school board it is this
legislature the responsibility
to ensure that charter schools
were given the support and
respect they deserve as the
remarkable asset they are to
public education.
It does seem ironic that we have
an example of a well functioning
public body and it needs to be
dissolved in order to propose a
new solution.
Surprise and I don't
specific recommendation I just
want to stay
easier than very hard and
diligent
thank you very much yes.
Chair members of the committee
my name is
I am a registered lobbyist or
excellent schools new mexico and
I read the set over twenty
charter schools throughout the
stated
we are in office session to this
bill because of the decided.
Our state charter schools have
loved being a part of that
institution because they have
given them direction they have
given them control and they have
given support they also have
disall charter schools that are
not functioning so we feel that
this pec.
Yes one of the issues that we
have concerning the resolution
and for that reason we do oppose
thank you
thank you.
Good morning madam chairman
committee
of new mexico kids can and like
many they have before has been a
four main concerns with the visa
legislation one we tried already
we literally had this model of
governance in the state as a
whole just twenty years ago
decided it wasn't working.
So as you've heard from me on
numerous occasions i'm certainly
extremely frustrated with the
lack of educational progress
that we've seen in our schools
across our districts over the
last years however I not I don't
think this is a solution that
will change that we have accord
instruction problem we don't
have a governance problem we
need to focus our time and
intention on the things that we
are going to make a difference
in the classroom and shifting
our government structure is not
going to do that then notice
thing is school where elections
have gotten extremely polarizing
over the last ten years more so
than they were even twenty
so taking the dynamics the first
thing playing out in our school
districts and in school
districts across the country and
assuming that this ten percent
elected board is going to be any
less political than the
environment we find ourselves in
today I think is frankly
crazy
you heard the comments about the
pc we have made her concerns
about what happens the
authorizing body who picks up
those responsibilities and I
think that once to the last
point which is this is an app
then discuss the early through
yellow se or with any researcher
study comprehensively over the
last year it moved very quickly
last year it's moving very
quickly this year and whether we
agree that it's a good solution
or not if we are going to change
the government structure of a
system that serves three hundred
thousand children we should take
some time we should study it and
we should research it more than
we have to this point thank you
thank you.
Madame chair members
matt paul with public charter
schools of new mexico we asked
that you pose a start the public
education commission as you've
heard their primary duty is to
authorize charters that's fifty
seven schools serving seventeen
thousand students.
They have to be the highest
performing schools in the state
when we look at low income
students in their proficiencies
up and down the list this is
true but all focus on one in
reading though income students
that charter schools have a
thirty six percent proficiency
rate versus thirty two percent
across other schools public
schools across the state the
party spends over thirty days
with the focus of managing the
these charter schools each year
and they do it a politically i'm
pretty sure they don't know what
which what letter goes after
their names when they get that
room and they're talking about
managing schools because the
focus is on student outcomes the
focuses on following the lock
not their personal preferences
she are nine will delete the
purpose of this group.
Of this body and the group of
schools that they serve as a
model for a state providing many
different models to attract
students with real
accountability for their results
the lack of focus in the school
board like politics that this
would bring it would kill a
showing star in a public
education system.
I'll reiterate the comments from
this arrogant minute ago this is
the biggest vote young bacon k
twelve education all session.
You showed that when you tackle
a complicated issue like
graduation requirements over the
entrant that you can come to
good solutions that are
generally agreeable.
It just passed instead of that I
assume that
so I think you could do the same
with this give it some time
given some thought give it some
discussion and you'll come to a
good solution about the
management of our state
education apart lastly I really
hope we're able to do public
input on wednesday as well there
are several key votes here for
them to not be able to hear this
and the those in support of this
I think would be a would be an
issue of just making sure
everything is there thank you
making it we are hearing a
public comment on the senate
joint resolution in nine of
those people who just came into
the room do we have anybody else
who would like to make AAA
comment.
Madame chairman members of the
committee thank you
for this metal to remember the
committee strong support for
central resolution nine stand
rounds for the school super
tenants of the college of
educational leaders.
We believe that we need to slide
a fire leadership have one
jeopardy in the leader positions
chairman we think it's important
to be some relief when we make
rules where there is electric
body that then would have to be
have the option to review and
make an approved those who come
from so for those reasons and a
very wooden basis and i'm sure
we stand to support that
thank you stan is there anybody
else in the room that would like
to make public on it.
Yeah.
Madame chairman members of the
community mame is bunny like
president of the mexico
coalition which case the leaders
also the current super of the
year we standard support of six
resolution nine I have just for
the fact of the penjulum swing
of political uh that can forest
in the mexico our students and
our districts are better than a
political pendulum return
there's a political shift we
feel like there's a change in
educators and our students are
just some stability we think the
assistant word might renew
stability thank you.
Right
point sounds like support
yes represent
give me a moment cos i'm still
gaining my bearings
representative.
The.
Okay
so we have hope they want
speaking opposition
online.
The.
Good morning mr chair can you
hear me we can please you have a
two minutes welcome
thinking as your chair members
of the committee my name is hope
moralism i'm the executive
director for teach plus new
mexico one new mexico see lots
of transition in the position of
secretary of education recently
this was not the case under
democratic governor richardson
or republican governor martinez
in fact under leadership of a
secretary of education under
each of these governors not a
state board new mexico students
demonstrated increases stood and
outcomes over a longer period of
time under governor richardson
fourth grade hispanic students
showed the longest period of
continuous growth on the
nation's report card nap between
two thousand three and two
thousand thirteen having a
twelve point increase from two
seventeen to two twenty nine
under governor martinez during a
time of rigorous expectations
and new accountability systems
by twenty eighteen eleven
thousand more student state wide
we're doing map on a great level
and thirteen thousand more
students were reading on a brain
level since twenty fifteen but
native american students
improving their reading results
more than any other group of
students these are examples of
strong consistent leaders who
work with urgency to develop
systems that meet the needs of
our students today and in the
future.
Under the current secretary
doctors in euromero a new effort
is being focused on responding
to our data and developing
systems of accountability and
support at every level we know
from our own past that students
can achieve at high levels and I
support the systems in place
today that can get us there I
asked that you give secretary
romaro and opportunity to lead
under the current system before
we go back thank you mister
chair.
Great thank you.
Okay so will go to patty good
morning patty you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you very much mister
chairman I paid to give some a
chair of public education
commission the public education
commission stands in strong
opposition of this resolution as
written the national association
of charter authorizers strongly
recommends every state create an
independent tradering board
which the PE c is there will be
eliminated with this resolution
as written absolutely no
authorizing means answering
commitment and capacity the
state school board will have
neither the p c has spent years
developing practices and
structures to carry out or
authorizing duties effectively
the commission has spent ears
working on developing strong
accountability and clear
expectations for state charters
based on national best practices
ensuring strong tribal
consultation is at the heart of
the peace role and procedure.
But for our schools and within
the pec itself this intentional
approach reflects our commitment
to fostering informal
connections and collaboration
this will be washed with this
resolution as ripped absolutely
authorizing means understanding
the responsibility of
establishing comprehensive
systems that monitors and
evaluate school performance and
compliance this is not
contemplated in the resolution
is written a state school board
will often have conflicts of
interest they're often prevent
them from fairly are adequately
performing their function as an
authorizer the pc's independent
nature leads it to more unbiased
results commissioners commit a
minimum of forty five days a
year in attending a minimum
meetings and working sessions
participating in improving
authorizing practices to
attendance at national
conferences and work on pec sub
committees as an additional
thirty days no state school
board member will have capacity
to do this the pec strongly
urges
review of this and a separation
of the pec and a state school
board once again we urge a no
vote on this thank you for your
time.
Thank you
married.
Good morning married if you have
up to two minutes
mister chairman members of the
committee and bear its major
speaking on behalf of the legal
and voters and american
association of university women
and we're speaking and support
of s j r nine I hope that i'm
not I didn't miss it I was in
the senate education committee
and and if I have
the wrong time please forget me
that it's okay we think it's
very very important to have a
school board with the only
statement nation without one
and we can learn so much by
having
learning from other states that
have strong boards including
massachusetts model we have they
have charged scores public
charter schools like we do
there's lots to be learned by
being part of
having a school board that works
with they would have
subcommittees working on charter
sports is nothing that would
would limit the charter schools
and we don't need just a public
education commission only
looking at charter scores when
you have eighty nine districts
and you have fifty public
estate charter schools it's
disproportionate to have
see the house such as small
scope of responsibility while we
don't have something for the for
the masters and for the
basically the eighty nine
districts I think have forty
five fifty charter score so
let's get the public education
commission bribed and let's have
a school board to go back to
being
what most states the high
performing states all have
strong school boards thank you
great thank you so looks like
we've taken a mix but others in
support.
I don't see another handed and
assistance order opposition will
take comments widely online
doing once
why.
The.
Yeah.
Alright so seeing nobody else in
supporter opposition we will
come to committee so
representative of our career.
I have you on a list
of mr chair just to clarify um
we understood that since the
sponsors weren't here that we
were going to entertain
discussion from the audience and
that we would refrain from
discussion and they are self so
could you clarify where we're
going with this that's a good
question because I was out on
since we have senator nevel I
think represent lane was in
another committee we can do that
will roll it we're probably
gonna start at eight in the
morning on wednesday so that we
can do questioning with the
members because everybody was
everywhere this morning arm in
the sponsors so our sponsor
would like to roll it until
wednesday eight in the morning
so the other question mister
chair thank you for that
clarification the other question
that came up was um whether we
would there were individuals
that weren't able to make it for
the
their presentation pro con and
the question remained because
they were in other committees as
well would you still be
entertaining any audience input
at that point no cause we've
heard audience employed it's
been customary that we have
audience input and then we come
to committee for the bill thank
you I just wanted to raise the
certain that were race before
that answers.
All right other comments
questions concerns so like I
mentioned we're gonna have a
quite a full agenda
and we will have eight o'clock
on wednesday so we'll start
right nearly yeah I can see the
happy faces yeah hey maybe maybe
we stay after the floor come
directly off the floor I don't
know I don't know some members
I don't know what's up
oh no year welcome to represent
please all right or seven am
i'll look at that
representative
mr chair can we think chris was
annoyed for bringing food this
morning it was really
appreciated great thank you all
right so we will see you all on
