Representative Chatfield
here Representative is up here.
Representative gorilla here.
Representative Herrerra here.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Madrid.
Representative more about my.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo here.
madam vice chair here and Mr
chairman here all right good
morning again everybody
Representative brown house bill
one eighty nine welcome yes
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
it's good to be here this
morning on a Friday that sounds
good to me that of Mr chair and
members of this house bill one
eighty nine and I have with me
this morning David Archuleta of
sitting at the table he is the
executive director of the
educational retirement board so
he's the expert what this bill
does Mister chair and members is
Amanda some state statute to
allow employees eligible
employees of southeast New
Mexico college to participate in
the alternative retirement plan
when the college was designated
it the recent legislation as an
independent college this is one
of those little of loose ends
that we we dealt with the main
part of just the independence
move but this is something that
we need to do for the employees
of the college so they have that
attention option and then the
second part of the bill is
conforming what we do in state
statute to the federal fire just
rule on when minimum
distributions need to be taken
out of pension fund so Mister
chair I do have an amendment I
and I just that to the committee
has that please give us a moment
while gets past please.
Thank you.
All right if we're moving on at
this point all entertaining
motion on the amendment please.
House Bill amendment for.
Sorry move the amendment what's
still one four of four for
discussion our great thank you
Representative Trujillo any
opposition all right please Mr
chair and members what this
amendment does is just straight
section one of the bill that is
that was dealing with some
contract matters and we decided
just to take that out of the
bills simplify things so that's
what that amendment does start
section one all right thank you
so we're on discussion of the
amendment.
Strike that section any
discussion on the amendment I
move the adoption of the
amendment all right so we have
adoption of the amendment by
Representative care second by
Representative Ezzell is there
any opposition to adopting the
amendment thing nine you have an
amended bill thank you back to
the bill itself as amended yes
thank you Mr chair second as Mr
chair what if you'd like to
explain in detail anything good
morning Mr chairman and members
the committee just briefly.
The the bill is now doing two
things the first of which is it
is that in the southeast New
Mexico college to list of
eligible participants that are
eligible to participate in the
alternative retirement plan the
educational retirement board is
responsible for administrative
both the defined benefit plan
for the vast majority of
employees but they also offer an
alternative retirement plan we
refer to as the ahrp which is a
defined contribution plan that
applies to certain high level
administrators at the
universities and colleges of
here here in New Mexico it
provides a little bit more
portability for those people are
gonna spend a lot of time in the
educational system and as as
mentioned when the southeast
Mexico college broke off from
New Mexico state those folks
that were participating in this
since they were not specifically
name in statute were exempted
from being able to participate
in the our plan so this now
corrects that the second part
that it did as you probably
recently read as part of some of
the retirement changes that are
taking place or the rules of our
retirements at the federal level
increase that minimum
distribution age in a primarily
applies to people who
participate in a defined
contribution plan from seventy a
half up to seventy two that
agent with a seventy three in
ten years it automatically
boosts seventy five and got it
god only knows will happen
between now that time and
whether not that will increase
but with that instead of having
to come back it's time to sync
up our language because we're
already following the federal we
would just simply reference that
section of the IRS guidelines so
it would automatically changes
that goes with that Mr chairman
and stand for any questions Mr
chair just other of some little
minor cleanup of things in the
bill for example on page eight
the existing language talks
about northern New Mexico state
school and we've for suggesting
strictly were state schools
putting in the work college so I
think that's it timely changes
well we stand for questions Mr
chair thank thank you so much
for your presentation we will go
to opposition first so anybody.
Online if you would if you're in
opposition to house bill one
eighty nine as amended please
indicate by raising your hand.
Those in the audience opposition
to house bill one eighty nine as
amended please indicate by
raising your hand give it some
wait time well you'll consider.
Thank you change your opinion or
not okay so we'll go to support
if you're in support of house
bill one eighty nine amended
online please indicate by
raising your hands.
All right so those of you online
will hold off on you will come
back please keep your hand
raised if you wish to speak I'll
go to my right hand side those
in support.
All right so those of you that
have been in house education
already know you have up to two
minutes but less is always more
that please we'll start in the
front welcome.
The superintendents we support
this is coming up.
There's also recognize changes
happening Carlsbad when Mexico
state Carlsbad became now this
is very important.
And also northern New Mexico.
The name changes are particular
stations and most importantly
this gives a second one fix for
good with online federal so and
allows term funded meet those
requirements so for those
reasons we support I think thank
you all right we'll go to the
next for please welcome you have
up to two minutes.
Yeah and members of the
committee I am sure read also
I'm a retired.
representing the New Mexico
association of educational
retirees and on behalf of all
the retired educators in New
Mexico we stand in support of
this bill and
Great thank you so much please
welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is
Representative registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
educators at retired educators
and we do support this bill we
think the sponsor for bringing
it and this is discussed and I
talk and
brought up during the interim
and so we feel that this bill is
really important to get passed
because it does do a lot of
cleanup for the bill so thank
you very much right thank you
please have up to two minutes
welcome chairman and members of
the committee Richard role metal
Representative in the New Mexico
association of retired people we
support this bill.
Thank thank you all right we'll
go to the next order those and
support house bill one eighty
nine as amended well that's not
quite the next for Vanessa.
But keep going anybody else in
the next for a.
R. eight thousand a day more on
euro welcome.
Thank you Mr chair committee of
men at the NASA Hawker executive
director for the New Mexico
independent community colleges
we thank the sponsor executive
director actually let for
bringing this bill we strongly
supported as Representative
brown said that this is cleanup
for those members that used to
be able to participate in the
alternative retirement plan
currently can't thank you very
much we appreciate it right
thank you doctor Hawker all
right anybody else in my right
hand side that was speaking
support I will go to my left
hand side does wish to speak in
support house bill one eighty
nine as amended.
Not seeing any money okay so we
go online we have Russell good
morning wrestle here with us you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Morning Mr chair my name is
Russell golf on the executive
director of the New Mexico
association of education towers.
We believe this bill will
greatly assist the agency.
As I move forward archer support
with this claim that bill house
bill one eighty nine we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward thank you very much
thank thank you for joining us.
All right I don't see any other
hands so we have to committee
Representative Ezzell your first
on my list please Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Brown it's good
to see your with this bill I
like the language that you've
used clean it up I do have a
couple of questions of.
As far as our branch colleges
such as the NM you.
The name you Russell ENMU rid us
I would fall under that just
even though they're not named in
this bill but because their
directly employees of eastern
New Mexico university is that
correct.
Madam chair Mr chair that can
answer that force Mr Chairman
representative is all that is
correct okay that's what I
wanted clarified my second
question is Mr Chairman
representative brown of color to
the southwest and hops American.
I don't see it listed in the
hear what major university do
that follow under or are they
sales self standing.
Mr chair representative is L. I
do not know the answer to that
question you're right that that
I don't recall
Them being on.
The list so I would I would have
to get back to I apologize okay.
You Mr on such as thank you my
friend are.
We're
of those costs on those in New
Mexico okay you Mr chairman
Representative Ezzell is a
reminder
And therefore doesn't okay.
Those okay thank you for
clarifying that Mr chairman
that's all the questions I have
thank you I did have a question
for you representative of these
was that a question that you did
not know the answer to that.
Chairman that is the only one
you're gonna hear.
All due to that Representative
all right next to me
Representative thank you Mr
chair representative grant of a
very profound question that came
to me at five thirty this
morning when I study bills how
what is the I was trying to
figure out if you would what is
being called like Simic because
S. C. N. M. C. is like too much
so what are they using.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Garrett thank you
for that question I was on the
other side of how to abbreviate
it it's they say it's S. C. N.
M. C. and you normally when we
make an acronym we go with the
initial capital letter in the
the place that they're in the
acronym so I I thought it should
be just in M. C. but I lost so
they just thought the temple was
better with S. E. N. M. C.
that's the story behind that Mr
chair okay so now the Senate.
May happen later anyway thank
you this.
All right any other questions
from committee.
Mr Chairman moved to pass all
right so we have a due pass
motion on house bill one eighty
nine as amended I think I heard
Representative the cell with the
second first
is there any opposition to the
do pass motion.
Seeing line you have a do passed
house bill one eighty nine as
amended thank you Representative
Brown Mr Chairman the employees
we thank you for thank you so
much.
All right.
We made quick work of that help
Representative Ortez you are
here today.
That's where some of like we had
a bill scheduled for.
Much like it is all right so you
have an expert.
Awesome.
Welcome when you're ready
Representative thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee you should be
receiving a hand out it's really
important if props while I go
through my.
Presentation here
Mr chair members of the
committee New Mexico faces a
severe health care workers
workforce shortage.
This document here shows very
colorful graph of all thirty
three counties and the work
force categories studied each
year through the health care
workforce committee this
committee looks at national
benchmarks for how many health
care workers one county should
have to adequately care for the
number of folks living in that
county yellow means the county.
Is below the national benchmark
for the number of health care
workers it needs to adequate
adequately care for its patients
red is not good it means the
counties severely short the
appropriate number of health
care workers.
It's a sea of red and yellow
looking at it right with only
one County Board Leo in the
green and not for every
category.
But this is that this doesn't
tell you the whole picture this
means that Bernalillo county
benchmarks had really only has
enough providers in the county
to care for the folks who live
in Bernalillo county not all the
people who are coming from all
the other counties to get health
care internally on at this is
the case in my district in
probably in many of your
districts to.
So.
We have a fix for this and one
way that we can address this
shortage is by investing in
young health care professionals
and creating incentives for them
to either stay in New Mexico or
come to New Mexico and one of
the best ways we can do that is
by offering educational loan
repayment programs put your hand
over the backside.
Winds up side so on the backside
you'll see that all the states
that have a health care
professional loan repayment
program the amount of debt that
each state is willing to pay
back in return for a commitment
from the health care
professionals to work in a rural
underserved community for
certain number of years so you
see that New Mexico two years
fifty thousand Texas four years
a hundred sixty thousand there
will it Texas is willing to pay
hundred of two hundred sixty
thousand dollars to those health
care professionals read more
folks go there Arizona Arizona
is there's no cap so they will
pay for the loan repayment until
that debt is erased.
We have a lower payment program.
But it's it's not adequate.
So what H. B. two oh nine does.
Is it.
It increases the opportunity for
young people to come to the
state to work in the healthcare
field first it to eight primary
care as a requirement for
physicians in the definition of
qualified health health care
professionals so special as of
the Y. ands oncologists surgeons
really important in our state
are eligible for the loan
repayment right now they are not
the secretary of of higher
education who is here thank you
will just have to still have the
full authority to determine who
receives that award.
But that the agency can give an
award to a specialist if they
determine after this bill is
passed second it increases the
number of years for that award
from two to three.
Two years is too short after
three years you're putting roots
down here you you know you're
maybe having kids sending them
to school you you're living here
and unlikely to leave that is
what we're looking for here and
AGD can find a higher amount
lastly the bill codifies that
that that that higher education
department consults with the
department of health to
determine what those under
served rural areas are this is
this is really is already
happening but should continue to
ensure that communities most in
need of health care services are
prioritised.
Kerry robin brunt brindar from
the New Mexico Mexico make
Medical Society is my expert
witness special say a few words
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee Representative
Ortez is a great job telling you
what this bill does I would be
remiss if I didn't also talk
about the funding that's
necessary to go behind loan
repayment this bill does not
have an appropriation on it
because there is already a fund
with the health care
professional loan repayment at
that's used every year to make
awards in FY twenty for the year
that we're currently in there
was about one point six million
dollars appropriated to fund
over six hundred health care
professionals applied for loan
repayment and hire a department
was only able to give awards to
forty six individuals because of
the lack of funding there is a
very large requests that is
working its way through the
house bill two process on in the
budget committee the executive
has asked for th of twenty eight
million dollar appropriations so
that it can actually fund those
individuals who are making a
request for loan repayment the
legislative finance
recommendation is currently at
five million dollars and so we
know that we're supporting the
higher at department and trying
to make sure that that funding
is increasing we think that with
that infusion through house bill
two and the policy changes that
we're bringing you today we
would potentially be able to
move the state a lot further
when it comes to recruiting
these young health professionals
to our state also remember that
this covers all health
professionals including
behavioral health allied
professionals are considered
allied professionals in the bill
include mental health and social
services so this is the way that
we're really trying to build out
that infrastructure for the
healthcare sector in rural
communities not just with
physicians but with all of the
health professionals that are
needed in order to make our
system work and that that I
think we're ready for questions
and any committee thank you Mr
chair all right thank you all
for the presentations so we will
go to opposition online could
indicate a raise your hand if
you're opposed to house bill two
oh nine.
Those in our audience opposition
to house bill two oh nine.
Seeing none and we'll go to
support online if you could
please indicate by raising your
hand support for house bill two
oh nine.
So please keep your hand of
those in the room of my left
hand side business part of house
bill two oh nine all right
welcome so we'll start in the
closest road to us here in the
panel on the end please welcome
you have up to two minutes.
We have a short.
I'm gonna be looking up a doctor
or physicians in the state we
have a critical shortage of the
numbers that you use so actually
are a lot worse because a half
of the physicians are say that
would be just fifty we are
closing docks every year I lost
six cardiologists he's here in
our group a it is we can all do
groups it is impossible to get
new docks in here the leave the.
medical school with about half
million dollars this they're
going to go to the places that
are going to help them to pay
that that so we do need your
help we need to make sure that
we have doctors to care for the
people of the state and we
really appreciate your support
thank you.
Thank you please you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Nancy
rights I am a medical doctor I
moved to Las Vegas twenty years
ago from Georgia to start a
pediatrics practice I did
receive a loan repayment from
the state that was a two year
commitment I got married I had
kids and I stayed in Las Vegas
and I'm still there we have lost
so many doctors in my community
for instance we have no be in
San Miguel county so San Miguel
County isn't read actually when
it comes.
Early in a crisis in the rural
areas of the state and anything
that the committee can do to
help recruit doctors and bring
them here and hopefully like me
the state here thank you right
thank you we'll go to the next
for of those in support.
Yes you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Search chair members of
securities my name's Lisa
reviews I am the project manager
for primary care association
office of the secretary and I
need the primary care is helpful
which was established in the
twenty twenty one New Mexico
legislature
we're in a dire situation with
our workforce four months ago
this bill will help address part
of our need of recruiting and
retaining New Mexico workforce
we're in full or in the CSX
support this bill
thank you.
Right thank you for being here
anybody else in that same row
we're not in that role yet
serves as checking to see if
anybody's in this row that's in
support.
Anybody else will double check
all right we'll go to the next
row Sir if you're ready sounds
like it.
The committee my name is David
Roddy the Paul health policy
director New Mexico primary care
association which has a hundred
and fifty medical sites around
the state eighty percent of the
number of rural areas we stand
as one of this bill the more
important is the the provision
in the existing budgets to raise
the the the funding as the
secretary said.
Only forty four out of six
hundred forty nine people were
approved that's less than one
minute forty seven percent so
it's going to be critical to.
Seriously rest of the funding of
this.
Is an artist thank thank you for
joining us others in that same
role in support the wish to
speak.
Right the next row those wishing
to speak in support has.
All right.
So we'll mix things up I'll go
online I know I'm going online
and then I'll do the right thing
mixing it up today all right so
we have Karen in support.
Online good morning here you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Carol
Cerro I am representing the
American physical therapy
association I am also a physical
therapist I'm with the New
Mexico chapter.
And we stand in support of this
bill and it's crucial to get
physical therapist into the
state on that rural areas are
short of physical therapists
according to the benchmark
we also encourage you to provide
the funding bill through house
bill two because what we're able
to have physical therapists
coming in as new providers
only one physical therapist at
their loan funded in the last
application period so there is a
great need out there are
physical therapist come out of
school with about a hundred and
twenty five thousand dollar
loans to pay off so thank you we
encourage you to support the
bill thank thank you all right
we'll go to mac good morning
back here of up to two minutes
please.
Good morning I and
want to testify in support of
this bill as I am both a program
director for a family medicine
residency through you and I'm in
Santa Fe as well as the current
president of the state chapter
of the academy of family
physicians
in primary care obviously
you know we struggle to
recruit family physicians
particularly rural areas and
working with the underserved to
need us the most and I think
that this bill is absolutely
crucial to close the gap in
funding that rural clinics
struggle to both operate and
provide services to patients but
also to recruit providers to I
have many residents who are
relying on loan repayment in
various forms but particularly
through the state in order to
subsidize in a way the funding
gap that they could otherwise
make by staying in larger
systems so I see this as
imperative to getting the docs
out to the areas that need us
the most and as somebody who
still paying their loans off.
After ten years of being a
physician I can tell you that
just secondary to all other
costs that we come out with from
our training these programs are
absolutely crucial to make sure
that we can keep our families
and and underserved areas so I
really encourage you to enhance
enhance the funding vote in
favor of house bill two oh nine
thank you so much for the time
and for safeguarding access to
care quality care for our
patients thank you so much thank
you doctor.
All right so go to my right hand
side doesn't support house bill
two nine all right please will
start in the front health
minister if you.
Gentleman and we've the
hospitals.
Sorry for my voice mountain
juniper and roundhouse crowed.
We're of the hospital solutions
support this legislation is very
important we have workforce
issues in the state are very
different to the dress with that
all I'll save you from any
further.
Ramble thank you very much thank
you sorry ma'am up to two
minutes welcome and thank you Mr
in I'm my name is Dr leases and
solace I miss family medicine
residents physician so I'm
actually the person this bill is
targeting further more and
friends house and it's my
biggest.
Go back and save tasks and as an
underserved community so just to
give you guys an idea I
graduated from on education with
about two hundred twenty
thousand dollars in debts and
that's actually on the lower end
of most people and if I go back
to if I accepted a job inTaos
I'm looking at signing on for
about like two hundred two
hundred fifty thousand which is
amazing it's unspeakable
wonderful however I have two
children and as a doctor I
really value education the
public education systems in
these rural areas are really
sadly not amazing and so I'm
looking at financing education
for my children and then further
more
for example I just got an offer
from Oct and they're looking to
give me ninety thousand sign on
bonus as well as like upwards of
like two fifty three hundred
thousand so it's just a huge
difference so there needs to be
something to fill that gap
outside of just like the
goodness of my heart.
that to encourage other
physicians to come up.
Thank you others as part of my
right hand side please Sir.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee click Nevins in New
Mexico State University we thank
the sponsor representative with
this and the secretary who had
to step out of the room we are
supportive of this obviously we
recognized.
Shortages across the state in so
many areas there the
legislature's made investments
through endowments through bill
such as this and we have a role
in this and we believe that our
our public health programs we'll
see increases in enrollment
which is important because we
need to start the pipeline in
our institutions and so again we
think the sponsor we think the
secretary and ask for your
support thank you all right
others in support place Dr
fifty.
The morning Mr chairman members
and that's the Hawker this is me
speaking as a citizen who used
to work at the UNM health
sciences center and from the
number of years I worked there
research shows that if we can do
any of our health professionals.
Unity forty three years there is
a very good chance that their
family will stating his ring
there.
Comma member of our community in
order to help address our
drastic shortages health
professional repayment programs
are a phenomenal step right
direction.
Thank thank you others and
support which speak thank you Mr
chairman Dennis are representing
levels health systems and they
want to express their strong
support for this legislation for
all the reasons you for right
thank you all right any others
which speak in support.
Okay will come to committee for
some analysts is Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Ortez and cherry
you know when I was little we
were really poor inTaos and my
parents saved to somehow money
to buy me a of nurses slash
doctor's kit I think it was like
for.
And I went around feeding
everybody Candie.
Bills and checking their heart
rates and everything and of
course we burned wood in a wood
stove and my brother was outside
chopping wood and a piece he
talked and the piece of wood
swirled and hit him right here I
what was gonna walk out to feed
Candie and check heart rate and
I saw the wood piece hit him
right here in the blood spurt up
I fainted and that ended my
career.
Really as a potential drive I
could be making two hundred
fifty thousand plus but no and
so I really appreciate this had
nothing to do with that thing
but.
But I have been a contender you
know and and the point is that
this is a hugely important that
my real question is have you
already identified.
The the underserved communities
because I know PTA's is one.
I'm not there but anyone else
madam chair and Mr chair sorry
Mr Chairman representative of
Trujillo there is a committee
that meets every year between
the higher education department
and the department of health
they look at of rural indexes
and underserved underserved
committee underserved
communities and they establish
which communities are going to
be eligible to receive awards as
of right now the only
communities that are not
receiving awards are Bernalillo
county Dona ana county and Los
Alamos County every other county
right now if your health care
professional you would be
eligible we think that as
funding grew over time on in the
loan repayment funds that there
would be more opportunities to
even include other communities
but it's highly competitive
right now but that process
happens on an annual basis to
the committee Mr chair thank you
I guess my final comment is I
would love to see anybody that
practices state get rid to stay
here but not everybody can
following live love and live
happily ever after and be
enticed to stay as a young woman
from in the audience stated so
what is the potential of other
enticement or for commitment to
stay in the state.
On Mr chairman and
Representative Trujillo we
really view tab in the health
care workforce shortage as
a complex issue that's going to
need to have a lot of different
items put on the table we think
that loan repayment is a first
step because when students are
graduating and they look at
their opportunities for loan
repayment in other areas right
now New Mexico isn't even a
contender right because our low
we are are low reimbursement
rates I think that there are
other initiatives that are going
through the legislature right
now that the governor's
initiative for the rural health
care delivery fund is a way that
if we can attract young
professionals they could have
seed money to actually start
practices through what's
happening with the world health
care delivery fund which that
becomes right another thing that
we can do in order to really
incentivize people to move here
so this is not going to be the
only answer there are many
different things that we have to
do to really build up that
infrastructure but we think that
word you know get move and which
is which is positive thank you
presenters thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chair thank you very much
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward it's very important
we are underserved out in our
areas M. Mr chairman at is this
and we're talking about these
loan repayments and it is going
before a board for distribution
is this a competitive process Mr
chair representative it is
competitive it is highly
competitive okay so the doctor
is going to give for.
Plus checks by their name then
of a practitioner and nurse
practitioners that correct Matt
and Mr chairman and
Representative Ezzell not
necessarily depending on what
the specific need of a rural
community is is how this
committee actually prioritizes
the award so let's say that
there is a general surgeon but
there is a lack of a nurse
practitioner and a registered
nurse actually support that
surgeon in a community then a
priority would actually go to
registered nurse or nurse
practitioner because everybody
is together in this fund so the
committee is actually pretty
sophisticated since it is so
competitive at really trying to
identify what is the absolute
highest need in that community
for us to give the incentive so
it it is that scoring process
that that committee goes through
when they actually determine the
award.
And Mr Chairman representative
ms.
Well.
For the applications do is it.
Semi annually is annually is a
quarterly how with those however
the judge because I know that
there's different graduation
periods everything else that
goes along with that Mr Chairman
representative out it that
annual admissions okay thank you
for that.
Mr Chairman representative is
this bill retroactive.
Mr chairman and Representative
Ezzell no however you don't have
to be a recent graduate to
necessarily apply so if you are
an individual who let's say
apply two years ago for loan
repayment and dot did not
receive an award and you're
still serving in a rural
community then you can apply to
try to receive the award now and
that's why we think it's
important right to be having
both of these trains moving
together the policy training and
the budget training so that we
can also try to catch up in
incentivizing people to come Mr
Chairman representative the
reason I bring that up there was
only fourteen percent of the of
the eligible applicants last
year were funded so I didn't
know if they would get to the
top of the list or not whenever
the state funding comes about.
But Mr chairman and
Representative Ezzell they can
reapply and be put through the
ranking process again depending
on the need for their
communities so I wouldn't say
will necessarily be put
automatically to the top of the
list but they will have the
opportunity to be ranked just
like they were last year okay
Mister chairman Representative
whenever you're expert witness
is talking about that so it it
can go back a couple years if a
person has already made
application all they have to do
is just to be applied Mr chair
Representative Ezzell they have
to still be living in that rural
area and that only makes you
appreciate this bill it's very
important thank you Mr chairman
Representative Baca please thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
bringing this bill forward I I
think this is a a good be on
good legislation I'm gonna go
kind of break care can go a
little bit of a rant because I
think that you know as we see
this health care is one of the
most important things we can do
for our communities our citizens
are still are
our families in the fact that we
have a shortage as a crisis and
I think we as a legislature need
to take action and address the
shortage.
As a father of three of you know
kids I can't get in to see my
pediatrician for.
Four five weeks when they have
some kind of illness well if
that that's that's beyond me so
I think Mr chairman
I think that if we're really
services the legislature we've
got to address the shortage in
four different areas one I think
Mr chairman that we need to
increase the number of
opportunity for residencies and
recruitment of doctors from out
of the state to come to our
state because I do know for many
the if we get them as residents
here.
We have a better chance of
keeping them.
Two I do believe that we have to
have as far as the.
The Medicaid reimburses the
reimbursement there's been a lot
of legislation out there and is
talking about how.
For our doctors with the
Medicaid reimbursement it's much
you know this part is not cost
effective and we're having to do
a lot more work.
in three.
The medical malpractice Mr
Chairman is we have gone crazy
with our state and our positions
are doctors are having to pay
these enormous amount of costs
for our to provide that medical
malpractice insurance.
I think Mr Chairman
That we this is a good first
step but to my colleagues I
challenge my colleagues to
appear on both sides of the
aisle.
This health care situation is a
crisis it is a crisis that faces
everyone in every community and
I think that we have to get
service about it.
And when you know when you have
an investment this money this
money that we have right now
it's a good opportunity to
invest in really make an impact
for our families and the
citizens of New Mexico thank you
Mr chairman I thank you
representative Representative it
up.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Ortez for
bringing this bill forward
I repeat all the things I'm in
agreement with everything that
has been said so far I just I
want to say that this is really
important because I live about a
mile from a rural health clinic
when I first came here every
time I go to that clinic I'd
have a new doctor right because
a state two years in late and
and so I learned that you know I
I would find a nurse
practitioners at that I liked
and I was just would follow her
around so it I she might've
started at the rural health
clinic and then moved to Santa
Fe voter had there then move to
retail fall under their then she
became a colonoscopy nurse I
said well I can't see there
anymore.
I'm just I'm just saying for the
citizens of New Mexico to get
good health care you want
somebody who knows you will you
want somebody who knows your
names the docks women know their
patients so if it's a continual
revolving door at a real health
clinic that really doesn't help
anybody so I I just stand in
full support I realize that you
have the almost five million in
a recurring fund you're gonna
put five million hopefully this
year into a nonrecurring fun is
that hello I'm reading this
Madam are Mr Chairman keep
looking reflective care it Mr
chairman and Representative
Herrera so I currently in the
current fiscal year there's only
about one point six million
dollars and health care loan
repayment fund the legislative
finance committee budget
recommendation was to increase
that to five and the executive
budget recommendations to
increase it to twenty eight it
so that still going through the
budget process so like we said
this is the policy bill to make
sure we've got good return on
investment that they're here for
three years having roots
consultation and taking primary
care out and then the budget
process is dealing with the
funding on and we hope that the
funding will be significantly
increased Mr chair thank you for
that
Us so the maximum that they can
get in our loan repayment is
twenty five thousand dollars
here for three years as it is am
I correct on that Mr chairman
and representative hi that
currently it's twenty five
thousand dollars for two years
for a total of fifty after this
bill it would be a commitment of
three years and currently the
awards are twenty five thousand
dollars a year however there is
no limitation on the award the
higher education secretary can
give so if there was more money
in the fund the secretary of
higher ed to this committee
process would have the ability
to say okay will we want to
target this person for let's say
fifty thousand in awards and
year one and sixty thousand in
year two and seventy thousand in
your three right so we're giving
them she has the flexibility to
change that which is really
important
but it really depends on more
funding Mr chair thank you and
thank you a Kerry for that
answer I.
I'm worried that we're not high
in front and not competitive in
the in the awards given out
because as we about seventy five
thousand on it three hundred
thousand dollar loan isn't going
to do very much so thank you for
that and that thank you Mr
chair.
Representative Garrett thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative I was gonna ask
you to delineate the money and
since such as been delineated
let me just say that for members
appropriations art sitting on
this committee and so very good
timing on your part was
presented but every day you go
into a New World of probation
and agencies so thank you for
time it right that's it.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
with a follow up question.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for allowing me to do this.
Of in light of what
Representative I could just sit
yes we do have problems with.
Our physicians and their
insurance costs and it's put in
of putting them out of business
they can't afford to do this
anymore Mr chairman.
And people's health is of utmost
importance so until there's some
sort of tort reform.
In our state and I'm stalking
series tort reform.
We're gonna continue to see our
physicians and caretakers leave
our state we even have a
shortage of veterinarians.
So one of our doctors are gone
we're not gonna have that many
veterinarians are going to be
able to systems of that type
stuff.
So it's it's real.
Problematic Mr chairman and
every time it's brought up.
We have certain steps special
interest groups that are
protesting.
Tort reform in our state and
it's got to be a necessity and
it's going to be here before we
know it whenever there's no
health care professionals to
take care of our population
we're going to be a heck of a
fight thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative help.
Thank you Mr Mr chair
you know we're in a health care
crisis in our state I looked at
the little chart you gave me and
I think it was and overestimate
in in our county because it said
that we had EMTs and in our
county we at one time had about
ten EMTs I was one of them but
they're they're gone now we have
one and you can't run the M.
with with one EMTs so that it's
freaking it's getting less we
have a lack of residencies in
New Mexico I have fought long
and hard to get the
educational institution to
increase the number of our of
residencies because former
doctor does their residency
that's where they get married
that's where they start their
family and that's where they
were state and practice so last
year we were successful in
getting the number of
residencies in the state of New
Mexico doubled I think this is
an excellent program I think
it's another facet to the answer
to the problem I think we
probably are undershooting the
number but I think it's a it's
an important part of the of the
puzzle and I support this bill
thank you Mr chairman free time
thank you Representative where.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'm gonna be
brief I was looking through this
actually the first time I saw
this my question when I looked
at the difference between New
Mexico and all the other states
my question was why would they
want to come here and and and
and and it and it's it's it just
baffles me we often will
complain because we are so far
below on a in the playing field
for and a lot of things but yet
I think this is the first step
in doing something about it
because when I look at my County
in Valencia at the very bottom
only two areas are green the
rest are read and and and
granted we get to drive we're
close enough to drive to
Albuquerque in many of us do but
when there's certain things
going on especially when you're
doing EMTs OBG weigh ins all
these you know we're we're still
fighting for hospital down there
to support but this is important
so once we get that hospital we
have to entice people to come to
us and leave other other areas
so or leave other states income
here because sure they'll fall
in love with New Mexico but Hey
money talks right.
I highly support this bill and
thank you guys for for bringing
it.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Bob of
Mr chairman if there's no other
further further debate I would
like to recommend they do pass
all right so we have a due pass
motion by Representative Baca
second by Representative
Chatfield I did have a couple
comments so before except that
motion thank you for bringing
this forward I think everybody's
echoing and recognizes the
problematic state that we're in
you know I'm from Bernalillo
county in Albuquerque and my in
laws are pull nurses and they
live in California and working
California have worked in
California for years and when
they were and my wife made me
aware of you know the health
crisis in New Mexico and again
in your chart that everybody's
referencing Bernalillo county it
is mostly in the green however
when my wife talks about health
care access in the state in
Bernalillo county particularly
she is alarmed we've heard of
long wait times for our kids to
get in to see their pediatrician
and again that's in Bernalillo
county.
It's incredible to imagine in
these rural county is exactly
what in the extent of the health
care crisis is so I think this
is a great step in moving in the
direction of improving
conditions but we still have
quite a ways to go so thank you
for bringing this forward we did
have a due pass motion from
Representative Baca segment
Representative Chatfield there
any opposition to the past
motion.
All right seeing line you have
to pass on house bill two oh
nine thank you Representative.
Our next bill as house bill
sixteen the legislative
education study committee public
station study and chairman
Romero when you're ready.
Thanks start all right thank you
madam chair good morning again
members
I'm gonna try to do this without
looking at the bill because I
sponsored this a few times over
the past few years
this bill many of you returning
champions to the committee and
to the legislature.
Probably recognize that those of
you that are new maybe not but
basically what this is doing is
allowing for the legislative
education study committee to
study the entire breadth of our
education system from early
childhood to higher education
there provisions if you notice
in the language that struck
under the L. E. S. C.
Bill language that those are all
the restrictions currently so
the L. E. S. C. as far as higher
education is restricted only to
study the colleges of education
but not higher education in
total
this was a bill that was vetoed
two years ago you probably see
in your analysis is well the
reason why is that there's fear
amongst the department of
duplicative work right having to
respond and be accountable to
LFC along with Ellie S. C. but
we know there are departments
mainly public education
department that does this work
already
And so I don't see that as an
obstacle I think it's important
for us to be able as an interim
committee to work with our staff
and we just see to overview the
entire educational system that
we're working on a specially we
just heard a bill that is in the
higher education round.
however we don't have time we're
not able to I should say be able
to study these higher education
in our
issues during the in our to help
improve legislation and really
coordinate efforts educational
efforts across the field with
that madam chair all stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair I will go to
the audience is there anybody
online who would like to speak
in favor of this bill.
K..
A doctor Garcia you have the
floor.
Good morning everybody my name
is Joseph Garcia I'm a former
employee of the LDS see I'm a
current adult backed into kind
of got to kind of studies and I
represent the.
you faculty unit UNM I
wholeheartedly support this bill
after working ten months of the
LFC I highly recommend that they
begin with the member doc study
which is a comprehensive study
from nineteen forty five to two
thousand ten.
Of New Mexico in terms of
education policy the challenges
the struggles that also compares
with Texas and with there is no
I also highly recommend that
this is a comprehensive
historical and sociological
study and I also recommend that
we unionize all legislative
staff to have.
Of what we call it stronger
staff as well as us not so many
changes in person not just the
LFC and not to criticize any one
person but the institutions and
the way that they're organized
also this study is would be
essential in terms of the
Martinez Yazzie K. a study has
not been done the manager got
dissertation is extremely
important this I've read it I've
worked highly recommend
everybody read it.
All thank you very much for this
opportunity please good luck
Representative and everyone else
there
madam madam her chair and and Mr
chair thank you for your time
thank you so much
see nobody else on line to speak
in support anybody in the
audience wishes we can support.
Okay state.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on state St is
For this bill and we stand and
support the intent of the bill
was solid and it makes perfect
sense for the legislative
education study committee to
adopt a holistic approach when
studying issues of public
education and as a result of
course it brings more
information to the share table
of decision makers to make
better informed recommendations
and decisions for these reasons
we ask that the committee
consider a bill in favor and up
thank you.
Thank you anybody else in favor.
Is there any opposition.
Okay seeing no opposition here
or online will go to the
committee of Representative
Trujillo.
Madam chair I try not to make
this is a snarky remark.
But will this prohibit the LFC
staff from creating its own
legislation thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair and representative I
think if we're able to
work on educational issues that
we could be a good backstop for
any attempts to do that as well.
Thank you Representative Baca
thank you madam chair thank you
chairman Romero for bringing the
support I think it is important
for us as we really see the
connection and bridge the gap
between K. twelve and higher
read as we are looking to
increase collaboration and as
far as working together I do
think that this is appropriate
for the L. U. C..
This committee made up many of
educators board members
otherwise to have a greater say
in and in reviewing and looking
at the higher education piece as
well so thank you madam chair.
Okay I just wanted to make a
comment that when I went to the
internet for all meeting of the
secretary of commerce appointee
for that used to be the chair of
the board of education in Rhode
Island which is pre K. to grade
twenty.
And she said how remarkably well
they could work on education so
this is a great bills I think
twelve of us signed on it even.
so of with no further questions
undertaking a motion madam chair
I move that we.
We just to pass the test to pass
House Bill.
Stuck in my head one two one six
two one six two one six I
second.
Okay of with the do passed
motion from representative to
heal and a second by
Representative Roybal Caballero
there any opposition.
To this bill see no opposition
Here you have a do pass on house
thank you madam chair thank you
committee unanimous.
Come.
Yes you may I have to is losses
shadows in the audience today
they are ready for this.
In the meeting.
We're here today if you get a
chance to speak to them they
love it.
We collect the three right.
I'm pretty sure Levin Act.
All right welcome with that
committee so just as an
announcement will have a meeting
tomorrow at nine o'clock for a
bill that will be referred.
Just kidding we'll meet again on
Monday.
We'll meet again on Monday at
eight thirty.
