Your.
Representative forever just.
Yes yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Sweetser if.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Dow.
Representative Madrid.
Here.
Chairman.
We.
All right awesome good morning
everybody you all are really
good students and follow
directions as to the new links
sorry about that
but there were some difficulties
with zoom in generating a new
link for today's meeting in
Saturday's meeting so I
appreciate that all my heads up
and I'll repeat this a couple
times so that we.
Are on the same note is that we
will go back to the former link
if we have meetings on Monday of
next week so if we have a
meeting next week it'll be our
previous.
But of course there always be a.
Reminder email with the link for
everybody on there that's on the
panelists list for the attendees
it'll always be up on the
website you can access it the
same way
as usual so I tried to promote
our Representative Herndon more
on house memorial forty three.
To be part of our panel so we
Representative Herndon.
So we'll start out house
memorial forty three.
Give me a moment.
Good morning Representative
earned in good morning Mr chair
and then the committee did I
need to promote anybody for your
expert no my expert is actually
Representative Christine
Trujillo who has been teaching
for so many years all right well
house memorial forty three when
you're ready representative
please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm presenting you
with house memorial forty three
and what this house memorial
does is that it is asking for
task force to take a look at the
weather that we should have a
mental health rooms within
schools and I'm middle and high
school facilities and this came
about as part of a my journey
and visiting schools as a
legislator and finding that
there is one school in the
entire state of New Mexico based
upon my findings that has a
mental health room and that
mental health loan existed
because they were a high number
of students suicides that were
occurring in students stated the
place to talk about how they
were feeling what they were
doing and and it just a place to
use that term to geo and so what
the CDC has found based upon its
findings is that more than one
in three high school students
really do experience persistent
feelings of sadness or
hopelessness and then there are
about that was about a forty
percent increase in ten years
that we saw this growing and as
we've entered into the.
COVID nineteen pandemic we see
this more and more of the
despair among students and they
are there far too many of them
of committing suicide are just
having of instances where they
are planning their own suicide
so what we would like to do is
to create at the task force to
look into what it's going what
would it take to have a mental
health room and what with that
mental health will look like and
then if we find that the date of
statistics support what I
believe to be the necessary.
Components of having that is
this have a pilot program in ten
schools throughout the state the
task force will determine how
those ten schools would be so
awesome if that's the direction
that we go and then to tested to
see if it really does work to
improve the mental health of our
students so with that Mr chair
members of the committee I will
stop unless my co chair
representative Christine
Trujillo would like to add
anything.
Okay yes Representative here
please good morning everyone and
thank you.
I was so eager to sign on to
this with my colleague
Representative Representative
Herndon because you know I've
talked for a long time.
But the building this.
These two compelling reasons
with the fact that my grandson
is now in first grade and he was
in kindergarten when when COVID
hit.
And I've shared with many of you
the stories of him coming back
as a into the regular possible
acting like a feral child.
No social skills he did not
interact with either the grown
ups for the kids in the
classroom.
And it was really difficult for
him and for the teachers and for
the other classmates to to try
to deal with is.
Is issues and I think one of
them was the fact that that
there were also some family
issues in his own personal life.
That he didn't know how to deal
with.
And so a lot of anger was
pouring out a lot of confusion
was pouring out and so he used
acting out as a way to deal with
that and fortunately that's with
a lot of work from the school
staff and school teachers he's
calm down and he's able to do
the work that he can but but
he's one of many and and I don't
say federal in a negative way
but in a it in a way that.
Has shown as COVID has really
created some very very negative
spaces.
The kids coping skills and I
believe these mental health
spaces that Representative
Hernandez is talking about can
be and should be created in
schools and I guarantee you that
anyone who is an educator on
this committee recognizes that
and
the issue is.
Really.
There is there are.
K. schools and also.
it it's cost it's not cost.
It's not costly.
To create a space where the
psychologist or the school
counselor for the school
principal can just sick have a
space where the kids can sit
quietly and interact with
everyone else but the other
issue for me was the issue of a
service thank you that that
we've had to learn about during
the years that I've been here
and the problems that kids with
basically have and then the the
third thing has been the fact
that the I had a very rude
awakening.
Shared the interim health and
Human Services Committee this
summer and it was stunning to me
the amount of things that
people with kids go through so
Mister chairman ask for your
support and I think
Representative Herndon for
including me in this.
Great thank you to so we will go
to our attendees list those in
support of house memorial forty
three please indicate there is
in your hands.
Given a moment.
All right as a reminder.
To our members.
Wishing to speak you have up to
two minutes please do not be
repetitive but you have up to
two minutes.
But as I say prefer is better.
All right so go to heather good
morning heather you about two
minutes welcome.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee this is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and we think
Representative Kernan for
bringing this memorial and
conversation to the legislature
I'm she's correct in her
district other out of high
school does have a mental health
state Senate did evolve because
of conversations with the
committee about what to do
around suicide post vention on
the students sat down with
architects and develop the room
and it's model our template that
could be used in other schools
on the other part of the
conversation of course is
talking about staffing the
spaces with therapists
counselors or social workers
that are I'm professional
support and we have some some
other schools that have
different kinds of rooms they
might column like sensory spaces
some of those were funded by
initiatives like the family
income index that we together
entry for example so we'd be
happy to help support this
conversation has evolved thank
you.
You.
Go to lily may only may welcome
two minutes good morning Mr
chairman thank you very much I
am willing more teas
representing the New Mexico
school board association as
their legislative liaison and Mr
chairman members of the
committee as noted in the bill
else's mental health disorders
have been on the rise since
before the pandemic and at this
point have reached a crisis
level because of the pandemic on
New Mexico school board members
throughout the state and status
of back in our schools and as a
result Mr chair last December
they voted to include support
for social emotional health
services as part of our
legislative plan for New Mexico
scored Association supports
funding for school safety
behavioral social emotional
health services counseling for
students and staff and will be
and Mr chairman we support the
intent of this memorial and
asked the committee to move it
forward thank you for this
opportunity to share our
position.
Right thank you.
All right we'll go to Meredith
good morning Meredith you have a
students welcome good morning
our current members of the
committee Representative current
and thank you so much for
bringing memorial forward our
work your world where.
all of the.
Thank we are thanks for your
right well.
My one of my background are we
gonna.
Our our program the card cool
We're aren't
Program.
We are really.
There are no Michael for.
Apple enrollment fell on but
warm under our global.
so I don't want to repeat one
million more that there well
Representative Greiner or will
board will go more important to
fund will mark
I called.
Right thank you madam.
All right Ellen.
Ellen you're with us good
morning you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name's Alan Bern
stain on the president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
I appreciate this conversation
every day I talk with
administrators and school
personnel about the social
emotional needs of our students
one of the things that we've
pointed out is that we used to
have a great partners in the
communities with residential
centers that serve a lot of the
mental health needs of kids that
were really extreme and those
have all but disappeared in our
communities leaving the schools
to take over that role with our
students which we're happy to do
but I think the natural outcome
of spaces is what Dr Bassett
mention which are the staffing
needs that will come out of that
conversation these are really
important things to pay
attention to not just for mid
and high but we have yes like
Representative Trujillo pointed
out who are very young and who
need a lot of help with
socialization and emotional
needs they interrupt their own
learning in the learning of
others so I stand in support of
this conversation and I'm happy
that it's going to happen.
Thank you.
Well right stand.
Good morning standing up to two
minutes welcome good morning Mr
chair members the committee
stand around for that
superintendents association of
the college of education leaders
I think we wasn't Allen the
lowly may's testimony I'll just
simply say ditto right on the
issue of staffing and facilities
are both important this is a
continuing emerging.
Crisis if you will our public
schools I want to thank the
sponsor for bring this forward
and we stand in full support
thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to.
Karen good morning Cairney of up
to two minutes welcome good
morning chairman members of the
committee catalog with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
of course we stand in strong
support of this legislation I
don't want to take up any more
of your time but I think that
all of your experts and the
previous testimony have set it
really well thank you very much.
Thank you for being here Hey me.
Okay maybe two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Amy
product and I'm speaking on
behalf of teach plus New Mexico
as their teacher network
coordinator.
Role as the network coordinator
I was a kindergarten teacher in
Los crucis public school
district and today I'm not going
to take up your time and
reiterating what the other
speakers have have stated this
morning Mr chairman and
committee members but I would
like to tell the story of a
student that I had in my class.
For this purpose is name will be
John in the story John was a
five year old student in my
classroom he.
Did not have a lot of social
emotional skills in handling his
is temper and emotions he had
very strong emotions in fact I
recall a date where John was
very upset because he did not
have lines in his animal
crackers snack that led to a
full on meltdown in.
Disrupting my class and had we
had training proper training and
resources to provide such a
space as in this memorial I feel
like I would be better equipped
to help John.
In a more timely fashion and I
was able to John went on for
a successful school year but it
took months of myself and my
administrative assistant to re
teach and to teach how you know
how we handle our emotions in
the classroom so I appreciate
the Sanchez in this bill and I
appreciate your consideration in
this most important and critical
matter in our state thank you so
much.
Right thank you for sharing your
story all right.
So that is the support.
We'll go to opposition is or how
is our opposition in the
attendees cited for House
memorial forty three please
indicate by raising your hand.
Virtually of course.
All right so it doesn't look
like there's opposition.
Reserve the committee
Representative Baca please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all colleagues of Representative
Herndon and Representative
Trujillo for bringing this this
is a very real situation that we
face
our districts are self has lost
to students this year to suicide
and so it affects us very well
especially when you know the
kids our new one of the kids so
much my questions are not
necessarily I will tell you up
front I stand in full support
this but I'm gonna just kind of
give you some other components
that I think that they may need
to consider when we passes
forward for the study okay as
one of the the folks on the
part of the audience to say
training for staff.
Not only for training for staff
but also the recognition of this
and then what to do because they
also have that kind of due to
report many times staff members
are somewhat you know they may
have this information they may
be somewhat unsure what the next
steps are so I think we need to
very much kind of lay out and
give them the confidence that
they can make the report whether
B. to the school counselor
school nurse and nurse
principles or otherwise
The other thing that was also
brought up that is also a
problematic is the risk or
threat assessment right so
especially for for for big
school districts like you know
also the mid size districts you
know the top fifteen side we may
have the resources but for
smaller districts.
Many times that they have a
student that may be exhibiting
these conserving behaviors.
They lack the resources from the
school do that move self that's
why they need to have those
community partnerships and
outside agencies we can do the
threat assessments or risk
assessments for those students
as well.
The other piece about it with
for the social emotional
is also the hotline okay because
I I can tell you that when we're
looking at these types things
how we monitor how we give
students or parents or anyone on
Avenue after hours because
that's you know that's when the
saints are are taking place so I
would definitely want to look
at.
Providing some kind of resources
that is thought it's you know
That's an important in many
times somebody knows about it I
mean you know there's somebody
will have turned a heard about
it somebody will have
They told somebody about it I
know our school district we have
an anonymous reporting up.
The students can text and tips
to us I don't know if Mr
chairman or the the folks you're
gonna name that program I can
name it but as a solicitation
but as an app that we use
But it's something the other
part about that is okay is
having the this the staff
trained on the school sites.
To to have a group in a save
situation where there's you know
there's a private privacy the
confidentiality and there's not
that statement that this is the
mental health rural or this is
the most because there's a
there's a statement when people
come forward with a number of
different problems we have to
respect the confidentiality and
we have to remove the stigma
because every single one of us
here on the committee at some
point in our life has had.
Times are live without so what
we've got to do is we've got to
be very careful about how we
frame this how we name it
because we don't out once.
Students to to feel that they
can come forward and that their
confidentiality will be
respected.
And the last thing I have is
actually you know through all
these things are on the
prevention and but when we do
have this and you know we do
have a loss of the life of a
student or staff okay because it
affects all of us.
it's important to do like what
we have is a crisis response
team where we have groups of
teachers we are are or
counselors are organized in the
state that we have an issue at
one school side that this team
of cultures they go in the flood
the school with the support.
For you know basically to
debriefs to share information
that's an important piece of
this as well because we know
that you know the the family is
gonna be impacted for others but
those close close friends.
Classmates and also the staff
members who work with those kids
also need the support so those
are things that I would ask that
you pry just when we push it up
here for the study we wanted to
look about that that also for
the school districts you know
utilizing some of these us for
funds I know during this time
because of the mental health we
have increased our number of
social workers for the stop
folks there may be also some
recommendations about how we can
actually fund these for smaller
districts that may not have the
resources like some of the
larger districts so I do get
this my full support I do
conduct percent by
might hopefully just force my
input and I I do stand for this
and I think you guys for
bringing this much needed issue
two or four fronts.
Thank you Representative care
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative current data and
Representative Trujillo.
Comments Representative Lara had
brought the bill forward several
times to study what is our ratio
of counselors and social workers
in our schools because before we
even think of special spaces for
students I know at my elementary
school which had over eight
thousand students it to
counselors shared a room we had
outside agencies contracted to
meet with our students but
finding spaces where they could
meet with students for very
serious counseling was in short
supply so I think we have to
incorporate looking at to our
counselors even have spaces to
our agencies have spaces some
schools are overcrowded some
schools aren't and have more
access so I just want to mention
that because I I know especially
with our secondary students
having a place to go it's
wonderful but as Dr massive
pointed out who's going to staff
that space it's such a great
need
but we really have to look at
this you know the spaces for
multiple purposes and then the
other thing is the corporation
of parent education
for some of our preschool
programs I know APS had a
program with an outside agency
operate and better does opening
doors and parents had to come
every week and they had meetings
that you know morning times
before work meetings after work
to address adult needs but it
was also to help sure it's look
at the mental health so there's
a lot of pieces to this
that I feel need to be
incorporated in what I think is
a really important study so
thank you for bringing it for.
Forward and I just wanted to
highlight some of the areas that
we can't over look at doing such
a study thank you.
Great thank you Representative
please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Kernan for
bringing this legislation before
this committee I am.
I just I just I don't have a lot
of questions I just want to
share model that that I I knew
of very well that worked in Los
Alamos years ago and this was at
a high school level and I always
hate to throw Los Alamos that as
an example because I know they
have more money than most
schools and they have well
educated parents eccentric
etcetera but they also have you
know ten percent of their kids
are are special ed and a good
friend of mine more than half
have ran that department and
they had a big room set aside at
the high school and those kids
had one of their one of their
let units one of their hourly
unit days I I don't know what
you call that any more they
would go to this classroom and
that you know they have catches
and they had is it can they had
it was a it was a place where
these kids went to every day I
mean if you go to high school
like Los Alamos in your special
and it is hard enough it's hard
and I can tell you that but they
had a place every day that was
kind of a safe haven and that
they counselors are the special
ed teachers but work with each
one of them there weren't many
that went to you know spend the
kids out during the day but it
was a safe haven and they could
check in on them they see how
they were doing they got a lot
of them jobs in the community
because a lot of these kids
didn't have money they but it
was a place where they could go
every day and and you had like
two adults you know just kind of
talking to them casually about
the date that such about
homework they needed to entering
that of them but it was a way to
check in with kids who were
really struggling every day if
they didn't show up more than
two days in a row they column at
home or sometimes they go see
that so it was if they created a
safe haven for kids who are
struggling at the high school
and that it was a it was.
I know the landmark programs
that I think national awards and
I'm just offering them that as
an example of what can happen
when a group of creative
teachers at a school say well
this is what we really need you
know with that we need to we
need for them to have a place to
check in every day not that they
needed every day that they were
there when when when a crisis
would set in for that the state
and I just wanted to share that
because it was pretty simple
idea
you know they just went out and
got you know donations from the
community if they needed that or
they just you know they have a
refrigerator with maybe they
should note that cokes and and
all other things and snacks
program and so it and these
women that ran this place just
as you know if if kids needed
something they'd find a way to
get a form so I'm just saying
it's just a model it didn't cost
any more money
that was very effective model
and and they were connected with
the lapse of the a lot of these
kids jobs like in mail rooms let
these kids are really poor and
them you don't think of that in
Los Alamos but there is there
support population like in any
in any that's all I wanted to
say Mr Mr chair thank you for
the time.
Right thank you Representative
for about it's.
And Good Morning committee and
thank you Sanchez on Friday we
are our representatives for
bringing this memorial forward I
am Mr chair and sponsors I just
want to relate
a person on our family.
Are you.
I.
And
The family was going to
grieving.
The mother of his mother.
The grant you she was on.
Spoke to the school to
right.
Spoke to well he she identified
as the circle.
What came out of those
conversations one of the.
Her.
How.
She and her mother.
And extended family whenever
body into.
Any conversations with the
school when the school no it
early on that there were
concerns.
Behavior are.
Out potential
Behavioral and mental issues and
health issues.
And.
It brought to light when I was
reading the memorial along with
the memorial.
I know that it is inferred.
Mr chair but I am going.
Parents.
Should be involved.
Well sometimes the imprints we
assume that.
However if we're not
intentional.
About involving parents.
In the way that.
Work yeah.
In our situation.
We're missing great.
Actually the most important part
of.
Are this child's well being.
Situation if there is a
situation or maybe it may be Mr
Chairman in this.
With probably not aware.
And.
When we talk about wanting to
prevent.
Incredible.
First.
In addition everything that we
do know some I know that L. CYFD
is is listening I know that they
will be charged with
asked to.
That.
Where we sent.
The
pandemic have shown how
important taking into social.
Hopeful actors are and
everything that we do.
And it may not be as
Representative up with that and
others in the school environment
may not be the environment.
To address these.
I don't as a as a clinical
social worker
for more clinical social worker
I do not believe that the school
is the environment.
But as we see them
come forward.
Students are responding to other
factors outside the school.
And so Mister chair I would
encourage on LAFC to think
outside of the box.
To look at ways in which
we can capture the needs of the
student.
Nontraditional that not we have
to we have to change the way we
approach.
We've been doing things and so
when we studies come forward Mr
chair it to challenges.
Those ways
that will work and look at
resources that you can share
with other entities that are are
working in the community I
noticed that in the title and
then in the
On the in the morning it it was
very specific.
mental health care providers
public schools secondary
teachers counselors
administrators even school yes
Representative will community
groups and that's that's very
commendable and that's important
to note.
These but we also need to look
at the setting in which we
deliver I services to ensure
that we're if we have community
groups and we have community
centered activities were
centers or places where children
gather and those are areas that
need to be looked at because it
isn't just one to one.
Therapy are when one approaches
it's also proven your approach
as to how we do and handle the
mental health of our children in
school so Mr chairman and and I
guess if as we monitor the
progression of the study if we
could still if we could.
Sure that we're looking at those
innovative and different
approaches that we center the
child and the you.
At the core of everything that
we do we have to know what makes
them comfortable where they are
comfortable and what conditions
they are comfortable after all
they are the ones that we're
focusing.
Our our attention on in order to
improve their mental and social
and economic and every
everything about their well
being so thank you very much Mr
chair I'm fully supportive of
this memorial.
I hope that we have all of them
thank right and Canada has been
presented by and make colleagues
thank you.
Great thank you Representative
so I don't have anybody else on
my list but I want to say thank
you Representative Herndon for
bringing this forward I did want
to point the committee to R. L.
E. S. C. analysis because
Representative Garrett had
brought up in the thanks others
have been alluding to
April health and behavioral
health.
Staff at our schools in in
pretty surprisingly I think
everybody would find out that
nationally we rank well above
the national average in having
behavioral health staff on the
screen or add a school site of
course I'm not sure about the
break down you know county by
county or or or.
where specifically there may be
gaps
but I think that one of the
things I think you're memorial
speaks about Representative
turned and and and I think
Representative Roybal Caballero
was was was getting added as
well as that we have some pretty
systemic issues on that are
affecting our students outside
of the classroom high poverty
rates crime drug use drug abuse
that are all
Contributing to these cases that
Representative Trujillo had
mentioned in her opening that
this these are things that our
students are working with
outside of the classroom and and
that we who are working in the
school site are are are working
within in working through with
the students
I just think as as part of of
how I see the the legislative
process on the it's difficult
because sometimes I feel like
we're working in silos away from
one another in in in our various
fields that we're the education
group and then over here you
have the.
criminal justice group or the
loss side of things and then we
have
The the.
The health committees and we're
all kind of working in these
different silos without much
cross collaboration because all
of these things wholistic we are
affecting our students in the
classroom and and.
I think that's where it becomes
A difficult thing to deal with
and I think regained
Representative Roybal Caballero
was alluding to this is that
we're we're putting a lot at the
school site and making the
schools have all these
facilities which are very much
needed but that we have some
real systemic issues that we as
a state are are really dealing
with that I think are at the
core of a lot of these issues
that that students are
experiencing and and just just
as an example we had a.
And I talk about this a lot and
you all remember Representative
from Representative re low but
he was our school resource
officer interest heritage and he
was instrumental in creating the
student success center which was
very much.
The program that you're laying
out here proposing that we start
studying in really having
students who may be acting out
in various ways be able to go
talk to somebody have a space
outside the classroom that's not
punitive that is very much
trying to foster this culture of
like Hey we understand we want
to get at the root of why you
may be acting out in class and
then leverage the community
resources to plug that student
and their family into what they
may be needing because students
are just acting out because
necessarily they dislike the
teacher or whatever the they're
dealing with all sorts of other
things that may or may not have
to do with the classroom and
it's having an attentive here on
methadone I in order to as
somebody like me an educator in
the classroom be able to
identify but then have resources
within the school or outside
within the community to leverage
so I think this is a very very
worthwhile cause but I think the
US is the legislature also
having to deal with with so much
and and working with so much
that affects our students
outside of the classroom poverty
crime drug abuse things of that
nature that that also certainly
need to be worked on but thank
you for bringing this forward
this time all of except in
ocean.
Over the past thank you we have
a due pass motion on house
memorial forty three by
Representative Roybal Caballero
a second so all right so we have
a second by Representative Baca
madam secretary of the call the
roll on a deep pass muster for
House memorial forty three
please.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Representative bills yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative Herrerra.
Representative Lane yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes
Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes
absolutely.
Representative Dow.
Representative Herrerra.
Yes.
Yes.
Chairman Romero yes.
Is what is your all right I have
a twelve to zero you have a do
pass on house memorial forty
three thank you Representative
heard.
So you need Mr chair members of
the committee great thank you
have a nice rest your morning
thank you.
All right.
So we'll move right along House
memorial forty eight I believe
we have Representative Lujan.
Where forty eight.
So Representative Lujan on the
attendees said we need
Your pro.
Analyst.
So we will.
Promoter demote you to our panel
signed.
All right.
Good morning Representative
Lujan did I need to bring our
panelists side I have
Hi Mister madam Representative.
New Mexico tech has witnessed
today and I don't have anybody
here for workforce solutions are
PED.
As an expert.
They may find COVID if needed
Sir okay.
All right some of the promote
Representative.
Mr Romero here.
C. and then if we need to be I'm
sure we could reference PED I
see health plan members of PED
out in the audience if need be
we can do that.
Yes thank you Mr memorial forty
eight how are.
When you have something going on
in the background which
is going to I'm.
Point everything out.
Yes I called the local it sounds
good so when you're ready
representative please house
memorial forty eight.
Thank you I think you good
morning Mr chair good morning
members I'm reading for today
has more forty eight it's
requesting the public education
department we.
Branch of science technology
engineering and mathematics
education teacher pipeline
study.
High quality professional
development for teachers and it
will report findings and
recommendations to the governor
to the legislature I recently
brought forward a piece of
legislation house bill
One fifteen which we had a
really wonderful discussion
about and.
Discussion and discussions
outside of this with the
Department
Public it I'm sorry PED excuse
me.
and workforce solutions another
we just want to make sure that
we come together and you the
interment through a study and
really acknowledge what is what
is all necessary as were
studying stem pilot program.
Giving up state funding to so.
That's what brought forward this
memorial and as we all know
We we're we need to improve our
stem education and the the
pipeline into our workforce
according to the twenty sixteen
LFC report science and
technology
Hi tech industries have created
sixty five percent of new jobs
since the recession and their
employees are twice as much as
the average worker outside
industry however what New
Mexico's ranked first in high
tech resources like Ph.D
scientists are better reserves
dollars per capita the status
fifty in high tech employment
growth since.
Two thousand.
Thirty percent we know that this
is something that's needed and
house legislation I believe
there's been twenty two bills
from twenty sixteen to the
present that we've tried to work
on so I think really bringing a
memorial to look at all those
aspects and and information
pieces is really needed.
And with that Mr chair I'd I'd
invite us to listen to Mr
Burciaga.
Mr chair some brief comments for
us welcome.
Representative.
Mr chairman thank you for
allowing me to address your
committee this morning thank
Representative Lujan procuring
this so important memorial.
I think as we look at the the
pipeline as we use is a metaphor
right the stem pipeline stem
pathways.
It's important as we theorize
around different ways so on
ramping off ramping to the
sympathetic lives we as a state
really understand the various
pieces of that whether it's stem
pipeline length it's the
contents within that pipeline
for the purpose of the pipeline.
And having a good foundational
understanding between statement
on stem education stem announced
an occupation and workforce
training and then having a
comprehensive study really going
from education workforce in
understanding the.
The continual training needs of
an educated workforce in stem
because a lot of our system.
Training workforce are not
college graduates they're highly
skilled technicians when you
look at the places like Los
Alamos national lab as an
example you look at their salary
distribution a hundred and forty
seven million dollars of their
workforces in Rio Arriba county
in terms of their payroll three
hundred thirty one million
dollars in Santa Fe County.
Fifty six million dollars in
Bernalillo county in forty
million dollars in Santa so when
you look at those large of
federal investments they do
spread out throughout the entire
region and having a good
foundational understanding will
really help us in developing
what what's gonna be the model
around the theory of change that
we want to see throughout this
pipeline and then understand
what's inside that pipe or other
differences in based on gender.
Region ality.
Demographics other pieces
related to social capital I
think once we have a
foundational understanding
things like the builder
Representative Lujan was
carrying the session really be
able to be more targeted
impactful Mansell out of the
question this committee had
about the.
Development of of pilot studies
or other types of interventions
so thank you very much
Representative Lujan for during
this to members of the committee
thank you for listening to me
this morning.
Right.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to the
attendees list.
Is there anybody here in support
of house memorial forty eight
please indicate by raising your
hand again in a moment.
All right.
So you'll have to two minutes.
Good morning Sharon welcome.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Lujan for
bringing this piece of
legislation I'm really happy to
speak in support of house
memorial forty eight I'm as you
know I'm from New Mexico tech
I'm one of the pieces it's
really exciting to me is that
there are curricular and
extracurricular stem programs
across the state of New Mexico
what we have science fair
science Olympiad of New Mexico
mesa we have two of our faculty
in New Mexico tech that are
developing statewide stem
programs one in combat robots
one in drones systems go and
that's you know A. A. W. explore
if there's all these
organizations and I know that
many of them do a lot of this
court date data collecting Mason
New Mexico for instance does
look at demographics they look
at what other stem programs that
their students participated they
look at what that where the
state whether they're students
are from rural with their
economic backgrounds are and
being able to integrate the data
across all of these programs and
to look and see what sort of an
impact as Mr Romero was talking
about on that their leader
interests in in pursuing stem
fields is a really important
question for us to be able to
look at so we know as a state
and as an as program program the
people that run these programs
what we need to focus on to help
our pathways for our students so
this is a real opportunity to be
able to break the silos of all
of those help collaboration and
really build a systematic
evaluation
metric to measure this so I I'm
full support and thank you all
for your consideration.
Thank you.
K. and you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Chairman members of the
committee.
Can you.
We can welcome.
Mr chairman members committee
just aspen as a registered
lobbyist with the New Mexico
technology council we stand in
strong support of the memorial
you know one of the things that
I just want to mention I think
Mr Romero also mentioned is
really stem education in science
in general is this really for
everyone I think we tend to
think of that as sort of the
national labs and and scientists
for state the stem education
really reaches every industry
when we're thinking of
agriculture or even construct
option with engineers and other
architects and other folks using
math with that in that industry
and fifty seven percent of stem
jobs here in New Mexico do not
require bachelor's degrees to
look really looking at the
different pathways through high
school through workforce
solutions with certificate
programs and then higher at
through more traditional
pathways we think is really
important and you're really
developing the twenty first
century sort of skilled
workforce to capture sort of
innovation our economic
development and states important
so we stand a strong support and
are happy if this move forward
the research I council stands
ready to help.
In collaboration with the
department state into the
memorial to provide any
information about what the
industry needs moving forward in
these to create transferable
industry recognized credentials
as well thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
More to welcome back you have up
to two minutes.
Chairman members of the
committee I'm here and I'm
speaking on behalf of all New
Mexico I appreciate their
intervention program that crack
or I'm not half of the league of
women voters of New Mexico and
working out here your thank you
all for your
thank you are creating groundhog
day for you know New Mexico had
a very low bar program called
who of the work cool the careers
are out thirty years ago and
frankly will perform the star
market.
Are done one really appreciate
my representative one for
bringing forward but I think
after that we move forward we're
so much data on.
Are there your doctor
when
they're farther apart
governor has there are working
on the corner for all our our
programs all of the very very
very important what are we going
on thank you for not.
Are not I think you have to have
you know
that can be exactly hold on the
market
for our thank you very very much
we look forward Representative
more on born on earth.
Our long recommend both the
whole screen
we are are one part of the now
how share report are.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We may welcome back.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee willing more thirties
Representative The New Mexico
school board association as
their legislative liaison all
this the association sports
funding and legislation that
will establish state needs stem
and career and technical
pathways to include financial
systems job opportunities
internship programs for our high
school students Mr chairman we
also support efforts that will
assist in retaining our teachers
which includes on going
professional development that
will provider teaches the tools
they need to keep them supported
and in the classroom educating
our students Mister chair we
support this legislation the
intent of it and we appreciate
your allowing us voice our
comments thank you great thank
you.
They don't have anybody else in
the attendees list in favor
we'll go to.
Judy your hand is going up and
down.
Will bring Judy in welcome duty
of up to two minutes I assume
it's in support.
Yes Mr chairman thank you very
much I'd like to take us to the
step where we're talking about
the pipeline getting interested
individuals either from second
careers or from other industries
or those in high school it is
really important that we not
only support the teachers who
are currently working but to get
those in the pipeline as we
prepare them for the elements
are in a stem classroom the idea
of critical thinking the idea of
looking at real world issues so
working with teachers at the
recruitment level at the
preparation level and then at
the retention level so I think
this particular bill on this
study again as previous our
presenters absent we study did
we see that it does work but you
do have to start with those you
might be interested in within
the grow up of the the community
schools model where again
families come into play
everything comes into play as
opposed to doing these things
individually so thank you for
the opportunity and the
importance of I'm starting a
teacher private wine promoting
stem education.
Right thank you.
So now I don't have anybody else
in the list on the attendees
side for support do I have
opposition for House memorial
forty eight please indicate by
raising your virtual hand.
Nobody we will come to
committee.
Committee House memorial forty
eight.
Representative please.
Thank you presenters thank you
representative on to being in
this sport I actually ran a
school to work program and them.
Early nineties
it was a federal program at the
time the money flow down to the
department of labor and state
honest honestly was the hardest
job I ever had well maybe this
is a little harder but getting
forty teenagers the job in one
month was really quite
extraordinary and we had to get
it them a job in the career path
that they have chosen at the
time and we did do Raul men at
the college which at the time
was very difficult now now it's
not
so it was it was a whole thing
out kids
High school kids trying to
figure out their path in life it
was a very successful program
and and if it can be replicated
if we can do this
again I really think we should I
think it really helped and I
have kids from all levels you
know I had a students in own
people competing for the
valedictorian position as well
as a special ed kids who were
really struggling and it was
amazing how how will that
program work I see them today
maybe in the Walmart or grocery
store and they tell me what
their lives are like in
you know it's quite
extraordinary it's a great
program and anything we can do
to for this.
would be great thank you.
Thank you Representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman I move it
to pass.
All right so in the past motion
by Representative care second by
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Discussion.
All right secretary to call the
roll on a two passed motions for
House memorial forty eight.
Representative.
Representative Chatfield.
You.
I'm gonna start over because I
just heard a lot of sense.
Representative.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative
yes.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative Herrera yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Romero yes.
Well deserved.
All right you have a unanimous
to pass on house memorial forty
eight thank you for sticking
with it Representative Lujan
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members.
Great thank you all right so.
We'll do some reshuffling.
the reshuffling themselves all
right so we will go to Senate
bill one so now we're moving on
to Senate bill so we have
Senator Stewart Senator Stewart
on the internet side would you
mind raising your hands to jump
to the top of my list please.
Representative Sarinana same
thing.
We now.
To
promote your demo to.
In your perspective.
C..
Good morning madam pretend.
Good morning Mr chair how are
you I'm doing all right did you
have an expert that I need to
bring along with us I do not.
Okay I see Secretary Steinhaus
says a Senator is we'll get to
attendees in a moment similar
hands.
We have Senator Stewart
Representative Sarinana please
madam pretend when you're ready
Senator one so I think everybody
knows about Senate bill one fact
when I got on when you started
your committee everybody said
yeah they were doing teacher pay
a Senate bill one races our
three tier salary minimums from
forty thousand to fifty thousand
for level one from fifty cent
current fifty thousand to sixty
thousand for level two and from
the current sixty thousand to
seventy thousand for level
three.
That is basically the bill I
will remind everyone that the
pay for assistant principals and
principals are tied to the three
tier so they have a.
Responsibility factor that goes
up when teacher pay goes up at
the responsibility factors a
percentage but it's tied to the
three tier like the pate so they
will see increased salaries also
and so Mister chairman this is
this is a recruitment tool this
is a retention tool this is that
the way that we show a little
more respect for the
professionalism of our teachers
excuse my French but they've
been through hell for three
years this was supposed to be
the year to catch up and that
will go back to normal and we're
far from it with the pandemic
still here and the absences that
are created through COVID
we're this is not really a catch
up here this is a year where we
tried to ask teachers to hang on
but what we've asked them to do
for the last three years is yes.
And some of their minds in you
may we have over a thousand
teacher openings right now we
have current teachers retiring
up there's a little ray of hope
we are starting to hear people
say okay well if you're gonna
raise salaries that much I'll
stick around for another few
years the impact on retirements
will be huge you can stick
around through these higher
salaries so I know everybody
knows about this bill on your
committee it's an L. E. S. C.
endorsed bill I wanted to do
this for a while it took the
governor coming out to say that
this is what we were going to do
to have this be in front of you
I just want to reflect that.
Work from her so I'm ready for
questions Mr chairman thank you
so much.
Right.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to the
attendees side so.
I haven't given directions.
All the students raising their
hands without directions.
I'm gonna go to opposition first
to change things up so good
opposition to Senate bill one
please indicate by raising your
hands and you can.
All right oh and I forgot I'm
sorry about that Representative
Sarinana did you wish to say a
few words before we go to
support.
Sorry Representative.
Open your muted.
Thank you Mr chairman I I I only
had one comment that Senator
Stewart has been a champion for
this for over twenty years so
thank you for that otherwise she
covered everything so thank you.
All right thank you all right so
we'll go to the attendees side
those in support of Senate bill
one.
We're gonna give it a moment
it's.
Shuffling the deck.
All right so you have up to two
minutes but prefer is always
better Kerry.
My system report.
Because we have to telecast it
for later Senator Stewart.
Please.
Good morning Mr good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I carry robin brindar
registered lobbyists the public
charter schools of New Mexico we
of course strongly support this
legislation we think Senator
Stewart Representative Sarinana
and madam governor Michelle
Lujan Grisham for their
leadership and we hope you vote
yes thank you right thank you.
Welcome back Amy.
Up to two minutes thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
again my name is Amy Prada I'm
network or needed to teach plus
New Mexico in my role I get to
work with our state's best and
brightest educators through our
network and policy fellowship
ship I get to hear their stories
about challenges and successes
in their classrooms it is clear
that our educators want what's
best for our students and our
community our teachers reserves
and had developed ideas related
to recruitment and retention of
New Mexico educators we are at a
critical time in education in
our state faced with double
teacher vacancies leaving around
twenty five thousand students
without access to a certified
classroom teacher in front of
them our teacher leaders
understand the impact of this
crisis in our overall profession
and most importantly the impact
and it has had on their students
we support salary increases as
one of the end of the strategies
to address teacher vacancies
retain our teachers and recruit
teachers more competitively
additionally we would like to
thank New Mexico pandemic for
supporting our teachers and
inspiring teachers by waiting
licensure fees until March
thirty first would like to see
this extended longer if possible
we also recommended that funding
be provided for state
institutions for effectively for
billing additional
responsibilities are working in
high need areas thank you all
for your time and consideration
and thank you us Senator
Senator Stewart workers in this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
State.
Stand will come back.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee good morning madam
pro tem and representative
Sarinana thank you for bringing
this forward this is one of the
important pillars and how we're
going to be able to effectively
it.
Tak our recruitment retention
problems for teachers in New
Mexico to tie this together with
house bill two and the work
being done there I feel fairly
optimistic that are thousand
person gap in the teaching ranks
can begin to close this is an
important message to our
teachers and our principal is an
assistant principals about the
importance in our in the fabric
of our system of education I
want to thank you specially
Madam pro tem as mentioned this
is your twenty year work it's
even more than that as we've
interact with and I just want to
thank you personally for
bringing this forward so Mr
chairman thank you for the
opportunity.
Thank you.
All right heather good morning
up to two minutes good morning
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee APS stands in
strong support of SB one this is
heather Bassett and we think
madam pro time Stewart and
Representative Sariñana
continuing to prioritize the
education profession each
session with legislation that
brings wide impact to educators
across the strait of state when
SB one was heard in Senate ad
APS here that we had two hundred
and thirty seventieth agencies
but I want to also share that we
have another one hundred and
eighty positions currently
staffed with long term
substitutes so raising the tier
minimums into statute is an
incredibly important part of the
recruitment strategies that will
need to rebuild the workforce as
our superintendent elder says we
don't need a handful of teachers
in the next two years we will
need hundreds so in APS we also
negotiate other licensed
professionals like social
workers counselors therapists on
this three tier system so in the
future or at some point adding
them would really help and
support the whole child needs of
students thank you.
Right thank you.
Any a New Mexico which I think
tends to be Steve.
Good morning you have a two
minutes.
Mr chair members of the
committee us is government
relations director bring a New
Mexico and I apologize for that
any A. N. M. I just haven't
learned how to change but on
behalf of our members we thank
the sponsors for bringing forth
this bill this is a necessary
piece of legislation given the
current and alarming educator
shortage crisis yes it's not a
perfect bill and we can do
better but it is a bill that
sends out the right message to
teachers at the right moment
it's not just about raising the
tier minimums does more than
that it tells our educators that
they are valued and respected
for the hard work they do every
single day.
And as you know teachers have
the most noble and important
task of all professions that
touching the lives of our kids
our students in the most
positive way and by doing so
shaping the future of our state
and our country.
We joined the voices in support
of this bill when we ask that
you consider voting in favor as
well thank you.
Great thank you it's.
All right so we'll go to Karen
morning care any of up to two
minutes welcome back.
Thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we are in strong
support of this bill we
appreciate the efforts of the
sponsor over the long haul to
increase increased educator Hey
but we would like to see social
workers that the workers are
educators and are a vital part
of the education process.
Social workers should be
included in this bill as well
again we think the Sanchez for
bringing this legislation.
Right thank you.
Good morning.
Two minutes.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and community members my name is
Eileen van we I am the co chair
of the Education Committee for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico a nonpartisan
organization and I'd like to
think Senator Stewart Hemphill
and Sarinana for
introducing this essential
legislation believe highly
supports S. B. one of high
quality equitable education
include is echt knowledgeable
and skillful educators and
Senator Stuart mentioned the
various reasons that I was going
to mention why this is so we
central so I won't repeat that I
personally wish that the three
levels would be sixty seventy
and eighty thousand dollars but
that's something to think about
for the future this is a a huge
step forward so I we strongly
urge you to support SB one thank
you thank you Eileen sorry for
the miss pronunciation.
John.
Hi John you have a few minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee to
under two and a half to New
Mexico we unsurprisingly are
here in strong support for
Senate bill one want to thank
both Sanchez Madam presents tour
and Representative Sariñana for
for always being champions for
educational staff in our schools
I would I wanted to underscore
one thing that was said and it
was really impactful this will
need veteran educators in our
classroom but I think on the
other end of that spectrum we're
going to show expiring educators
that New Mexico is serious about
this profession serious about
recruiting the best talent into
our public schools so again we
are in full support of this
measure and do want to urged the
committees yes vote on this
measure thank you right thank
you.
Secretary St house good morning
you have a two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members thank you very much
three technical things to help
you in your committee make an
informed decision the minimum
salaries are currently in
statute so we do need this bill
to raise the minimums secondly I
wanted to point out Mr chairman
members that this bill is a part
of did tire package of support
for teachers at all are school
personnel and we want to thank
Senator Stewart for for bringing
this forward in caring at and
thank you Representative Sonney
out of recurring this over the
house and then Mr chairman my
last point
is that the funding for this
bill currently exists in house
bill two thank you Sir.
Right thank you so much
Secretary.
More.
You're undefeated champion this
morning welcome back.
But Paul.
Thank you so much Senator
Stewart I heard R. thank you for
so long and thank you for the
governor working on that's.
The most important fell apart
all sessions I'm more of
the New Mexico which are.
For now.
Are there more often thirty
years I think the most
important.
New Mexico Kamal.
Or not quality what are the
market thank you but.
Great thank you.
Morning Seri of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm cert that
sterile senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we support
increasing teacher salaries and
raising the minimum salary level
across teacher licensure tears
teaching is a key work for
storage area in New Mexico and
to the extent that increasing
rate is helpful in alleviating
that problem we're absolutely in
support especially in the year
where revenue is plentiful with
due respect we want to offer an
important caveat this simply
increasing the amount of money
flowing through our education
system is not the sole or even
primary answer to improving it
we believe every child should
have access to a great school
and a high performing teacher
and kids to spend more time in
the classroom each year we hope
extended learning requirements
go hand in hand with this so
that our kids can to continue to
benefit from our teacher skills
and catch up on what they've
lost out on these last two years
as long time admirers of the
difficult job the teachers do on
a daily basis we're happy to
support this legislation we
thank the sponsors for bringing
it thank you.
Thank you.
We may.
Welcome back really make your
two minutes thank you Mr
chairman good morning good
morning members of the committee
millimeter to use with the New
Mexico scored Association and Mr
chairman members of the
committee we are completely on
board with this legislation
since two thousand and eighteen
legislative session and MSP has
recommended in support of the
raising of the three chairman of
the to the fifty sixty and
seventy thousand dollar levels
along with those higher levels
and MSP has also for the last
five years as well recommended
and supported increasing to
eighty ninety and hundred
thousand salaries for elementary
middle school and high school
principals and must be a
strongly and wholeheartedly
supports increasing the minimum
salaries of the three tier
license Sir system clearly Mr
chairman the raising of these
base salaries places I stayed in
a position to be competitive
with other states in our region
raises to these levels has been
long in coming we sincerely
appreciate the work of the LFC
members for their disbursement
to move this legislation forward
we think representatives are in
our fridge carry the bill in the
house and we cannot say enough
Mr chairman about senator stores
tireless lifelong efforts to
champion our education our
teachers our students in the
state of New Mexico thank you
Senator Stewart Representative
side now that and the
government.
Thank you.
Ellen good morning Ellen welcome
back you two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Erin
Byrne Steen I'm president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
I want to thank Madam pro tem
for her decades of dedication I
would also like to say that
compensation is a cornerstone of
our ability to show respect for
the profession to recruit and
retain the highly qualified
caring and competent teachers
for every student across the
state I think this goes hand in
hand with other initiatives that
are going through this session
like Senator Stewart
Representative Garrett and
Representative starving artist
work on teacher residencies I
think that will also make a big
difference in recruiting and
retaining and I hope as a your
work in the legislature advances
we can also address our need to
be regionally competitive in
salaries for all are classified
and all our license people that
work alongside us in public
schools to make our schools the
best they can be for all
students thank you very much
right thank you.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Committee
I serve the need academic.
Sako several other worlds but
mainly I'm here just to echo the
voices that have gone before me
and stand in strong support of
the spells thank you all so much
for your hard work
and ask for the past have a
great day
thank you.
Sabrina good morning Sabrina
welcoming of up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak I
agree wholeheartedly with the
previous public commenters and
voice my support for this bill I
am a school social worker at Las
Cruces public schools and I
urging the committee to consider
adding social workers and other
duel licensed professionals to
this bill the past legislation
that was done in two.
Twenty nineteen I believe that
was H. B. one sixteen named all
of the different professionals
that would be included in the
two years that we I I it named
audiologist school psychologists
speech language pathologist
social workers and for these are
all of the team members that
make up at the very important
structure that supports our
children are most vulnerable
children in the school setting.
many schools my district
included have social workers in
the tiered system I'm currently
on tier three by naming
counselors and not naming the
other professionals I fear that
it's going to leave us in an
awkward position we're districts
may provide an increase for the
counselors but not for the other
professionals that are currently
in the tiered system
also I'm and special let but we
had a second.
Okay we have many professionals
that are social workers to
find that fill the role of
school counselors and so we
might end up in a situation
where some people are doing the
same job but are on different
pay scales if we do not include
if we don't open up the language
for who's included in this
measure thank you for your time.
Right at two minutes thank you
so much.
R. A. Melissa.
Good morning my state of up to
two minutes good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
important legislation on the
center stands in strong support
of this bill it is a step in the
right direction towards building
a robust teacher workforce I'm
in addition to filling teacher
vacancies there remains a
critical need for teachers who
are bilingual or diesel endorsed
native American and those places
to special ed we need to provide
training to all teachers in
these areas and and racial
equity and CLR instruction and
finally the teacher workforce
should reflect the diversity of
our student body we thank the
committee for your support of
this measure thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chair Linda Siegel
for the Santa Fe public schools
and we stand in strong support
of this we have about sixty five
vacancies now and as you all
know Santa Fe is a very
expensive place to live so we
feel like this is really going
to help us recruit and retain
key thank you.
Great thank you.
Chris good morning Chris you
have up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning there's a committee I'm
Chris Bazan on their registered
lobbyists for Las Cruces public
schools and Roger public schools
we want to echo or support along
with all the school districts we
believe this is going to help us
with our retention and
recruitment of teachers we
appreciate all the hard work the
years that Senator Mimi Stewart
has done for behalf of teachers
and supporting school districts
and we stand strong support this
piece of legislation thank you.
Thank.
Thank you.
All right everybody on the
attendees side we've done
opposition we will come back to
committee questions comments
concerns motions.
I
all jump up at once.
Mr chair with the pants so we
have to pass a motion by
Representative Sweetser and a
second by Representative plane
Representative Garrett do you
have some comments before except
the motion.
Yes
Mr chair I'd support this but I
am concerned about the inclusion
of other and ciliary staff
because the bill just mentions
counselors but we heard from a
social worker
From Los crucis.
And we do have other people we
have are nurses
social workers all these other
bills I wonder if not approach
him just comment on how this
fits into another's compaction
money but that's not a guarantee
that these other hard working of
professionals our school system
will also get braces so we just
have a comment on that Mr chair.
Please madam person.
Hope you're muted Madam pretend.
Sorry about that.
Mr Chairman representative.
So we we need to do a different
statute to involve and slurry
this is a teacher licensure
statute with all kinds
provisions about how you
evaluate teachers and how they
move through the three tier
system that's totally different
four and celerity so in
districts
many districts have as you heard
from some of put ancillary on
the same salary schedule mean
every district has their own
internal salary schedule that
goes above and beyond these
anymore.
These are just anymore so you
know I certainly support and
celerity being at the same
salary level but this is not the
place to do that if you wanted
to put that in statute you just
have to do a different bill
because they don't fit into this
licensure section of our
statutes this is really just
teachers.
So we could certainly think
about that in the future I have
not heard of the district that
doesn't pay and celerity the
same as teachers I just haven't
heard of one there may be some
certainly those districts with.
Bargaining if you heard from
Ellen burns state park in the
same salaries for ancillary
I do believe that we've put
extra funding in the budget for
hard to staff positions I just
saw it in there fact I suggested
that we increase that amount I
don't know if my suggestions are
going to be in that final bill
to give districts little
flexibility with our to staff
ensuring that ancillary are on
the same salary schedule
etcetera so I don't I don't
think I'm just thinking about my
thirty years with APS we never
had a different salary schedule
for ancillary everybody was on
the same salary schedule so.
These anymore so I think are
very significant for districts
because it does tell them the
minimums but all those districts
have all the steps in between
the minimums so it's certainly
something that I'll think about
and work on in the future but
this is not the statute to
change that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam pro tempore that thorough
explanation and if we need to
work on that I would like to
work on that with you in the
future thanks so much for the
bill.
Thank you Representative care.
Right so we did have a motion
before I accepted I I mean Madam
pretend you did bring up one
thing about the ten million
dollars that was put back in the
budget on the house side for the
hard to fill certainly an L. E.
S. C. we had been proposing
almost fifty million on that
would go a long way and
alleviating some of the issues
that Representative Garrett had
brought up so certainly we're
hoping and rooting for getting
that out because initially HSC
had not included it but then I
think with our Jing and
certainly Representative
Sweetser is urging back out on
top and re included into the
budget which I think will be
helpful but I'll just put that
out there as an added urging
hopefully you all in the Senate
with our house bill to could
include that but I appreciate
those comments we did have a
motion for do pass
by Representative I forget
Representative Sweetser was it
second by Representative plane
madam secretary could you call
the roll on a do pass on Senate
bill one please.
Representative.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Herrera.
Yes this is been a long time
coming.
Representative Eli.
Representative Lara planes yes
yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Baca.
Representative.
Representative Figueroa.
Yeah.
Representative Madrid yes.
Mr chair yes.
Representative Romero.
And remember.
Well yes.
Eleven two zero all right so you
have a unanimous to pass on
Senate bill one thank you so
much better pro tem
representative are known thank
you all very much.
All right morning apparently
definitely and that's that is my
next announcement thank you the
we will be meeting tomorrow
morning at nine o'clock our
first and only Saturday meeting
to consider the E. R. P. Neville
so madam pretend you'll be back
with us.
But will be back in the morning
remember there's a different
link for Saturday meeting so
just follow the
link that you'll be sent out an
hour before and then Madam
ProtonMail be up on the website
we can pull you in from the
attendees list just like today
okay great thank you so much
thank you we'll see you
committee thank you for the good
work have a nice rest of your
day.
Recess.
Thank you.
