All right good morning everybody
if you all would please take
your seats everybody else if you
would please remain quiet we're
going to go ahead and get
started for this morning.
So good morning everybody so
we're having our joint meeting
between house education and
Senate educations are Senate
education counterparts welcome
it's good to have you here
Those of you that are here so
today we're gonna be hearing
over the various budget
recommendations from Public
Education Department
R. LESC and R. L. E. S. C. so a
couple things from our
presenters good morning thank
you all for for being here on
the snowy morning.
If you all would please give
we're under a bit of a time
crunch because the Senate Ford
like to make it back to their
side around nine twenty years so
Senator souls so that they could
start hearing their bills house
members we have lingering
questions we plan on going to
about ten o'clock we have until
that time then we'll break from
here and we'll go back to our
zoom room will have about a ten
minute break once we do and our
session.
And for return towards in room
to hear a few bills and get some
some more business done but
certainly members also with your
questions obviously certainly
very welcome
Senator souls and I will be
keeping track both of our our
members participating virtually
and those of you in the chamber
so excuse us we have a little
bit of a juggling act to do but
our staff is doing a fantastic
job setting us all up so.
Presenters again if you could
give a quick overview of your
proposed budgets because we want
to leave plenty of time for
questions for members but
members please keep your
questions a brief so that we can
get to everybody's questions I
wish to ask questions this
morning in as quickly as
possible so without further ado
I guess I'll call on Dachstein
house will come if we could
start off with the public
education department priorities
and proposals so yes we have a
microphone that'll be passed
along thank you Sonny.
but please.
When you already.
Mr chairman members of the
committees Mr chairman both of
you good morning it's on honor
to be here with you I'm Kurt
Steinhaus the designated for
public education secretary and
Mr chairman to follow your
instructions I will keep this
summary a very high level in
front of you you've got a
spreadsheet that we
traditionally called the
different sheet that shows the
FY twenty two up but that's what
we're operating under right now
and in the different
recommendations from Kelly is C.
LFC in the executive the
executive recommendation focuses
on addressing the three really
big challenges Mr chairman that
we have facing us the first one
is the workforce crisis out
across New Mexico schools that
are in session today is our
meeting this morning they have
done an incredible job to keep
kids safe.
In person learning going in
every way possible including
getting substitute teachers out
this week that's the first part
workforce crisis the second one
we have got to do everything we
can times ten fund the social
emotional side our staff for
teachers that are out there on
the front lines need our support
I call it student and staff well
being and our budget proposal
addresses the social emotional
learning as well as the other
two the third one Mr chairman to
make sure that we stay focused
on addressing the Martinez
Yazzie ruling and the work that
needs to be done so Mister
chairman those are the three
primary big challenges that our
budget recommendation is focused
on I will add that the finish
learning that we have seen in
New Mexico and across the
country which is especially
impacting the subgroups in the
Martinez Yazzie is the over
arching theme that we have in
our budget recommendations and
with that Mr chair I would be
happy to answer any questions we
get to that point.
Great thank you so much.
Since we share Mr chairman
members of the committees
But just very briefly by the
analysts so might myself our
jobs of seven with Ellie S. C.
C. lu with the legislative
finance committee as a new
Martinez with the department of
finance and administration will
go over the the staff framework
for Malia C. as well as
recommendations from Ellie are
sorry LFC and exec.
You should have this spreadsheet
it should have been passed out a
few moments ago for the first
I'd like to draw your attention
to flight ninety two on page
three this is the total
recurring general fund.
The amounts for each of the
recommendations our framework I
can see the executive.
As a the points sorry three
point eight six six billion.
For the LFC has three point
eight six seven million and the
LFC staff framework has three
point nine two five billion
those are increases of between
four hundred and twenty million
dollars for four hundred and
seventy nine million dollars
to just very briefly going back
to page one for the state
equalization guarantee which is
the top proportion of the sheet
I just want to draw your
attention to a couple of
different items in the LFC staff
framer before handing over to
sunny and seventy first on line
twelve you can see there is
twenty seven million in the LFC
staff framework to fully fund
elementary P. program units this
bill would permit the department
to.
Send out additional funds for
PED without diluting the unit
value.
additionally will draw your
attention to.
flying number seventeen for
which is
Ten point six million dollars
for educator health insurance
this would allow school
districts to pay to pay a larger
share of employee health
insurance benefits than they are
currently.
Online's eighteen.
Twenty two you can see the.
Compensation amount of trucks
are twenty three you can see the
compensation amounts if
In addition to across the board
percentage increase and
increases in minimum salary
levels the LFC staff emerged
online twenty two has about
fifty million dollars for
flexible rate increases to be
decided at the local level.
and then following up on what
the Mr secretary said a few
moments ago online fifteen
in the alley aceasta framework
for fifteen million dollars for
school districts and charter
schools to support student
mental and behavioral health so
with that I'll pass this over to
Senate for any remarks on the
SCG thank you and and before you
begin Sunday I'm getting word
that on our panelists listed in
the webcast they're not getting
sound so if we could take a
moment we're waiting on I. T. to
get to this issue
So that we can get everybody in
the webcast I don't know
So if you want to try and yes
some Mike and somebody
externally that's listening in
can verify whether or not they
can hear Sonny on the wired
microphone yes yes if they can
hear me some.
Testing.
Testing.
Yes yes.
Mr chair.
This is Representative season
Herrera I can hear you all right
so you can hear you heard sunny.
All right thank thank you so
much so looks like we may have
to use a wired microphone School
excellent so funny thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
but also metal this is
Representative I believe I've
I've got a couple you know I do
not hear anything.
Mr Chairman representative can
you hear me now.
Representative of the Energy
hear me at this point.
Representative about it are you
able to hear Sonny.
I heard you Representative
a chair Romero but not some.
Representative for the county
and can you hear me now.
Yes thank you thank you awesome
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman.
Thank attorney to the third
column on the handout few things
I'd like to point out and
highlight from the LFC
recommendation for SCG.
Lines formed I increased funding
for the extended learning time
program and provide additional
funding for smaller districts
online I and then on lines
twenty one twenty two twenty
three the compensation
recommendations for LFC and
provides a seven percent across
the board average increase for
all school personnel that's
can happen to a three percent
increase for the end of fiscal
year twenty to the last quarter
and four percent across the
board raise starting in FY
twenty three.
Following that across the board
seven percent cumulative raise
is a increases to New South
amendment minimums for level one
two and three teachers and
principals at forty eight
thousand five hundred for level
one fifty seven thousand five
hundred for level two and sixty
seven thousand five hundred for
level three there's also
additional money to address
compaction issues in targeting
pay for hard to staff positions
and last but not least online
twenty six like to highlight
forty million for employer
contribution increases T. E. R.
B..
There's a schedule one percent
increase this fiscal year from
changes to statute this would
add another one percent
contingent on a bill for fiscal
year twenty three and that
leases at a total of eleven
point nine percent online thirty
five increase for SCG thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you so much please when
you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so just to
highlight on the executive
recommendation which is the
second column there
the executive recommendation
just to give you a little bit of
a highlight as a total of three
point eight billion this is a
twelve percent increase in
recurring funding and it's a
overall in the larger scale
that's about a four hundred
million dollars of more than
four hundred million dollar
increase in general fund
spending and about a hundred
million from the public
education reform Fund before
above the line I'd like to just
highlight a few of that that
rolling to some of the
discussion that the secretary
spoke about and that's you'll
see lines twenty.
In line twenty three which
relate to the compensation
online twenty three two hundred
million to increase the minimum
teacher salaries so this
increases the levels one two and
three up to fifty sixty and
seventy thousand dollars and
then online twenty three there's
seventy six point nine million
four seven percent increases for
all school personnel this does
allow for some
you know adjustments for
compaction as well and and then
a little bit further down not in
this section but also related to
compensation is on line forty
seven and that's a we also
include a seven percent increase
for transportation employees as
well and with that I'll turn it
back over.
So Mr chairman and members
moving on to date to and
categorical appropriations I'll
just highlight
online forty nine in the LFC
staff framework it looks as
though there's a smaller
recommendation for
transportation that's largely
due to differences in lines
forty six and forty seven the
LFC staff framework continues to
utilize funds from the public
education reform Fund for both
K. five plus an extended
learning transportation where is
there some some small
differences in the executive
recommendation and LESC they use
a general fund dollars for the
that purpose
Additionally all refer you to
line fifty which is the Indian
education fund so the LFC staff
from work includes in that
amount for the Indian education
fund fifteen million dollars for
tribally based after school and
summer on a community based
programs out of that fund also
highlight for you online fifty
three four million dollars to
allow PED some funding to
improve implementation of the
Hispanic Education Act.
On the line item number fifty
six the CDC ADA appropriation
for for
again for health insurance to
provide funds to the public
school insurance authority to
account for some of the
disparities in premiums between
the the different plans
different health plans at the
state level.
And then finally online fifty
seven ten million dollars in
recurring general fund for the
teacher residencies fund I had
we'll talk about this a little
bit later went over the public
education reform Fund I believe
the executive and
LFC use public education reform
Fund dollars for the for that
recommendation.
Mr chairman and.
Turning your attention to call
on three the LFC recommendation.
Back to one forty nine on
transportation the LFC
recommendation includes one
hundred nineteen million for FY
twenty three three million of
that is coming from the public
education reform Fund.
Online fifty in the Indian
education fund the LFC
recommendation includes about
fifteen million which is a ten
million dollar increase from the
prior year to help tribal
education departments tribal
libraries schools to increase
their capacity to implement the
Indian Education Act and with
that I'll turn it over to.
The executive recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on moving on to
just a point you to line forty
nine you'll see the executive
recommendation for
transportation totals a hundred
and nineteen million yes similar
to the LFC it's about a twelve
million dollar increase in
general fund as well I'd like to
direct you to line fifty which
is the Indian education fund and
the executive recommendation is
for nine point seven million an
increase of four and a half
million this funding will
maintain the current standard
distribution yeah and in
addition to a per student
distribution.
As well as the line fifty two
four million dollars for the
black Education Act.
And then online fifty one
there's ten point two million
for native American student
education and this funding will
expand and enhance programs such
as the indigenous language
initiatives native language
database support and grow your
own indigenous language teacher
pipeline.
And with that I'll turn it back
over to the LFC.
so thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee moving on to
the below the line that begins
on the line sixty five I will
really on blowing just highlight
one area for you that is a
little different in the LFC
staff framework and that is on
a line number seventy eight
includes one point four million
dollars for PED to be able to
cover the cost of licensure exam
fees to that assist in
recruiting a new educators to
the classroom
just also very brief that the
increased online seventy nine
for student nutrition and
wellness programs for
to improve
the
The hunger issues.
Mr Chairman one thing I'd like
to highlight from below the line
programs online seventy one the
LFC recommendation includes
eleven point five million for
early literacy and reading
supports three point five
million of that total is from
the public education reform Fund
this is why I only see a million
from the general fund recurring
portion here otherwise the LFC
recommendation maintains flat
funding levels for all the other
below the line appropriations
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so moving on to
below the line the executive
recommendation you'll see on
line seventy one for early
literacy there is eleven point
five million in from the
executive.
Also line sixty seven eight
million for Martinez Yazzie
student program supports this
funding will help to in de
escalation training and training
for teachers with us students
who have IEPs in English
language learners a little bit
further down but from the public
education reform Fund online one
eighteen you'll see ten million
dollars for the before after
school and summer enrichment
programs.
And then I think.
a little bit further down ten
million for career technical
education that's online ninety
eight that's ten million
dollars.
And then line one oh one we have
eight million dollars for
community schools and this is
you know continues to build on
that same program and finding
and then last but very
importantly online one oh seven
we have eleven million dollars
for teacher residency programs
and so this funding will
maintain programs as established
by the teacher residencies act
and with that I'll turn it back
over to this is.
Thank you and just to continue
with the the folk education
reform Fund online's ninety
eight ninety nine a total of
seven point five million for
career technical education
divided between the existing
statutory funded as well as an
additional
allocation primarily for
equipment purchases.
online one to one you can see
ten million dollars for
community schools that looks a
little higher than the executive
but the the executive
recommendation also included two
million dollars in a categorical
funding so it is that's
That aligns with that request
again online one oh two we have
an additional seven point five
million for students mental and
behavioral health supports.
Sonny spoke a moment ago about
early literacy the eleven point
five million requests for
recommended by the executive so.
All between the public education
reform Fund and the general fund
all three scenarios have that
recommend recommendation just
comes in different amounts for
different funds so the six
million there in the LFC staff
framework supplements of five
point five million general fund
where is
LFC does the same to us to a
smaller amounts
I also want to highlight on I or
line of one eight so
a recommendation to have.
Fund colleges of education to
provide continuing support for
new create teachers alternative
licensure teachers
ten million dollars for that and
on line one eleven thirty
million for collaboration
planning and preparation time.
Finally online one seventeen so
in FY twenty two the state began
an additional instructional time
pilot which essentially provides
some schools funding is
equivalent to that for K. five
plus program that allows them to
to do things a little
differently at hours rather than
days essentially and so that for
fiscal year twenty twenty to
that program is fully subscribed
and the LFC staff framework
includes thirty million dollars
to expand that program in FY
twenty three and FY twenty four
essentially growing it from ten
million dollars in the current
year to twenty million dollars
in FY twenty three in FY twenty
four
sunny.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
to highlight two big themes in
the LFC recommendation for the
public education reform Fund
appropriations the first big
piece you'll see starting on
line one oh six through one oh
nine there's a big emphasis on
improving teacher recruitment
retention and building up the
pipeline from our colleges of
education sunline won all six
you'll see fifty million for the
Dow faculty positions at
colleges of education this is to
help schools provide full time
faculty to.
Teach teacher candidates as
they're going through that
process additionally of fine
appropriations for teacher
residencies online one of seven
and paid student teaching online
one oh nine the other big thing
that I'd like to highlight is
starting on the next page four
lines one nineteen to one twenty
two in addition to the extent
learning and K. five plus
appropriations and SCG the LFC
recommendation includes public
education reform Fund dollars to
provide additional flexibilities
for tribal and rural extended
learning programs K. twelve plus
flexibility is planning grants
for teachers and principals and
schools to develop programs that
are the need to their community
an additional transportation
funding as well last item on the
last page I lines one sixty five
and one sixty six just wanted to
highlight some transfers to the
teacher loan repayment fund and
the teacher preparation
affordability scholarship fund.
That will help with scholarships
and financial aid to the
sparring teachers as well thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee it died I did
already highlight several of the
really high initiatives are
supported by the public
education reform Fund but I I
would like to just note a couple
of others and bring to your
attention as there's been
discussion about them online one
thirteen the executive
recommendation has one point
five million for cyber security
and data systems this to support
schools as as we know there's
been lots of discussion about
that also on line one twenty
nine the school budget
transparency there's one million
in there to continue the work on
Senate bill ninety six and with
that all turn it over to the
committee.
Great thank you all for your
presentation so members again
we'll go to questions but if you
have questions please raise your
hand in please be brief in your
questioning we know that the
Senate would like to get back in
about twenty twenty five minutes
and then the house will kind of
linger a little bit also so that
we can get our questions in but
I know some of us would like to
have you know everybody know
what's up on each side of the
chamber in terms of their
thoughts so without further ado
Senator souls please.
Thank you Mr chair
I guess my question is kind of I
have a very broad question
they're very specific question
but the broad one is on the
compensation which is the
highlight piece of all of the
education budgets of the fifty
sixty seventy you will talk
about how we get to that because
I believe there's a major
difference is that the LFC.
The in what's the seven percent
in first and then moves up to
the fifty sixty seventy where
the other recommendations do it
in the opposite order and I
think that matters and if you'll
talk about that and how that is
different between the two or how
they would compare.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for highlighting that it is
a major difference and I'll
speak to this as a school
district superintendent which
are was just six months ago in
building a school district
budget if the salary adjustment
is done in the order that the
executive is proposing it gives
school districts the ability to
address compaction and also to
address the differences and you
see a teacher experience and so
the executive order
recommendation is to first
give that teacher the minimums
that would be step number one
and then step number two would
be to add the seven percent
raise on top of that and Mister
chairman Senator souls also add
that one of the areas of
confusion that happens when
you're talking about over and
over and over about teacher
minimums if you look at salary
schedules and school district
budgets very few of our teachers
are at that anymore most school
districts because of years of
experience are able to give
those teachers additional money
on top of the minimums and that
helps with the the the border
that we're proposing as well.
So Mr chairman and and members I
just I'd like to draw your
attention to line twenty and
twenty three so these are the
different.
recommendations for increasing
Salaries by a percentage
environment and by a minimum
level and Mr chairman you're
correct in that both the LFC and
LESC
of columns here applaud the
percentage before the the
minimum increase so what you see
on line twenty the LFC staff
framework is the is the cost to
go to fifty sixty and seventy
offer a five percent across the
board increase.
And could see between those two
there's a total of about.
Two hundred and fifteen million
dollars or so away from between
those two.
the executive recommendation the
recommendation so the two
hundred million dollars of the
does the.
Increase first and then our
understanding online seventy six
for sorry online twenty three to
seventy six point seventy seven
million essentially that's
essentially all of the boys
other than teachers and
principals and then if you were
a teacher principal and didn't
get a seven percent increase you
then get an additional increase
so if you were to do the
complete seven percent on on top
of the meeting increase it would
be significantly more than
seventy six point seventy seven
million that's what you can see
a five percent increase over all
is a hundred twenty eight
million about fifty million more
than that so the the I'm also
fairly similar
overall the LFC is a little bit
less because of the lower
recommendation for salaries.
and the also on salaries of
state are you you know as I said
after five percent increase the
executive that did seven percent
we also included that flexible
spending pot online twenty two
and that's kind of where that
we're all of the differences are
made up in that in the flexible
spending time I thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman just for.
Briefly the LFC recommendation
does the seven percent across
the board first.
Makes it up into three percent
this year and then four percent
next year and then applies the
minimum increases to forty eight
point five fifty seven point
five and sixty seven point five
I think similarly as Joey just
mentioned the LFC staff
framework.
For supplies there five percent
than does the minimum but at a
higher level of fifty sixty and
seventy and then for the
executive it's the minimums
first fifty sixty seventy and
that a seven percent applied
afterwards so it's really just
an order of operations
difference in those cases and
also the LFC and LESC
recommendation both include
additional funding for.
Compton's targeted compensation
that's flexible and can address
compaction while the executive
recommendation has a built in
into the minimum increase as
well that answers the question
Mr chair.
Thank you all and I know in
talking with superintendents
they prefer.
To to make sure that they've got
dollars for.
Dealing with compaction issues
with flexibility for their
specific needs and not have it
tied completely into legislation
by very specific question on
page three line one oh six the
LFC budget.
Sure this is the right one.
For not I mean I have yeah one
of six why are we putting fifty
million dollars of essentially
the head K. twelve into higher
education should not be a higher
ed budget not in the K. twelve
budget.
Mr chairman Mr chairman that's a
great question the colleges of
education are actually overseen
by the public education
department there
the programs are approved by PED
and so this funding would be
allocated to colleges of
education for the purposes of
adding faculty so that.
Teacher candidates are not
taught by part time adjunct
faculty that they have a full
time professor providing that
educational support and
additional coursework the
funding isn't intended to be an
endowed position we also have
recommendations for invalid
seeing faculty positions as well
on the LFC recommendation for a
different sections of this is
just targeting those high need
workforce needs and this one is
practically and
pertains to the public education
sphere additionally if you look
at the language from the public
education reform Fund statute of
funding to help recruit and
retain high quality teachers is
an eligible use of the fund.
The Mr chair and thank you I
appreciate
we have oversight of higher
education we don't have budget
oversight of higher education
even in the teaching field this
really ought to be in their
budget not fear where it then
shows up in the total amounts
that we're putting into various
different things and so that
that that's more of a broader
thing
so I'll I'll drop it at that but
that just stuck out as the why
is that in our budget instead
hired budget.
Thank you senator souls because
we're running up on time for the
Senate but I don't have any
other senators asking questions
as we take the prerogative of
the chair to ask a few questions
before I get to the list of
other members
So I wanted to us if you all
could give
You know yes or no answers to
these
I I I I tend to watch and I've
watched some of the proceedings
over the week about some also
fine and and Fund clear.
Frankly language being used
around some of these issues I
want to start getting into
demystifying some of the staff
if I could so in your respective
budgetary recommendations for.
Your your agency do you support
or have language toward a
mandate for E. L. T. P..
So if you start off as a Mister
chairman no.
Mr Chairman yes.
Mr Chairman now.
And thank you for that so
in that.
LFC
Is what is the current language
within the statute around a
mandate is it mandated or not
according to statute Mr chairman
in statute is not mandated.
And so the recommendation and
sunny with where would this be
placed on this mandate.
Mr chairman the LFC
recommendation included in house
bill two the general
appropriations act thank you for
that and I think yesterday and
House Appropriations if I'm not
mistaken that was asked to be
pulled from the budget how much
money is involved in that if it
is if it may be pulled.
Mr chairman the year correct HSC
did remove the mandate in the
language and some funding
associated with the unspent
amount in the days of the SCG
there's a hundred and sixty
million for extended learning
time programs about half of that
is being spent currently from
about forty six participation
statewide so about half of it is
being unspent currently.
So we're talking about a great
deal of money and I know
Representative Sweetser I think
has been a part and will be part
of the group working on that
in language I mean I'm I'm
Planning just a mandate out in
exemplifying
What's in statute and what maybe
go into house bill to and I
would like to refer the
committee before get into
further questions to article
four section sixteen of our
constitution that outlines that
appropriations shall be made in
order of existing law and not
created through the budget
process so in my line of
questioning as well
We have.
Further in the.
I'm looking at the H. AFC
scenario so currently what we
may be looking at in terms of
the house side as our budget for
now is there in temple language
from any of your agencies to
mandate K. five plus extended
learning into the future.
Mr Chairman them.
Mr Chairman yes.
Mr chairman I might also add
that it would be important first
also look at Senate bill forty
which was passed last year about
L. TPM K. five plus.
Thank you for that reference
Mr secretary
so we have in in this was
subject of debate HSD as well
was that the question came up if
there is a mandate currently
this is a couple days ago at
that time there was but then
this question came up it was one
year I think by having intend to
language within the budget is
where you know we're voting on a
tremendous amount of things
within that budget and certainly
gives me pause as the chair of
the Education Committee to to
have that tucked into our budget
another thing I would like to
Point out if if you support or
have within your budget so on
the Public Education recommended
language different sheet that I
have on this was passed out I
believe to
LFC education members that I'm
referring to
so we have.
DOT P. exemptions so I think Mr
secretary you referred to these
as incentives built into the
budget
for E. L. T. P. in terms of days
however there's language in
there ELT P. exemptions under
the HSA of C. scenario for
fiscal year twenty twenty three
with the parchment approval for
a school district that meets
academic performance targets for
a school district with less than
two hundred students may
structure of the school year to
provide additional instructional
days required extended learning
time program by extending the
total number of days no fewer
than sixty is that different
than the way the LTP is
currently structured by statute.
And I guess Mr Secretary.
Mr Chairman I think the answer
your question is yes.
Thank you for that and a new and
we're looking at putting that
into the budget agency
Secretary is that something you
support and endorse.
Mr chairman
thank you for bringing that up
if with your permission can I
give some background and then
answer the question of briefly
please very briefly from my
first day on the job I brought
my experiences a school district
superintendent and found it
extremely challenging to work
with my community to get them to
agree to budget and implement
the L. T. being K. five plus for
a second year we did it the
first year and so I've been
asking and
talking about the need for us to
provide flexibility and
incentives for for our school
districts in implementing LTP it
is not in the executive
recommendation at this point Mr
chair.
My understanding is that it's
currently in the HSC scenarios
that corrects any.
Mr chairman it was in the
preliminary scenario shown
yesterday to HSC our guidance
from the committee was to
revisit and make adjustments
remove considerations for
mandate.
And the funding amounts and I
believe that there is also
intent to limit the amount of
language that is policy driven
in the budget.
Thank you for that sunny and I
say certainly appreciate that
because I will point now in my
viewing of certainly
The secretary HSD the other day
about providing these incentives
based on academic performance we
use to have that where we
At a school grading system that
was academic performance and we
repealed that item number a few
years ago under this
administration and I think
starting to go back to.
Those years I will say in a
previous administration under
the Martinez administration at
least they had a statute to
base.
The academic performance on this
language is strictly by the
department to provide incentives
for school districts to
participate and me academic
goals I have to say that I'm
pretty disappointed by that
language it's encouraging to
hear that something like that
may come al.
But this is all to speak that.
Talking.
Language and.
Substantive policy into the
budget.
Is highly offensive to me and it
should be to all of us just sit
on the legislative education
study committee and all of us
that sit in the Education
Committee right large because we
go through a intensive process
to vet bills and ideas by
working with our various
stakeholders to make sure that
we're doing right by New Mexico
students by New Mexico families
and everybody involved in the
school site in order to do that
so again taking these things
into the budget and frankly.
Basing it on academic
performance that is not vetted
is very very dangerous and I
think that is something contrary
to what I believe.
And I think the legislature has
demonstrated at this point.
So I hope that in the future
there is.
More collaboration prior to the
legislative session all what
made go into.
The budget and language that may
go into and making sure that
it's not substantive policy that
we the committee and our
respective committee should
review really to be doing a deep
dive into.
So with that all relinquish the
floor.
The questions might be any
questions from the senators
prior to.
Then heading back into
committing.
All right see then Senator souls
Mr chair thank you for including
us in the where the budgets are
with things I think this is very
helpful I've got a number of new
members on my team and I know
it's overwhelming to see so much
budget there's a lot of jargon
in there but it as they continue
to to do well in education and
here it more this is always
helpful and so thank you very
much and thank you for all three
groups to come and present to us
so we can get some handle on
where the similarities the
differences in the supports for
public schools and students and
teachers thank you right thank
you senator souls thank you
Senate education is we are built
start to crossover we look
forward to seeing you all in
committee it's great.
Not that great so three eleven
for senators and Senate
educational start about ten
minutes.
All right so I do have
representative Representative
Trujillo and then I have
Representative Dow and then
we'll see who else may be added.
Mr chair thank you for your
comments and thank you for
allowing me to speak I was in
the JFC yesterday and there was
a clear in this is in response
to your questions regarding
Staff creating policy there is
it it was very clear to me based
on the votes of every single
person in that committee that we
did not want mandated E. L. T.
P. the chair also rendered a
decision that said that we
needed to remove mandated
language and.
There should not be any question
anymore about that so I'm very
concerned that the LFC
Representative is saying that
it's still mandated so I would
like to hear response.
Mr Chairman representative the
mandate is going to be removed
and adjust the funding will be
adjusted accordingly there will
be no mandate and the agency
adjusted scenario.
Thank you Mr chairman that is
all.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation and I I
just want to thank the chairman
for speaking up on this and I I
I think you're being very very
generous in saying how about
next year we do this together.
How about next year we have more
collaboration and more say in
the budget because I've been
hearing you say that for three
years Mr chairman and it's
getting really old.
We leave our homes we leave our
families we leave our jobs we
come up here to represent the
voice of our districts and we
continue to see millions of
hundred fifty years sixty.
Millions of dollars reverted
because things are being
mandated in spite of the fact
that our local school districts
are saying we can't.
Or we don't want to have this
top down approach.
There are many many evidence
based models that are districts
are saying they want someone to
focus on C. T. E. someone to
focus on targeted interventions
someone of focus on early
childhood someone of focus on
behavioral health services and
we keep saying next year we'll
get flexibility and there's
really not flexibility and so I
just I want to thank you and the
other members of the Education
Committee for speaking up this
has got to stop I can speak for
my district.
District thirty eight some
schools are not participating in
these programs even other low
income even though their title
one districts even though they
have a majority of minority
children in different schools
and when they cannot opt into
the extended learning the K.
five plus when they cannot meet
the requirements those dollars
to not get spent on the kids
that generated them those dolls
they are getting the
interventions at all.
It's not right it needs to stop
I don't.
Why next slide next committee
why next internet you know next
session.
It needs to stop now this are
superintendents reaching out to
us.
School boards are reaching out
to us administrators and and
principles are reaching out to
us and we've been saying this
year after year and so I mean I
that's just a little soapbox but
I do have questions for the
committee and.
And I I do I really do want to
thank my colleagues on education
for speaking up on this
Mr chairman and I don't know if
this is for sunny or would
answer the question but online
thirty thirteen when you talk
about enrollment growth could
you explain to me if we're
holding harmless and we're
hearing mostly about declines in
enrollment what does number
thirteen Fund.
Mr Chairman Representative Dow
enrollment growth was a factor
that was put into the formula
back when the legislature
switched from current year
funding to prior funding and in
the legislature's wisdom they
said there will be some school
districts that have a growth
factor of over one percent and
even though we're going to fund
on prior year we need to
acknowledge that those school
districts that have growth
additional students of what we
mean by growth more students
over one percent they will need
more funding to pay the teachers
to implement the program that
year and so Representative Dow
that's an explanation of what
that funds thank you Mr chairman
and thank you secretary that
makes less sense online nineteen
the there are differences in the
recommended the LFC is
recommending thirteen fifty L.
yes he is recommending fifteen
is that recommendation from the
L. E. S. C. based upon other
legislation passing.
The so Mr Mr Chairman
representative doubt the so I I
believe that is just it's not
contingent on legislation is
just an appropriation thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that and.
Are some of our contracts are
federal so the school school
food program as an example and
those are fixed reimbursement
rates they don't change our
reimbursement rates whenever we
implement a new minimum wage I
think the same would be set of
like twenty first century
funding programs those are fixed
those go out by R. S. P. are you
making adjustments for these
increased costs to contractors
are to those employees within
those contracts and if so where
is the line items because the
cost of fifteen dollars is the
minimum wage then it's going to
cost more to serve that food and
to pay those employees where we
adjusting for that so Mr
chairman and Representative Dow
the amounts on this line would
only be for those positions
funded with SCG dollars so it
would it does not include an
adjustment for those other
employees thank you Mr speaker
and thank you for that so the
school districts would have to
take care of that out of their
their annual operating budgets.
Mr Chairman representative yes
this is we need to take care of
that with federal funds or other
or other funds thank you Mr
speaker thank you but they're
not getting increase in federal
funds so it does have to
supplement it locally.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Dow school
districts have
to have gotten a big slug of
federal funds related to the
American rescue plan act and and
other
and other provisions
additionally you know those
federal funds come with
to come with increases I think
just just yesterday the US
department of agriculture I
believe announced a twenty five
cent per meal increase in the
federal reimbursement rate for
for example for food programs
there is other at
action at the federal level that
has that has gone into
increasing those budgets as well
so.
There are additional federal
funds heading to school
districts for four different
things thank you Mr speaker and
thank you for that so.
Let's see a scenario where
someone's been doing twenty
first century funding and that's
that's federally funded the
school district for out of
school time programs and the
federal funding is not
sufficient to cover these new
state mandates then wouldn't it
make more sense wouldn't it kind
of dissent that it would Senator
by someone a district from
applying for twenty first
century.
When you're also saying here's
extended here's K. five plus
years around why would they
continue to apply for federal
funding in and why would why
would we supplant those
programs.
So Mr chairman Representative
Dow it could disincentive eyes
it all could also be that you
know school districts are having
a staffing shortage right
there's a there's a a lack of
staff in part due to other
professions offering more money
so increasing
Hey at the you know at the
school district could have the
effect of
you know making it easier to
staff those positions it could
also dis incentivize some from
offering those programs if the
if the not able to to make it
work thank you Mr chairman thank
you isn't isn't I appreciate
that the chairman reference The
New Mexico constitution and that
the house bill two cannot insert
language that has substantive
change is wouldn't you consider
a fifteen dollar an hour minimum
wage of substantive policy
matter.
So Mr chairman and
Representative and
Representative I'm I'm not sure
about that the the LCS the LFC
staff Bremer would include
the very similar to what we've
done in the past with minimum
teacher salaries and you know
and having of slightly higher
minimum
so this would be the amounts in
the LFC staff framework would
give districts the money to to
offer those increases for
Four June first SCG funded
employees and whether or not
there is language in their
mandating it is it is a matter
for for you all to consider.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you I just you know I mean
if we're we're talking about
these federal dollars but there
one time they're not reoccurring
but these these operational
costs are reoccurring and I mean
I remember when we passed all
kinds of mandates to school
districts good things were the
things and then oil and gas went
down and districts I believe got
a sixteen percent cut in their
operating budget but not one of
their mandates one way and so I
I'm I think that this important
conversation is a little late in
the game.
It's not a new conversation
we're saying it again but what
the burden that we put on these
districts it we've got to be
we've got to consider what
happens this year next year five
years that the these are
substantive differences and and
they're they're hard to maintain
in a fluctuating of Dustin boom
oil and gas industry
Is the second time I I.
Mr speaker and.
I don't know who would want to
answer this one if we are doing
tribal funded after school time
for supporting libraries
programs in local communities
which I think is great anything
we can do to the local
communities is great I think
there's a lot of similarities in
my rural district in in what
we're seeing on the tribal
communities kids are getting on
the bus when it's dark.
getting home when it starts to
get up early they're on the bus
for hours every day sometimes
our parents are driving an hour
to a bus stop and then there on
the bus for another two hours of
people live in the he left these
are people that are putting high
quality affordable food on our
table and so I love seeing that
there's gonna be local out of
school time programs and I see a
lot of that in the
In the the.
I don't know which one it was we
talked about funding after
school tribal library programs
extend.
Is how are we making sure we're
not duplicating also.
Extended after school
programming in those same
programs for duplicating
existing twenty first century
programs in those communities
how are you guys looking at that
because taxpayer dollars are
precious and and we should use
them as widely as possible.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question the need is
so great for after school
programs and enhanced summer
programs that there is no
duplication out there it's just
the opposite Representative Dow
there's more need than there is
funding.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Secretary designate
areas secretaries is officially
it doesn't make.
Okay thank you
In the student nutrition and
wellness.
Is is that enough and and and it
maybe you answered earlier
because you think it twenty five
percent increase in the per
child reimbursement is enough to
cover inflation the new unfunded
mandates increases of of cost to
serve those foods is is this
stirred student interest in
wellness also supplementing the
food costs were.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Dow there are a
couple of programs in statute
that that are directly related
to this appropriation the first
is an elementary breakfast
program where schools can apply
to
to PED to get funding to cover
the cost of the elementary
breakfast program the second is
an initiative passed a couple
years ago to cover
so reduced.
The lunches under the national
school lunch program
New Mexico school districts
don't collect reduced fees the
offer those meals for free and
so this appropriation is used to
cover the costs of the
difference between what the
reduced fee would would be and
and and lower so the for a
couple of specific programs as
well as other initiatives the
department has related to to
signatures thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that so it's it's
it's to supplement its it's the
free school lunches but it's not
you're not going above the
federal reimbursement rate.
So Mr chairman technically yes
because the the the federal
government says okay that
students should be paying a
reduced fee the state of New
Mexico says they're they're not
to pay any fees we're going to
cover the the difference thank
thank you Mr chairman I I get
what you're saying but what what
you're saying so I'm just making
this up if the reimbursements
three dollars.
And that students must pay forty
cents we're going to cover the
forty cents but if the meal
costs five dollars because we
increase the minimum wage and
the cost of food is going up
we're not covering that.
So Mr Chairman representative
that's not the purpose of that
particular appropriation thank
you Mr chairman.
I know you said be brief was up
before the Senate left Mr
chairman.
Representative I do have a few
of our members on the list.
What was and how much time do I
have if you have one pick one of
your favorite questions okay
well I guess I'm gonna skip to
cyber security a lot of good I
have a lot of questions
I think this is you know I just
saw this yesterday and that's
Representative that's question
our topic.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
could you please tell me
how long it we have had a
cybersecurity task force
presenting to us their needs and
we're in the budget we're
responding to their needs for
forty three million dollars to
take care the eighty seven
school districts in coming
schools.
This.
Mr Chairman representative of
that one one one thirteen there
was a request for the public
education department and
recommendations from the
executive for one point five
million for cyber security
programs
I don't know if the secretary
can add to the fact that on with
the department requests covers
madam chair I I yes
Representative yes I can speak
to that this school year we've
got an appropriation from you
thank you for one point five
million for cyber security and
that money is being used to
first of all shore up the staff
that can go out to school
districts and provide technical
assistance and that work is
making a difference and it is
not a one year thing Madam chair
representative Mr Chairman
representative Dow and so this
request is to continue that
support for school districts to
address cybersecurity issues I
would also add Representative
Dow that this is just one piece
of an overall statewide approach
but it's in the executive budget
across all state agencies and
it's with the do it secretary
and I've talked to him and we
are coordinating with him so
there's no duplication.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you guys for your answers I have
a lot more I think I just I
would just end it's not a
question it's a statement I'm
I'm really was excited when he
said when we set up the school
reform Fund.
I believe there's like two
million dollars and two hundred
million dollars and this year
the reverted dollars it didn't
reach students what I'm
disappointed in is the LFC
deciding where that money goes
with little little or no
engagement with the Education
Committee.
And so I with that thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you panel my questions about the
house bill fifty nine which is
about shoring up contributions
to the insurance
it had requested passed house ed
it requested fifty two million
to be appropriate for the
general fund for expenditure in
fiscal year twenty twenty three
to distribute to school
districts Xcerra to pay for
increased employer contributions
for group health insurance
online fifty six.
There is the LFC allocates
fifteen million.
Can panel members just comment
on the difference between what's
been allocated and perhaps other
places I'm not sure and what is
being requested to actually
solve the problem.
So Mister chairman Garrett.
The amount on you see online
fifty six is not strictly
speaking related to the employer
employee shared that is in that
in that building you referenced
this would this would apply to
premiums across the board that's
meant to smooth out some of the
differences between the two and
other entities in the cost of
health care because needs it
covers a rural population and
those costs are higher what I
will refer you to is on a line
item number seventeen.
Ten point six million dollars
that's aligned to an L. E. S. C.
and Doris bill currently and and
said education that increases
the employer share to a lower
extent than the building you
were for your for income sorry I
don't recall the the number of
thought my head but it's a it's
a lower level but in the legacy
staff framework that is that ten
point six million for employees
to change the employer employee
should.
Mr chair and and our other but
folks any additional comments
would be much appreciated Mr
chair representative here at I
appreciate the question because
this is a real issue and school
districts and I would ask you to
please look at grow sixteen.
In the spreadsheet and you will
see the executive recommendation
is twenty one point seven
million dollars to address the
topic you're asking about.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary Stewart in house.
I don't know if this is all
adequate but it's a good start
to get the answers one other
question is on the
transportation
this is a question from the
listening public.
They're asking Mr chairman hold
done.
The question is for
transportation workers that
seven percent for transportation
includes funding for contracted
transportation employees does
that figure includes seven
percent for workers that would
be available to districts to
include in contracts that are
put out to bid because they're
concerned that contractors don't
have an incentive to provide
equitable raises if they're not
included.
Mr Chairman representative here
at the short answer is yes I
would add that that amount is a
negotiated amount between the
school district and the
contractor.
Thank you very much that's it
Mr chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr thank the panelists
I just want to echo a couple
comments
the need for my colleagues as a
twenty nine year educator
my commitment public schools is
is just like many of my
colleagues I support the funding
of public schools.
And I also want to say that my
does this may that we try to put
in the policy a one size fits
all model tied with funding I do
believe that each district has
to have local control about
these things districts that opt
into those programs I do believe
that we have to adequately fund
and we have to incentivize of is
the secretary has said I think
that one of the things that we
don't want to do is make
decisions out here in Santa Fe
that's going to affect all of
these other districts with
requirements that they may or
may not have the capacity to get
done.
So I just want to echo that I
want to say that some of my next
question is about the in this is
more for any of this the issue
of compaction.
You know we talk about increases
teachers salaries and as being
of education being in the.
Involved in the state level.
The monies for compassion for
other folks including
administrators as I can be
enough money for districts to
help.
me suppose requirements because
as a teachers move it move up
which I totally support.
The other the ministry to stuff
other stuff is also there so
I just had one of the panel if
they think that the money that
is appropriate that is put to
put aside for the if that may be
adequate than secretary styles I
don't do have received
Input from the superintendents
association survey of the
superintendents from the
district of the state.
If the money is adequate to or
do we need to do to to add to
that bill or does a fund.
Mr Chairman representative
three parts to answer that as a
school district superintendent
the issue of so compaction got
worse and worse over the last
five years so what we're talking
about here is from all three
organizations a proposal to
begin to address that I answer
your questions no there's not
enough money to fix it all in
one year but this takes a very
big leap forward in giving
school districts the flexibility
to address compaction not only
for teachers but also for other
employees in the school
district.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary Steinhaus any any
other thoughts but because one
of the.
One of the requirements
especially as we're looking at
the extended learning and K.
five plus right.
Again that's given me more time
the teachers will be there but
also for the administration of
it additional responsibilities
so I just urge that you guys go
back to take a look at that
because we want to make sure
just like this I want to report
I want to recruit and retain the
best most qualified teachers in
the classroom I want to make
sure that our stuff is
adequately
Funded in their Rolf come stated
but I also make this point is
that leadership matters going to
fight about is we're talking
about leadership we're talking
about whether to be department
or school we need to make sure
that we are covered to
attracting retaining those
leaders who will help make the
the intended J. as we want to
see an education thank you Mr
chairman thank you Secretary
styles.
Thank you so much so other
members with questions
Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I'm
just looking at
Line nineteen the minimum wage
and so what we're saying is that
the LFC for an increase it's
currently eleven fifty to
increase that to thirteen fifty
will cost us nothing three point
five million to increase that to
a fifteen dollars will cost us
another ten million in my
reading that right.
Mr Chairman representative yes.
And that is for all employees
all of our.
you know cooks the bus drivers I
think they this is that included
in there so Mr Chairman
representative of that would
only apply to employee employees
currently paid through SCG funds
okay so because this is
appropriation the SCG so if if
you're rate with SEG funds it
would it would that's where
those numbers come from.
Okay I just and comments Mr
chair and
Kelly people are really
struggling especially in rural
districts and and I know this
takes a big budget.
Of the eight you can't live on
eleven fifty an hour he can
barely make it on fifteen an
hour and a so I'd recommend that
we certainly look at that LFC
recommendation I think it's
critically important to to
really our our schools the
health of our schools and and
that's all I have Mister chair
all the other questions I had to
have been answered and I really
think this whole panel of people
for all your work it's it's
extremely valuable and deeply
appreciated.
You so much Secretary.
Mr chair representative a even
though it's not on the
spreadsheet in front of you I
did get word five minutes before
this hearing that the executive
does support the fifteen dollar
an hour minimum.
Thank you.
Which Joey that was an early and
see recommendation the fifteen
dollar minimum
I do hope that makes its way
into house bill two as we're
crafting it I hear there's a
little bit of money on.
If we're not going to mandate
the LTP that would be great I
did have a question about the at
risk language I failed to
mention the LFC recommendation
ACS H. AFC scenario I think
commuter each other.
Currently so when I look across
our cross eyed at them they do
but it gives the department the
discretion to add additional
program units for at risk.
Is currently with in statute.
Mr chairman of.
Is that something that'll also
be reconsidered as we move
forward with house bill two.
Mr chairman the guidance is to
look at policy language that is
significant are ineffective.
And so I do hope that is it it
makes its way to committee and
certainly to the floor that we
get ample time to to look at the
language and and decipher its
meaning and and have some of
that input is Representative Dow
mentioned is is looking over it
prior to it hitting the floor I
know we have several members
part of the committee and that's
awesome to scrutinize it
Certainly we'd like to expand
that to us and education being
that it's almost fifty percent
of the budget
and and certainly my members
here in the house as well to
look at their respective issues
so members with further
questions Representative
Figueroa please.
We have about thirteen minutes
left but thank you there I was
so sure you're going to say
thirteen seconds.
Yes Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
the panelists for all the work
you have done to put into this
and I appreciate the time that
we are giving it this morning on
the broader issue of when and
where and how we have this
discussion.
No need to to beat the dead
horse so to speak right I think
we're all clear on what's
happening
and and that I will just say
that hearing today about the
decision made and HCFC.
About whether or not to mandate
something like L. T. P..
It sounds like that decision was
made.
Not to do it in House
appropriations and I'm not on
probation Mr chair I'm on
education and I am.
Feeling like on education my job
is to have input into that
discussion so I am I'm sorry I
missed that discussion of I
probably would have come out and
and argued for that E. L. T. P.
but the data that informs the
decision the research that goes
into how effective it is
I think needs to be discussed.
With more time.
Questions on this bill thank you
for the insurance of.
The recognition that insurance
costs are an issue for a lot of
our educational workforce and
how that affects retention and
recruitment you have in sixteen
and seventeen and.
One fifty six some references
to.
Making sure.
That increases in the cost of
insurance or accounted for I'm
just not sure we have address
yet.
The difference in the name
Sierra
employer contribution rates and
we really have to look at that
at some point so I'm hoping that
as you reconsider policy and as
we take HB fifty nine through
through the session.
That that is reconsidered.
Lines one sixty five one sixty
six I'm wondering if anybody has
any data.
On one sixty five one sixty six.
the demand for those funds
because the three
recommendations are very
different so I wondered why and
how much of those current funds
are being used.
and why.
Why the different decisions were
made in those three options.
Mr chairman I didn't hear what
line numbers Representative
Figueroa.
One sixty five Mr chair one
sixty six the teacher loan
repayment fund and teacher
preparation affordability
scholarship fund do we have data
on how the FY twenty two amounts
have been used and why we chose
to in the LFC for example to
split the money evenly LFC
totally different and the
executive those are very very
different numbers and I'm
wondering why semesters
Representative Figueroa these
are not authorizations for
spending in the current year
these are transfers to put aside
fund balance so that these
programs have stability
operating in the future years
I'm not recalling of the top of
my head what AGD requests for
these programs my recollection
though it is the LFC
recommendation for those
programs aligned with what
agency requests for the the
different programs looking at
the sort of the use of those
funds currently.
Thank you Mr chair if I heard
that correctly it was the LFC
budget recommendations align
with the AGD request is Mr
chairman Figaro that's my
recollection but I can follow up
with you afterwards on that
specifically thank you my last
question is about the
residencies and.
One fifty seven.
Verses line one of seven.
What's the difference in putting
those funds in those two places.
Thank.
Mr chairman federal it's it's
essentially funding source both
the executive and the LESC Fund
teacher residencies from the
public education reform Fund the
LFC staff framework looks to the
general fund.
Thank you Mr chair and sunny the
LFC.
Requests there line item is
about half of the other is there
a reason for that.
Mr chairman for teacher
residencies we have yet to
receive information from the
department on colleges on the
effectiveness of teacher
residencies in New Mexico and so
there is a growth in that
recommendation and also
acknowledgement about six
million dollars to address rate
student teaching which is
another track that's available
to teacher candidates on line
one on line.
Thank you Mr chair incentive for
that clarification I appreciate
that thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think just to wrap up I was
hoping to have a secretary
designate Steinhausen talk a
little bit about the Yazzie
Martinez could you started out
by saying the budget addresses
three of our all of the main
things that you're working on
right workforce Crisis social
emotional learning and in the
Martinez Yazzie ruling and I
know that's kind of the over
arching thing for the budget and
for the direction of PED so if
you would just kind of give us a
high level and what's happening
there.
Madam chair representative
Sweetser hi level summary of
what's happening with the
Martinez Yazzie started way back
when we heard the ruling and you
as a legislature has done have
done an incredible job in
providing funding and support to
address that so that's point
number one as we sit here today
and look at this budget almost
everything in this budget
Representative Sweetser ties
directly back to what the judge
singleton said that needs to be
addressed by New Mexico and I am
pleased to report that
we are very very close to having
a planned to share with you for
your feedback and that's exactly
what it will be is a draft plan
it's taken longer because no
excuses I take responsibility
for it but we went all the way
back to the four thousand
findings of fact and this is not
just your happy go lucky
strategic plan this is about a
lawsuit multi billion dollar
lawsuit and we took this very
very seriously what we bring to
you will be high quality.
So thank you for that secretary
designate and and Mr chairman I
I guess I wanted everyone to
remember that that lawsuit is
still a viable it's still out
there it is progressing and we
have so many mandates over us as
we look at how we allocate our
funds and so we look forward to
that plan I know several
meetings that you and I have
both been that you've said it's
coming it's coming so I know
we're getting closer every step
and we look forward to it but I
just guess I thought that Mr
chair that might be a nice way
to wrap of this morning's
discussion on the budget thank
you Representative Sweetser I
think that's very appropriate in
a great way and and lest we
forget all parts of the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit are English
language learners are Hispanic
students are our tribal students
and also our special education
students and addressing all of
those parts where where their
needs may be and working on that
collaboratively but that's a
wonderful way to a to close this
meeting analysts or other
thoughts.
So we look forward to
what that additional freed up
money may look like prior to the
budget coming to the house floor
and through committee and
certainly
we are always welcome to being
approached with what to do with
those funds and where to
allocate them and I think
through the legislative
education study committee we've
put together several plans in
order to deal with some of the
issues that we're experiencing
adding money to the SCG our
insurance issues and dealing
with compaction that are still
looming over us in a big way and
as Representative Sweetser so
eloquently put addressing our
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit but with
that certainly thank you all so
much for coming to this meeting
and presenting your your ideas
in the hard work you all played
into I'm bringing these
proposals forward on behalf of
New Mexico students thank you
all so much so with that
Representative Dow please and
then I need to make an
announcement Mr Chairman just a
question is there public comment
in this or it.
I I'm sorry I haven't scheduled
public comment on the on the
budget and the and that's my
fault and I probably should have
for this meeting and I
understand that but certainly
all of our information our phone
numbers are emails are public
record I think the staff's is as
well so I certainly invite the
public to reach out to us to
reach out to our staff here with
their comments and suggestions
as well
That we will.
It is nine fifty seven so we'll
take till ten fifteen R. as in
will continue running so we're
going to reconvene on these
rural rural
at ten fifteen and we have three
bills to hear committee so if
you would
take a break grab something to
use the restroom and then we'll
reconvene where you're most
comfortable on a computer.
In fifteen minutes about.
The state in Germany.
So we'll recess will be back ten
fifteen thank you to the staff
for coordinated coordinated this
I'm certainly are Education
Committee staff on the staff
here on the house floor thank
you all so much for reorienting
everything and and then putting
it back together again for our
later floor session thank you
all so much for doing that and
getting the microphones working
are you working thank you all so
much for that.
