And Mr chairman there.
We have a quorum all right good
morning we have Representative
Allison back on house bill fifty
two and I understand there's an
amendment for all right if we
can get the amendment
distributed may have a motion on
the amendment please.
The amendment segment for.
For House Bill.
One of.
Due to the two fifty two for.
This discussion discussion I do
that all right so we have a
motion for discussion on the
amendment Representative Allison
could you read the two oh two
number for us please verify we
got the right one.
Yes.
Mr chair the to to is.
Two two four eight four five
point two all right so we have
discussion on the amendment
would you please let us know
what the amendment does please
okay thank you Mr members of the
committee good morning.
Of the amendment states that on
page one line twelve after
schools insert and secondary
schools funded by the bureau of
Indian education of the United
States department of the
interior and also the second
changes on page one as well line
twenty one after schools insert
and secondary schools funded by
the bureau of Indian education
of the United States department
of the interior that is the
content of the amendment Mr
chair.
All right so discussion on the
amendment members.
Kerry move the.
Move for four we need a purpose
adoption by production.
How the amendment on house bill
fifty two all right thank you.
Well we're going to brief you on
it make sure you get it right so
we have a motion to adopt the
amendment yes help.
all right well thank you by
Representative Roybal kinda yet
of is there any objection to the
adoption of the thing if you
have an amended bill.
Discussion on the bill itself
it'll Representative.
So we have a motion for a due to
pass by Representative and a
second by Representative but the
madam secretary could you call
the roll on a do pass motion.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative Ezzell
Representative yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Lane yes
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative nearby Milan yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Madam vice chair yes and Mr
chairman yes we have a deep all
right you have been told to hear
do.
On house bill fifty two is
amended thank you Representative
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
All right.
Fellowship from the transition
will move on to House Bill.
Thirty.
We'll have Representative there
are vice chair.
With us today.
All right madam vice chair.
Welcome experts welcome you all
are ready please brief
presentations okay thank you Mr
chair thank you committee today
I am presenting house bill
thirty a committee substitute
for the public school
ventilation improvement act I've
expert witness Rhonda Gilly land
Lopez the executive director
sheet metal contractor and
internet she needs says thank
you Shane this bill
we get organized.
Of this bill provides a process
to identify the scope of the
needs of mental as ventilation
in our schools and our districts
although we certainly found in
COVID the portents of that
everybody in this room and panel
who's a teacher is familiar with
the fact that just opening a
window and circulating Senator
room is not adequate ventilation
solution so if you look at the
bill the first section creates a
public school
demolition improvement act
section two who reminds us with
the definitions are the county
assessors wanted to make sure we
got the definition of a
technician right so that's a
certified ventilation
verification technician section
three gives priorities of and I
want to read section three eight
to the extent that funding is
available and Representative if
I may interrupt just for a
moment and I'm sorry you're
reading from the committee
substitute is that correct get
some section thirty seven may I
have a motion on a committee
substitute Mr chair the hi
Representative that we.
Most discussion question the
committee substitute on house
bill thirty thank you so we have
discussion committee steps to
accept second by Representative
Ezzell I cannot all right my
name have so.
We have a chichi if you need one
please all right Sir
Representative please continue
sorry your affection for you or
remind me the process and this
committee substitute is very
important because it addressed a
lot of things that were brought
up in the for and the LESC
recommendation
so.
Of three eight to the extent
that funding is available the
public school facilities
authority shall require all
school districts to undertake a
ventilation verification
assessment and if you look
further down in it it reminds us
that the focus of requirement
our buildings frequented by
students and staff that was the
issue brought up in the analysis
so if the building is a storage
facility that is not our
priority it also lists the
contents of what has to be
examined so you don't pass
inspection just because a switch
turns on and off we actually
have to go through some steps
that are outlined on page four
BC it talks about the corrective
actions indicated and then on C.
on page four to the extent that
funding is available the public
school facilities authority
shall assist school districts.
On page five on DEC the school
districts that receive
assistance from the public
school assist of facilities
authorities shall ensure that
the work required is performed
using the construction workforce
that is in compliance with the
construction industry licensing
act and I just want to do a
couple more points the school
district on page six F. R. shall
have a ventilation verification
assessment performed at least
every five years and then
finally section for the there's
an appropriation of twelve
million dollars appropriated
from the public school capital
outlay fund to the public school
facilities authority for
expenditure in fiscal years over
three year period twenty twenty
four to twenty twenty seven of
and finally be it talks about
the public school facilities
authority shall make the
distribution to each school
district in a matter in which
each school district receives a
greater fifty thousand dollars
for the percentage of the total
appropriation equal to the
percentage of tribute to
attributable to that school
district obviously some of this
funding others a capital outlay
of process that's also done in
the public school capital outlay
fund so some of these things
will work together but with that
to either of you want okay and I
stand for questions from the
kids committee Mr chair all
right you know presentations
good when the even the experts
agree that I think all right so
we will go to.
Our audience so those in
opposition to house bill thirty
we'll go to the room if you
would please indicate by raising
your hand okay so let's start
here please give up to two
minutes welcome current thank
you stand around school so from.
We appreciate of the committee
amendment of which we just got
two minutes fully started
I just let me let me give you
the high point I think you might
want to contemplate this is this
is a well intentioned go.
Appropriation of twelve million
dollars is coming from the
public school capital outlay
fund which is currently
administered by peers of bank
would
be in a little behind on the
other needs that we're providing
money for and so this is kind of
one pocket in the next Baca I
would recommend my want to
search for other purposes the
second issue is this is a
mandatory review of ventilation
the school districts we are
process under appears of fame
does take into consideration all
these engineering issues it puts
every building on notice every
district in most every five
years and a fine.
that is and has been inspection
was done that's about a twenty
million dollar liability
according to the LFC
review the different or FIR the
last point here opening up
according to the LFC F. I. R.
the one to two million dollars
liability then we'll have to be
paid for when you go to replace
those units.
Final comment I would make we
hit this two years ago was the
first.
We have different still waiting
for things to arrive so they can
do the work and ventilation that
they were required to do to meet
the COVID impact and so we just
saved a lot of logistics issues
in here issues that we think
need to be studied and I'm
concerned about the long term
liability to the state and to
local districts in that FIR
flashpoint it says it will be
state and local dollars let me
let me take.
The local bonds the local
utilities now have a one billion
dollar liability that's coming
up likely according to the FIR
thank you Mr we oppose the bill
US rated two minutes please
welcome morning Mr chairman
members of the committee to
again with New Mexico school
board association also set the
service chair of the public
school capital outlay council
and posed the.
The bill because we the money
that is directed to this effort
is is already set aside for
projects around the state we
have many that are coming up we
would like for the source to be
some someplace different also we
would like some assurances that
we that the other source would
pay for the actual costs not
sent limits on the amount of
money that can be used for this
purpose and again many of the
reasons that the stand around
indicated we agree with that
also the staffing for this
additional work is going to be
necessary at PS that they were
already short staffed as
possible and
I think that
any modifications we we think
that the sponsor for coming up
with
some of the amendments but again
we have a chance to look at at
the final.
Replacement bill so again those
are comments Mr chairman members
thank thank you others in the
same row.
The next row.
Opposition.
All right the nextra.
Please welcome you have a two
minutes Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico we stand in
opposition of the bill we
appreciate the committee says
because that did remediate some
of the issues with the bill in
its current form that published
but as public schools we agree
with many of the issues that
were brought Mr rounds in the
superintendents association also
know from the charter angle many
of our schools don't own our to
and so we mediation of some of
the issues that were is is is
much more difficult so we stay
in opposition but appreciate the
sponsors of.
Thank you others in the same row
in opposition next row
opposition to house bill thirty
I will go to my left hand side
is there any opposition on my
left hand side to house bill
thirty.
All right online is there any
opposition to house bill thirty.
Okay.
consumers is that an opposition.
All right good morning
superintendent you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Kevin
summers on the superintendent of
the Aztec municipal school
district I to amend opposition
of house bill one thirty while I
believe it is very well
intentioned I believe some of
the language at least in the in
the bill as introduced I haven't
been able to see the amended or
substitute version but in the
bill as introduced I believe
that that there's there's a
significant financial liability
that schools will have to carry
that is largely going to be
woefully underfunded in in our
opinion so with that I will
stand but as technical school
district is in opposition house
bill one thirty thank you for
your time great thank you for
joining us.
All right.
So we're still on opposition.
Opposition signing good morning
welcome are you opposed to house
bill.
Thirty.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee yes I would
like to speak guess on the
district side here as well as
being you've heard some of the
reasons why there's problems
associated with the language
currently and and house bill
thirty so I am speaking in
opposition to that bill as well
this morning thank you.
Thank you so much for joining us
all right.
So anymore a position.
All right so we will go to
support so if you're on the zoom
side if you would please
indicate your support by raising
your hand will get to you all in
a moment those in support in the
room of house bill thirty could
you please indicate by raising
your hand please all right you
have up to two minutes will
start American side again please
Sir.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee on C. span is.
That the New Mexico G. R.
director for and on behalf of
our members we send support of
this bill is a commonsense bill
in the sense that we want our
schools and our students and our
teachers to be healthy and the
air that the pre obviously that
so we stand support we think the
sponsor and that thank you we
ask that you support thank you
great.
Thank you others in support on
this all right we'll head back
on please have up to two minutes
thank you chairman members of
the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
mechanical contractors
association in New Mexico we
stand in support of the
legislation our understanding is
right now P. associate does
conduct annual assessments that
include H. back but those are
very basic sort of visual
assessments that just really
take into account the ease of
the system of this legislation
would really require that these
assessments are done by our anti
certified so nationally
accredited organization to
really make sure his functions
are done right thank you for you
know over the pandemic you
realize the importance or
quality and you Mr unit talk
about the potential one billion
dollar liability to me that
really just shows the need that
we need to do this our kids
deserve better our kids and our
teachers are educators need to
have these systems and ensure
indoor air quality service
standards from support for thank
you others in the same we'll go
to the next row support okay
we'll go to the next of please
Sir you have up to two minutes
welcome thank you Mr chairman
members the committee Douglas
Michael Chen with conservation
voters New Mexico the point of
this legislation is to make sure
that the more that our children
or in my case grandchildren
freeze in their schools is
healthy and that the it is not
polluted for that reason
conservation voters New Mexico
supports this legislation urges
you to give it to S.
recommendation thank you thank
thank you others please thirty
of up to two minutes welcome
thank you Mr chairman members
job with you to the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO were
always going to be in support of
any legislation that provides
the need for not only our
workers in the state educators
but certainly families our
workers as well our children
those who serve in our schools
so for.
For those reasons we strongly
urge Lucien and we think this
project would bring this up yet
again.
I thank you so go to my left
hand side those and support that
wish to speak.
Of please circle starting from
or correct welcome good morning
Mr chairman and members my name
is Michael Bailey I'm a hema
springs grandfather my
grandchildren are in Alabama
right now with their points to
move here if you guys would
passes bills I'm quite serious
about this I can give you the
information and telephone number
what that.
And I know about the budget
situation in the state and I
know about how you guys are
smart you guys can figure out
answers to these quibbles
problems please get this done.
Thank you all right anybody else
in the same room we'll go to the
next for please Sir you have up
to two minutes welcome chairman
members committee as is and do
business matters this.
Instead of strong support of
this measure you know just
because COVID is senator still
faced with R. as we and as well
as.
And I'm like a prison where
people are mandated to be in
schools also were children are
mandated to be.
This is a public health concern
that we need to be addressed
obviously there's some funding
issues but there's funding
issues with a lot of.
As we stand.
You too.
Great thank you others in
support place Feb welcome.
Chairman members of the
committee with the holidays to
Mexico as a classroom teacher
during the height of COVID and
there's a point when we wrasses
teachers to make a decision
between having our door opens a
COVID are dark clothes for
school shooter we cannot and
will not put our teachers in the
Senate thank you great thank you
others on my left okay please
Sir you have up to two minutes
for conspiracy that the faculty
at doing and study environmental
racism and it's been recent
reports about certain parts of
New Mexico.
We're certainly provides for
example the south valley of
Albuquerque.
Impact of falling so this might
be a space actually were
students can go to school in my
my daughter goes to APS goes to
a lot of the stuff.
Children can actually get some
clean air or have access to
clean air just.
So what I study environmental
racism that's one of my research
areas so I highly support this
and for the focus on
environmental racism and
understanding are falling to
shoes that New Mexico has had
recent news reports about thank
you right thank you all right
place ma'am you have up to two
minutes welcome chairman members
of the committee my name is
Carla who are and what the
succeeded in contractors
Representative
two hundred commercial
contractors that the state of
New Mexico want to add thank the
sponsor at the for bringing this
forward time for members are
some of the ones that to service
a lot of the violation systems
in New Mexico and they have been
asked to do miracles with very
little so I think this is
actually this legislation and I
want to thank the sponsor for
amending the legislation make it
more he said so far rural areas
will be able to use their own
the workforce was still only for
workforce because before the way
it was written it was not they
were not able to use that maybe
possibly the work the
contractors that were long
stating that has killed
workforce but were and would
never meet those requirements so
now that those changes have been
made we thank the sponsor we
stand for thank you right thank
you others and supporting.
All right we'll go online so.
Those of you online.
We'll go to Brian good morning
Brian you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman Brian
Condit New Mexico building it to
the construction trades council
without stand in full support of
house bill thirty.
If not now when we urge the
committee to move this bill
along Taos a appropriation thank
you very much great thank you
all right John Baker good
morning you have up to.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is John Baker on the political
affairs director with United
association local four twelve
that's a plumber pipefitters
union we also cover H. fax
service technicians I I don't
know if any of you remember two
years ago this bill came forward
and I stood in opposition I
think the sponsor and the expert
right witness Rhonda Gilliland
for their diligent work and
making sure that this bill is
what it absolutely needs to be
to protect our children so I'm
standing in support today due to
their hard work and the
importance of this bill and
making sure that there's fresh
air turned over so the fresh air
turnover in schools it decreases
airborne pathogens number one
and number two it's in it's been
shown in many studies to
increase test scores so this is
a step we must take as a state
and so I urge you to support
this thank you thank thank you
for joining us I. B. E. W. six
eleven good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Okay.
There you go Evita you welcome
good morning you have up to two
minutes morning Mr chair
committee members I am thought
those Griego with international
brotherhood of electrical
workers we have our members we
are both part of the public
collation improvement act.
We believe this is good for New
Mexico and the we recommend do
you pass thank you very much for
your time today but thank you.
So I have in support so we will
go to committee for some a list
Representative result.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
The restaurant speaking it's
going to be just let me be back
in the labor committee and lots
of you all remember me from the
life committee okay.
Of.
First of it's not going to
appropriation Mr chairman and
Representative and it definitely
needs to I have a big problem
with that how are we going to
fund this if there's no money
for.
Many had already been set aside
for other projects that are
going on Mr speaker Mr chairman
and representative it's funny
this bills come up to that.
I was notified last week of the
problem that happened in the
school in my district.
Where the P. SFA which this the
public school.
The ability this is at the
facilities authority ordered one
of my schools to be evacuated.
And it was all due to a
contractor that went down there
approximately three years ago to
replace the H. back units on
this relatively new school is
one of the newer schools in the
southeastern corner of the
state.
And if there's no oversight by
any of the agencies are heard
working at here you should all
be ashamed because this
contractor that worked for this
that was not bonded by the state
went in there to replace the
system.
And instead of there were some
problems.
The systems were stacked instead
of spread out which caused all
the fire alarms to go off
continually continually.
Repeated efforts from the
superintendent of the school and
the principal of the elementary
school of get making these phone
calls come down here some is
going on we're not sure what's
going on and everything he would
make minor adjustments.
Which never really solve the
problem Mr Mr Chairman.
Representative ultimately his
last trip down there.
The fire alarms were
disconnected.
There were some upset parents
whenever the students went back
to school after Christmas break
the parents found out about it
and they said get our kids out
of there impious yes if I
stepped in.
After numerous emails numerous
phone calls to the forties
public school authorities and
they sent out an email saying
your building is substandard.
Is needs to have all the wiring
replace it needs to have all the
H. back units replaced it nobody
can go in there they literally
had to go in there and take
everything out of that school
now the students are being
taught in and a lot of Tory in
in any classrooms in the high
school that they can find to
make sure that they get a good
education.
This little school system cannot
afford to spend over a million
and a half dollars to replace
his system whenever this unit is
less than three years out and
I'm appalled by what do is if
they has done to the school I am
not in opposition to have and
good clean air for students.
To be able to be educated in our
public schools that I really
really have a problem.
With.
He is if I may not setting doubt
someone down there the
constructions industry division.
One of the this school was built
they were down there all the
time to ensure that this was as
safe structure and it is a free
can state save structure.
But for PSA face to come and
there's a we're condemning the
building is insane Mr chairman
and I I'm.
Getting pretty excited about
this
the governor's office is aware
of this so measures have been
taken.
For that particular contractor
to lose his bond in the state of
New Mexico.
But that's the problem that we
have right now with little Davis
bacon act.
Because we could had people
locally down there that could
have handled this problem right
to begin with the state of the
students.
Having to be expelled if you
want to call it that from this
particular school it could have
been taken care of three years
ago whenever this whole system
was put in place it could have
been taken care of with that
spending the amount of dollars
that happened to on the initial
cost of it that never worked.
But I love my students downturn
I love my superintendent out
there and I love all my teachers
down there but I'm not happy
with PS it but.
Constructions industry division
thank you for stepping up and
say there is not a problem with
that school with electrical part
of it with the construction part
of it or anything else and
they're the ones that help this
school make sure that that
particular contractor lost is
bond.
But I am appalled because these
young kids it's an elementary
school and now they are up in
the high school.
Where ever they consider me and
that is unacceptable.
Mr chairman and representative.
Like I said earlier we do want
cleaner for school.
But I'm also reading is that
these the H. back systems could
be between seven hundred and
thirty one million dollars in
two billion dollars that's a lot
of money.
And without this I don't know
if.
We're going to hear it today in
education and goes to health and
Human Services.
Reserve funding.
It's not there it has has a bit
in the poor appropriation during
the summer during the interim
Representative Mr chairman.
Mr chair and representative
first of all thanks for sharing
that our story that should never
have it is a our stores yes.
And second of all this is been
through appropriations
previously but not this bill
this time okay a Mr chairman and
representative this particular
bill the committee substitute
that we're discussing right now
is quite a bit different than
the ritual bill came out is that
correct that is correct Mr chair
representative we got a lot of
feedback and systematically went
through and corrected that
feedback Mr chairman and
Representative all the more need
I feel for it to go back to be
appropriations so they can
understand that this
modification has been made to
the bill that we are discussing
today Mr chairman thank you for
allowing me to see if we get all
that off my system on a Monday
so maybe there is the week I can
keep it under control thank you
very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Chatfield high
ranking member electors.
No one.
There turn my back from thank
you Mr chairman Mr Chairman the
first thing that I would like to
do is to thank you all for
look the taken the suggestions
that we have from the previous
bill Mr Chairman it.
Rectified a lot of the problems
of that many of us had with this
bill
when I see this bill I can't
help but think of.
Watching TV and seeing
storerooms full of un used and
un usable filters for the H. fax
systems in in some of our
schools and and it's just
appalling how much money was
spent in the they're just
sitting there and they're
they're doing no one any good
of state I don't know I don't
know why but
the second thing I want to bring
up was was a twelve million
dollar appropriation without it
it's it it is an unfunded
mandate on the screen but with
yeah it needs to go to
appropriations it if it went
through appropriations two years
ago it's still not been
considered as a part of this
year's budget so it in order to
be in the budget it these to go
through appropriations of this
year so I'm not sure how how we
deal with that but I I certainly
believe in order for this
funding to pass passed through
that is a problem in the state
needs to be reviewed by
appropriation than the decision
made whether to included in the
budget or to not including the
budget also the a billion
dollars of of
You know the possible changes
that need to be made I think
You know that's something to be
considered also worsened where
is the billion dollars going to
come from to rectify these
problems a I'm not sure a that
the that this liability be
brought on some of our little
schools and quality of our
schools are big school pride
have a bigger liability so I I I
do have concerns about this bill
but I appreciate
the fact that you all worked
hard to make it a lot more
usable than the first edition
thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative and what we can
do is we can request the speaker
to add it to appropriations
thank and the other thing is you
can't as as you know Mr speaker
Mr speaker Mr chairman.
As you know it is like broadband
you you can't do it all at once
you have to do it piece by piece
and this just helps prioritize
the schools most in need.
Did you and and anything that Mr
chair representative capital I
think we're looking at these
numbers and we've we've heard
talk about a billion dollars to
two billion dollars those are
really wild estimates and what
it does tell us is that we have
a big problem in what the bill
does is it provides for a
mechanism to identify the
problem to identify with the
real number is it to create a a
a situation where we can go
about methodically and fix these
things I am Representative I'm a
council for the teachers in the
state of New Mexico and what we
faced in twenty and twenty
twenty one with regard to the
air systems in in in the schools
was was amazing and profound and
this bill.
Makes a structured approach to
solving what is it is a serious
problem clean air for kids in
the in twenty and twenty one
teachers as as the comments were
made were faced with deciding
whether or not to open the door
to protect their students and we
just we have a problem in our
schools and this is a very
sensible approach to solving
problems thank you Mr Mr chair
of you know the one small school
that I'm familiar with the the
estimate to replace the H. back
was two million dollars and it
was on funded that's two years
ago and the original bill which
Alexei I do appreciate that the
changes in and the addition of
some funding but but for that
little small school two million
dollars that's a lot of money in
and they have no way to provide
two million dollars thank you Mr
great thank you Representative
please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Garrett and and
experts
It rural schools really struggle
that's I have you know seven
rural school districts in our
district and I can tell you when
you're
just been you know ask me for
two hundred thousand capital
outlay fund so they could afford
to hire a technician you know
and H. fat guy to work for the
district and have somebody help
them and I said I wish I could
it would be the best money I
could spend but I can't give you
know we didn't have junior money
at the time.
Of the the problem is most of
these rural school districts
don't have a full time person
that does this work and they
they really kinda need it
and so they called in you know
an expert and it just it just
breaks their budget.
You know he's just doing the
math and I thought my gosh maybe
wishes higher H. back people
through appropriations in every
school district and then I'll
give some of the larger ones
that probably equal to a million
because I can tell you rural
schools don't have the staff
when they call in an expert to
do this it's in the fifty
hundred thousand dollar range so
it's it's a real problem I I I
appreciate the work on this bill
I I'm I'm I'm not sure this is
the solution at this time hi I
know we need it
I what can you explain to me the
liability issues and how that
would work a little bit more.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
gonna ask our executive director
of the legacy to come up and
talk about that thank you and if
you checked.
Mr chair representative it's a
liability for school districts
and charter schools because in
the bill I think it says section
see actually refers to the next
step so once this is have been
made then there's a requirement
for the district for the schools
to go ahead and address those
there's not a necessarily a
timeline there's no
prioritization and there's just
the requirement for them to go
ahead and address and make the
needed repairs around
improvements on their H. fax
system this poses a liability
for the school districts because
again they have to either use
their own operational funds they
have to go to the PSUC unified
which would also create a match
the bond so there in lies the
liability.
And Mister chair and and and the
misalignment
So let's say they come in and
their number one they're the
number one school and that in
the state with these problems
could teachers really then say
well we don't we can't go to
work and an unsafe environment
could help out what would
happen.
For Mr chair and representative
of the
The PS of a actually has a
process it's a pretty vetted
solid process by which they list
the schools that need
improvement there's two types of
in general two types of what we
call programs and PS that they
would not allow the schools to
actually improve one is just
there's standard program and
that's building new schools new
buildings that the others is
what we call systems based
programs and those are things
like the track upgrades needed
flooring those types of things
more systems in that state
support the structure of the
building
in this list of vetted schools
that need improvements it's
always tricky for schools and
charters because for districts
because let's say that you have
a school that needs an upgraded
each about system.
So I they can get systems based
improvements in H. back up from
update but then what happens is
they get kicked down the list a
little bit if they do that also
an additional building so
there's like an interesting
balance for them to be able to
kind of.
If they want a whole new
building do you need do you go
for the H. FAQ upgrade or do you
wait so that you get a little
bit higher on the list so that
you can actually apply and you
have to go far the funding right
mill levy any type of funding so
that you can then also just got
a brand new building it's an
interesting system.
Mr chair and misalignment can
you tell me is there emergency
money in that in that Fund.
And how much do they have.
Mr Chairman representative there
is ample funding in PSSA the
fund is actually pretty solid
right now in terms of that's
that that is why I think in what
is Senate bill one thirty one we
have a hundred million dollars
appropriation going to support
our school security in CTE in
pre K. and school.
However
Some of the things that school
districts can also uses their
cash balance right so typically
school districts and charter
schools have a cash balance that
they create in a lot of cases to
support these types of
improvements for that they the
use that for the for this
purpose Mr chair and grand I
miss Warniment I'm just not sure
cash balances would cover an
aging school I don't know that
I'm sure they try to keep it up
there but but we don't have an
emergency fund and that fund
right Representative here you're
correct cash balances only I
typically they can look they can
use them but it's it's you know
it ranges for every single
district.
For the match right not for the
entirety of the school sometimes
they will use it for that
sometimes not just depends and
Mr chair with some match
requirement
it depends on the school to Mr
chair pardon me Representative
it just depends on the school
district some school districts
don't have a match because they
don't have a tax base like
central consolidated others have
a pretty hefty match but.
Mr Chairman sorry thank you
that's all thank you Mr chair.
Thank you hi Representative
Roybal Caballero please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative
and panelists this is been the
bill that I've been supporting
in the past and
Fund familiar with it and thank
you for the revisions and the
substitute I think that we have
sufficient data that shows that
especially in I'm talking from
the Albuquerque Bernalillo area
that we have a critically high
number of children with asthma
and other types of upper
respiratory illnesses we also
have and I think health and
Human Services going to address
this more closely data that
indicates that adults suffer
from adult conflict of as much
and the data also shows that
those with adults that suffer
from that on set
actually suffer from an aiming
are influenced by pollutants in
the air and we we we know that
we know that from an
environmental justice
perspective as well that
Air pollutants are damaging
period to any community and I am
Mr chair particularly concerned
because in our area as was
mentioned I in the from someone
in the audience
I'm adjacent to the south valley
the southwest area and our
schools are constantly faced
with increased air pollutants
because of the industry's
encroaching in poor communities
and we've been fighting that
with the city and I know that
the Representative no sense and
with the county we've been
fighting the of any additional
industry that's coming in and
locating which they
traditionally do in very poor
communities but the poor
communities Mr chair a rising up
and protesting and we've been
successful in holding them at
bay but that doesn't
Address how it has already
impacted our antiquated systems
and also concerned because we
have a great deal of portables
Mr chair in our area and so this
addresses the portables we have
a growing population and we're
schools are not able to can't
keep up with building or
renovating so more portables
more portables and those often
come are older models they're
not new models so we need to
really pay attention to that and
I I wanted to ask just a
Yes my question one question and
our a couple of questions where
does federal
Mr Chairman representative what
is federal money come in and how
can the school districts
leverage
that those federal funds yes in
the year if the chair allows Mr
Chairman I'm gonna have.
Executive director Warniment
address that.
Mr Chairman representative royal
title
federal funds the just
art dollars can be use and
there's actually explicitly
which that suggested this was a
usage with that thing around to
but round three the our dollars
can't some of those funds can be
used to this extent some of
those funds are also explicitly
to address Fund finish learning
so school districts have some
restrictions or at least
boundaries if you will and how
the dollars can be used but some
certainly County.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative I would add that
we need to be a little bit more
of creative or innovative in are
searching for federal funds
because we also have department
of commerce offers a has a
component of education I'm not
quite sure where it falls in
their line of requests for
proposals and they often times
assist in will not often times
more often than not they also
have provide leverage funds with
the department of education and
other departments to help in
these particular areas of HVAC
work of the federal government
has recognized through the
department of and that fireman
that this is a need upgrading
all facilities period around the
country public facilities but
more importantly schools public
schools our top on the priority
so they've worked out an
agreement Mr chair with the
department of at to offer these
kinds of of subsidies subsidy
funding to help leverage other
funds so I would look I would
encourage the
fought P. V. everybody who's
involved in helping school
districts also tap into and then
the labor unions are very
familiar with these types of
sources so I'm glad that there
are Mr chair at the table and
have endorsed this piece of
legislation in the past and
throughout in fact if the fifth
come from far are multiple
communities and so they also
could be a good source of
tapping into funding for for
this cause for concern I
understand Mr chair the concern
is funding
but that can never food for
sleep or cloud over the need to
get something done and I
appreciate statement that this
bill is to provide the mechanism
to make those determinants and
to also come up with a vigorous
plans to address because I don't
want those children to can.
In you with their Mr chair the
admin of a respiratory into
adulthood because it becomes
very problematic and then final
point COVID studies indicated
that there was a direct
correlation between.
Heating and ventilation air
filter systems and the spread so
we already have those studies
those studies are very well
publicized so Mr chair and and
Representative this is an
absolute responsibility of our
part and I high I am a support
this bill thank you so much.
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr chair.
Sure appreciate the conversation
of this morning I think
sometimes there needs to be
built introduced to to force us
to the body of a conversation I
think that's been helpful this
morning to sort of highlight.
this issue I think as of as a
body we need decide you know
what this is something that we
should prioritize enough because
of the dollar amount.
I think everybody agrees that if
we had a magic wand that we we
would place all of these things
and it would be a no brainer but
I think it forces us to
prioritize what how we want
appropriated dollars.
Mr chair I I want to talk about.
a few technical flaws that I see
in the committees of and and I
would humbly suggest maybe we.
We should work on those of the
sponsor agrees so I just want to
go through those Mr chair page
two paragraph a.
I appreciate the the language
that to the extent that funding
is available
I think that's helpful it gets
us down the path.
but I'm not sure gets is all the
way there so I don't really know
what that means what does that
mean we say to the extent that
funding is available.
Revert.
It's.
Here is the page to section
three.
F. eight sorry Devlin twenty
three yeah thank you.
So at that Mr seems like the
Sanchez we've committed for me
articulate the question
differently so.
I don't I don't understand what
this means with so when the
state funding funding from
where.
Mr chair and representative
great question so the funding if
you look at section four on page
seven the twelve million dollars
section eight of four four
million dollars is appropriated
from the public school capital
outlay fund to the PS F. eighty
four under taking those
verification assessments Mr
chair I spread out over three
years I'm sorry I mean
interrupt.
Mr chair and and I do understand
appropriation language here's
the issue that I think that we
have if we pass this bill is
we're creating new statutory
language The appropriation is
going to go away eventually what
you're left with the statutory
language and so now we've put an
obligations in to law.
And maybe we appropriate the
future maybe we don't but that
appropriation going to drop off
and it's not clear in the.
Where this funding so I'm just
thinking through this if if I'm
a local district with a lot of
cash reserves do I have to tap
into those this doesn't specify
do I have to go to PS you'll see
this doesn't specify so when we
talk about to the extent that
funding is available and I and I
I appreciate intent what you're
trying to do I just think this
language need to be tightened up
and may I don't know if it's a
pecking order
But if we want school districts
Mr chair to actually implement
these these assessments.
I think we need to specify what
we mean when we say the extent
that funding is available.
The other thing Mr chair this
section three there's no time
frame.
In law from which they must do
this.
Mr chair so is there any thought
around that.
Mr chair and representative
there's not a specific time
frame because schools all have
different situations we have the
school that Representative the
self described where it's
emergency we have other school
districts who've already
addressed it we have new schools
it would have to be that streak
and individual school or charter
schools timeline.
Mr chair I.
Again I think if we.
If we think that this is a
priority for schools.
If I'm a school that's just
swamped with all kinds of
ministry of things and other
things there's I don't think
there's anything in this section
that would actually hold my feet
to the fire and make me do the
assessment Mr chair
representative I believe the
public school capital out lay a
fund for the PS if they already
has a schedule.
and if Dr we're making just
clarified the existing schedule.
Mr Chairman representative lane
is.
Mr Chairman representative lane
there is a blue screen it's
actually contingent on the
school districts and their
public's their facilities plan
meditates generally about every
five years.
Thank you Mr so just another
suggestion I think to to tighten
this up but I think it.
If the state is going to save
school districts you should do
this and I think having the time
frame is is helpful and then Mr
chair for page four paragraph
C..
So this is where we get in the
corrective actions.
Same question there's I don't
see any thing in here that would
implement a time land from which
they must do the corrective
actions.
And I'm Mr Chairman suggested
schools local schools are bad
actors but when they got a lot
of things on the plate if we
think this is a priority if we
don't put a timeline in place in
statute then I don't know if
there's any way for us to hold
their feet to the fire so to
speak.
So something else.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna have.
My one of my expert witnesses
response to that question please
share amero Representative wait
a you raise an important issue
and the the bill doesn't provide
funding mechanisms for all the
repairs that we may need to in
the bill is designed like other
We leave it to the legislature
in future years to decide what
level of appropriation or
importance it will be dedicated
to to solve the problem it does
not create a liability for the
schools which those are things
we have to balance right it
doesn't create a liability
because repairs are subject to
the availability of funds just
like the inspections are subject
to the availability of funds but
the bill provides a funding
mechanism so there are funds
available because the bill would
appropriate those funds in we
would hope that in the future
once we have a real handle on
the scope of the problem in the
state of New Mexico the
legislature can decide.
Along with the systems that are
currently already in place what
priority to attach to the error
students and educators pre.
Thank you Mr I understand I just
again I don't think there's any
mechanism that we can make the
schools actually implement that
if that's the intent.
Mr chair page five paragraph
the.
I think I'm committed this point
to raise every time the that we
create a new report on local
schools.
Just sound the alarm and and
again that this data is helpful
and no but this this bill would
create yet another report for
public school staff to to have
to issue.
Mr chair page six paragraph F.
this is where I think you have a
real conflict.
So you don't have more language
here in paragraph F. that you
had previously.
Which was to the extent that
funding is available you don't
have that language in paragraph
F. now what you have is the
school district shall.
Have this assessment done every
five years this is not dependent
upon if there's funding they're
not funding this this makes it
obligatory in law every five
years and I I would submit Mr
chair that that you have a
conflict and I I think you're
intent is that the funds
available but that languages and
in here and if we pass this this
becomes an obligation on
schools.
And then Mr chair my last point
and I promise I'll I'll stop
here page seven the
appropriation language.
Mr chair the only thing that
we're actually appropriating for
is the assessments themselves
there's no language in here that
would authorize this
appropriation for the actual
fixes that need to take place so
I would submit that if we're
going to do an appropriation we
didn't make sure it's broad
enough to include both the
assessment and any potential
fixes that fiscal sites have so.
Your question thank you.
Thank you Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for bringing the support I
think it is it's it's a bill
that cause us to talk about it I
can speak about as an adult as
well thank you for thousand.
so I think the the discussion
about keeping our kids safe is
an important discussion.
But I think that there are some
some challenges with this and
this is for you know I need to
put kind of boiled highlight
some of the challenges so Mister
chairman the court the question
I have is really about the Merv
thirteen right and why.
Why that why it that level of
this because I can tell you Mr
chairman and
As far as panel that most school
districts.
Do not have the ability or the
their facilities cannot handle
those
so Mr chairman I guess the
question is why why Merv
thirteen for the of filtration.
I think is looking for its on
page
Thanks for.
Line twenty three.
At.
Mr chairman and Representative
bargaining and help with my
expert witnesses answer that
question.
Chair Mero Representative Baca
the Merv system today I I do
know anything about it a few
years ago until COVID came about
I move thirteen filtration
system is a system that was
recommended I believe by the CDC
and other other H. FAQ experts
as the one of the most effective
and in terms of balancing the
interests of cost the best
option to prevent airborne
illnesses in the schools.
Thank you Mr chairman and I also
know those recommendations came
out early as we fought the
pandemic and we all thought the
pandemic and so you know I
wonder the CDC recommendations
have since changed their cell
I think we've we've definitely
learned about the comment as
it's progressed and gone through
it most people been a touched by
it in some ways and other so
Mr chairman the other question I
have is that the question was
brought up earlier with
statements made things haven't
been done up I can tell you that
many districts like my district
about portable units that were
placed in every classroom that
had that capability that didn't
require an overall good Mr
chairman looking at this looking
at an elementary school to
upgrade the H. fax system to
handle Merv thirteen filters.
Our correct anywhere from one to
two million dollars so for
districts like my size you're
looking at anywhere from twenty
to thirty million dollars that
would be required to upgrade the
system so
So I I think that the point is
that things haven't been made I
can also tell you that other
districts have use other
cleaning up portable cleaning
units as far as we have a robot
to that roams the halls and we
have portable cleaning so I I
want to make that clears that as
it as a parent as an educator
myself and children school I
think to say that we haven't
done anything an address that is
not necessarily for statement
because I think that we have
Mr chairman in really my last
point is really that
The the challenge it may create
for for districts isn't just
dependent upon funding but it's
also a on the availability of
materials and or labor to get
the process is done because as
we're looking at Mr chairman
if we're talking about the the
investments for these things
like in my district alone you're
talking fifteen facilities
That's that's quite a bit of
this and as we are struggling to
fill of maintenance custodial
positions now the fact is for
these companies that are coming
in who also struggle with supply
and with the materials I think
that's also Jones so the the
conversation the idea behind
this bill is absolutely one that
I think we have because our kids
are the priority but this only
addresses part of the problem
because we also want secure we
put in the kids we have in the
Merv thirteen that we put on a
school bus with fifty kids out
there and we know that those
buses do not have those filters
as well so I just have to to say
that that again I this is a bill
that it's it's good to discuss
we got a really prioritize the
health of our kids and our staff
in our students but I think that
the the challenges in the the
the unforeseen consequence to
the school district.
May have a huge impact thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank thank you Representative
cool.
Mr chair thank you for the
purpose that the four bring in
these over I think that's a
anyone being in the classroom
will understand the priority of
these highlight for them steam
the raised a somebody here say
if not now when
As a classroom teacher.
I think this is a priority as
big as any good curriculum
cabinets students with five or
six of faith funds around the
clothes from because we do they
have the error is a liability in
every sense of safety and the
the cables everywhere I remember
Maestas one time taking the kids
with commercial fund because
that's the only thing available
at the moment he was astounded
by this he was so much fun with
the people around our outside
the whole committee what what's
going on on this to have to take
the test without noise because
there was no other choice so
Also I think a teachers we don't
have or other things have not to
get sick because as soon as we
start teaching without getting
all these of colds and
bronchitis and everything that
happened to me.
So when I start reading these I
I understood the challenges on a
huge you all about the
challenges that we have but I
think we need to start seeing
this as a priority in in in in
the classroom for the safety of
our students is a liability to
also have a unhealthy classroom
with the students there
thank you
Representative Representative
that the for our committee told
the questions that we have here
and hopefully we can work
through these it seems to me to
be a priority a some us because
coming up with must curriculum
some of the chair
Mr chair and representative I
being in schools throughout the
state and this is an issue that
I have seen in other places up
some classroom are what like you
to have a window from because we
don't even have a window to to
open and if they have a window
they have to close it during
this that in them last time or
break or if you vote is to the
street you can have it open
things like that so if you have
been in the classroom and in in
the old buildings like I wants
to understand how big the
financial this is so I just
wanted to share that and thank
you Representative for bringing
this up for us and hopefully we
can work together in making it
go up go to thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair I I won't I
won't take too much time thank
you Representative for bring
this forward it is important.
Hi I I don't want to repeat what
was said earlier because of
there are a lot of important
points but the one important
point that I wanted to make.
This cash reserves as mentioned.
So you you know let's just use
our cash reserves to purchase
this or do this but those cash
reserves are also there because
our waiting for reimbursements
from the state.
So some school districts could
have up to fifty million dollars
in been waiting for
reimbursements so you're you're
you're gonna we're gonna play
source are superintendents or
school boards to make that tough
decision on for the for the
going to prioritize the funding
or how they're gonna use of
funding
so I just wanted to to mention
that and this is this is
important it is my son has us
but he.
With the public schools you know
we have we we we understand that
issue
however we also have to
understand the sustainability of
this and especially if there's
it the question about the
appropriation of.
But what I want to really say it
is you know there is room for
compromise there is room for
both sides to work towards is to
obtain the goal of creating a
safe environment for students
and four teachers in the
classrooms however I think there
since there's been so many
concerns have come with that
have come up I just I use
strongly suggest Representative
Garrett that we consider you
know rolling this and and
looking at a further instead of
tabling it or by getting a no
vote on it because this is very
important and it does need to be
addressed and I and I called and
I I want to thank you for taking
the steps for taking this on
thank you Mr chair Mr chair I
just like to make a comment
Representative I I agree cap
cash reserves are not the answer
at all and I appreciate the
suggestion to roll it over
because I think we all recognize
and I appreciate everybody
participating in the
conversation because it's an
important conversation there's
balancing the existing
organizations all the public
school organizations balancing
with that going to
appropriations and getting it
right I was here when we first
discuss the bill and anybody who
is here knows that it's like
fifty times better but fifty
times better I don't think has
gone all the way and I would be
grateful to rolling it over Mr
chairman I thank you we did have
further discussion center
Representative Ezzell wanted the
second bite at the apple which
is fine please make a brief.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative when they were
talking about our school
districts and what it the cost
is going to be we have eighty
nine school districts in our
state does not count toward our
schools that is this funding
also going to apply to be able
to live with the address of the
district of non educational
spaces and other types of
facilities.
So that's a huge impact out
there Mr chairman and
representative.
Mr chair representative we took
we took out the no okay if it
was taken out that's fine.
But I agree with the pre prior
statement Mr chairman from.
Page seven of your.
The committee substitute we're
making that that is good now
going to be statutory language.
And when we say share all of
that is included in your bill is
this committee said hold on let
me funded I have that.
Set in here so on page six the
school districts shell.
We're mandating that now Mr
Chairman.
In general like I said earlier.
We want pressure for kids we
don't want our kids to be safe
we don't want our teachers to be
safe we don't want any person on
our schools the second our
school facilities.
But whenever I was discussing
earlier Mr chairman the problems
my small school there which is
its own school district which is
a new school having problems
like this cash reserves are in
an option.
They have already bonded out as
the there because people down
there I understand how important
education is.
And what are they gonna do brand
new schools that they're totally
empty.
I feel like this really needs to
go back to appropriations for
them to understand the magnitude
of what this is and I would
strongly recommend that that's
where the Senate Mr chairman
thank you very much for allowing
me the second opportunity to
speak.
Thank you so what I'm from the
committee that we've come a long
way but not quite all the way in
terms of this bill especially in
rural areas.
With regard to the school
districts I think you've heard
from the committee and some of
the places to improve the
committee set up here on the
something we can continue to
work on bring back especially
the finance P. so with that I
think will roll the bill.
Bring it back if you all make
department maintenance fee with
the committee thinks that that.
if you get it on the agenda
again so will roll house bill
thirty of the committee sub for
House Bill thirty.
Thank you Representative thank
you experts thank you committee
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you all for your input which
would be noted and will work on
thank you right thank you
We do have Representative has
been
Up with house bill one thirty
seven.
Thanks for being here hi we just
do not have a sponsor.
And she's at that comment and I.
new thank you so much for the
heads up all right so
Representative to here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Please see if you all are ready
house bill one fifty one.
The person.
What is.
It actually turns out to be
perfect.
All right Representative
Trujillo yes good morning Mr
chairman I bring to you today
house bill one fifty one the non
tenure track faculty
unemployment bill what it does
is simply provides
Of.
Actual language that
will address unemployment
ambiguity in higher education
with the respect to non tenured
faculty who are entitled to
unemployment insurance it this
is what the bill does it amends
existing law to include non
tenure track faculty as being
eligible for unemployment
compensation by meeting the
following criteria the offer
must be written oral or an
implied offer a future
employment at or near the same
position and remember that at or
near the same position for the
following academic year term the
offer must come from a person an
actual with already to do so the
term of employment is the same
as was for the previous and for
the previous employment term.
The compensation is not less
than ninety percent of the
amount paid in the previous
period the employment is not
contingent upon factors that are
controlled by the institution
and that is highly probable that
there is some is the same
likelihood of employment for the
same job the next academic year
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee I have gotten over
the course of time.
Strong letters of of.
Concern from non tenured faculty
and staff at higher level
institutions that many times
they are hired for one semester
and then they're not hired the
next one and then there hired
another one and then the
difficulty is trying to.
Consistently maintain a source
of income and sometimes that's
really difficult if they're not
eligible for unemployment so
what I'd like to do is ask my
chief
Witnessed a Shane you to please
give me a little bit more
insight thank you certainly
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is a pretty
simple bill simple legislation
we have a gap in coverage in
unemployment coverage for person
to perform important tasks in
the state of New Mexico and that
is that people who teacher
students at the at the beyond
high school level and what this
does is indicated in the FIR is
effectively Mears federal
regulations to allow those
persons to recover to be
eligible for unemployment in the
interim when they're not
teaching so that they have the
ability to continue teaching
it's a yeah I I know it's an F.
R. there's some questions about
that about the language in the
wording and what we've done is
we've we've measured at federal
language but this is.
Legislation that someone like
the tax code it's inside
baseball stuff in the language
is identified to make it clear
and explicit who can recover and
in what situations and and
resolves itself effectively is
it kind of a technical fix to
allow these people to continue
to do what they're doing and be
eligible for unemployment during
the periods in which they don't
have a assignment to teach or
it's the summer or their load
gets decreased unexpectedly the
classes get at decreased
unexpectedly and we have a
provision that will going
forward allow them to collect
unemployment and and Mr chair
just to add one of the concerns
that comes to me often is the
fact that the
I don't think every university
but some universities and
institutions of higher learning
tend to like to hire non tenured
faculty because they don't have
to pay benefits insurance or
other things so that the they
get a bang for their Buck by not
doing that so what we're trying
to do here is just simply
find consistency with some kind
of assurance that these folks
are going to die of starvation
between quarters or semesters
thank you Mr chair we stand for
questions all right thank you so
much so we will go to opposition
online or.
In the committee room so if
you're opposed to house bill one
fifty one please indicate by
raising your hand.
Give it some wait time.
All right so we'll go to support
if you're online please indicate
by raising your hand or on house
bill one fifty one.
If you're in the committee room
under my left hand side those in
support of house bill one fifty
one more please indicate there's
an art will start in the back
please you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Yes.
My name is mark.
New Mexico council members
present expanding support of
this legislation but I think the
sponsor and members to turn
coming forward to help clean
clarify this language we support
those benefits for part time.
The thing is I mentioned with
the sponsor of the matter is
that there are some things we
like to sit down there after the
committee passes the clarify
when it comes to clinical back
part time when it comes that
jumped how maybe this could be
clarified today on a bigger note
I think the concern we have like
for anything when it comes to
expanding benefits or other
services within higher education
the budget issue and and I think
that's the chart the Sanchez
been a tremendous supporter of
higher education so if you all
the best committee just keep
that in mind member possibly
like to monitor any fiscal
impact on the road we don't see
it being made possibly be
minimal or none at all this
something we like to watch and
work with the sponsoring going
forward this reminds for
education is our base budget
reading one percent increase in
our base budget at seven point
two million dollars to go all
higher education.
The New Mexico for fiscal year
twenty four with your support
would like to keep in mind the
increased Judy does help to find
these types of services and
other services to our faculty
part time faculty or students
thank you Mr chairman members
coming in much federal counts of
investments thank you ma'am
Sanchez.
Thank you others on my left hand
side moving forward from okay
we'll start on the end here
please Sir give a two minute for
consistency I don't pack with
you and I'm maybe the poster
child for the Senate currently
and unemployment and also
receive rental assistance I
don't have health insurance for
the last six months as well as
my wife fortunately my daughter
was able to get health
insurance.
And so I make about twenty eight
thousand dollars teaching six
class seven classes a year and
it's kind of goes to this
department online and so I
highly support this as well as
other benefits because we have
this if you look at nationwide
this is a huge problem the ex on
the cation of the
corporatization of universities
that use myself as an others is
basically wage slaves.
If you find this kind of benefit
you give me the ability to teach
your students and the future
economic power of the state to
actually get a better education
which I've been doing since two
thousand twelve as well as being
a of graduate student and worker
teaching at UNM since two
thousand two.
Right.
Thank you others in support the
wish to speak in the same row.
skip that other please have two
minutes.
The New Mexico.
Members of the committee
eighteen Mexico supporting
objects and we've done a great
job Supporting Actor staff so
we're sticking our focus accents
are the backbone of recognized
colleges right now and we have
to do right by them thank you
great thank you you on the rope
of.
All right.
First place welcome you have up
to two minutes.
Eight hundred under for
University of New Mexico I
masters of the universe to
Mexico and currently getting my
PhD at the university Mexico
during my time at the university
many of my teachers and
educators have been junks I have
seen this increased from the
time that I was first in two
thousand fourteen until this
year
junks and graduate workers which
I currently.
Each seventy four percent of
undergrad courses at the
university that is three fourths
of all class members are being
taught by non tenure track
education these folks are
especially
at.
Please where they are able to
obtain benefits the other folks
are across the country get and
unfortunately universities are.
More.
And Representative workers to
teach the classes as was said by
the representative because they
are able to not pay those
benefits it is especially
helpful in New Mexico because
they're unable to get
unemployment and I believe that
this bill will help those
educators that do teach many of
our New Mexico and undergrads
and people who are rising.
Thanks currently and in the
future thank you thank you if
you could state your name please
for the record.
And the White.
Thank you others in the same row
that wish to speak in support.
Please you have up to two
minutes welcome keep it very
short Ernesto long as president
of the United academics at the
university New Mexico the
faculty you and I represent Act
jumped in part time faculty up
to Albuquerque Valencia Tallis
Los Alamos in Gallup and I stand
in strong support of each the
one fifty one to provide
unemployment benefits to
essential really essential
workers at the university
without without the part time
faculty instructors the
university would really be
unable to to facilities missions
there's standards John support
okay great thank you others in
support of my left hand side.
The.
Right please Sir welcome you
have a few minutes.
And it's brand new instant and
I'm not an adjunct faculty but
I'm instructor of record for
geography course at and as you
and
I presented to commend you all
any any efforts you had in
getting that going over the the
the name or the number of the
bill that was passed last
session that aware of a whole
bunch of undergrads got it got
it have access to higher ed and
so that was great but if you
only common sense that then
they're going to hire more had
jumped in the no with school
being funded in large part why
oil and other things matter
what's funny that there's going
to be as opposed to it not
having a river guide it is just
part of life there's and then
flows and so these people are so
essential that it makes sense to
to find like you know because I
wasn't able to procure and so
let's let's let's let's support
those those people are so
essential to actually educate
those people because if we put a
whole bunch of people in higher
ed but the quality is low that's
that's that doesn't make any
sense and so by by passing this
we're we're we're.
With the filling the spirit of
having more people in higher ed
which is what I would hope we
would all want thank you.
Thank you others that wish to
speak on my left hand side of
the family of up to two minutes
welcome.
Members of the committee my name
is Dale that rose and that we're
going to do with the graduate
workers in that incident that
and our colleagues in the
faculty you you a UNM to setting
up in support of this bill and
many of our members Act in
addition to working as teaching
assistants also work at other
colleges as adjuncts and want to
express you know our full
support for making sure that our
other colleagues statewide have
at is that.
Thank you any others I wish we
can support in the room all
right so go.
Move from front to back please
have a.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo Vanessa hop in the New
Mexico independent community
colleges and we think the
sponsor for bringing this bill
we are in full support of
providing these benefits to our
part time adjunct clinical
whatever we make all these
staff of the pandemic of the
stairs Mister Yeoh said that
with insider baseball but having
worked within higher education
it can be confusing as to what
type of tax talking about
because our institutions called
in different things we would
like to also work with the
sponsor after the eight this
committee to get that language
to ensure that the folks you
want covered are indeed covered
and as Mr speaker pointed out a
we don't know what the fiscal
impact would be we're prepared
for the for that but we ask that
as we getting one percent of the
instruction general funding
currently in the recommendation
to to look at that because there
will be some cost and so as to
not pass it off into motion how
can we work together.
Thank you right thank you others
so which speak please thirty two
minutes welcome.
Thank.
The New Mexico.
Your director of relations
director we stand and support we
think this one's for and with
the bill and we just.
The.
Great thank you others a wish
speak in support of please Sir
you have up to two minutes
welcome thank you Mr chair
members the committee John the
tickets with the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO we
believe that all workers are.
Ported certain benefits This of
course being one of them perfect
world we also believe that all
workers should be if it's a
collective bargaining and have
all the rights afforded in those
as well but that is still a
dream so in the meantime.
Out there for bringing up this
measure and we encourage you to
support thank you great thank
you others in the room that wish
to speak in support.
All right so I will go to I. B.
E. W..
Good morning you of up to two
minutes please welcome.
Mr chair committee members
on top of to go with the
international brotherhood of
electrical workers
Representative.
And we stand in full support.
Of this legislation thank you
very much.
Thank I appreciate the privative
all right.
All right the song tree good
morning support for house bill
one fifty one welcome you have a
two minute.
Thank you Karen and morning
chairman members of the
committee my name is Andrea
you'll need I am here
representing the native American
democratic caucuses New Mexico
and stand in full support of.
Sponsor for bringing HB one
fifty one
Forward and ask for your support
thank you.
Great thank you so much.
All right so I don't have
anybody else will come back to
committee representative but
have you know please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative of I I obviously
I'm refer I refer to myself
oftentimes is the higher it
member of this committee because
I am in higher it and I offered
my support to Representative
Trujillo on this bill as a
sponsor of because I can speak
firsthand
to the importance of having this
bill passed today and move
forward and I hope to see it in
the future committees and on the
floor and passed and signed by
the governor.
First I think there were several
comments that were made that
need to be highlighted I'm gonna
repeat that seventy four
percent.
Of
The classes.
Taught are typing on tenure
track faculty that's that we
really have to pay attention to
that that number has been
increasing throughout the years
because the institutions have
found a way.
To exploit.
The labor of part time and non
tenure track.
They've also Mr chair found a
way.
To limit the number of tenure
track we have tenure track that
have been on track for years and
years and often most of those
are of come from communities of
color are persons of color.
And so we know being inside the
institution.
Mr chair and representative that
institutional racism is alive
and well.
Most of the seventy four percent
of the all those non tenure
track and part time.
Are I would say communities of
color.
The enrollment at our
universities as I've mentioned
Mr Chairman representative to
I'm Rowland is comprised of the
majority coming from communities
of color yet we have systems of
institutional racism that.
Exploit on the one hand and then
prevent from progression on the
other hand and those are
important points that Mister
chair I feel compelled to have
to bring up
because there's there's a reason
why institutions are going more
and more in that direction.
I myself have been a
Imagine faculty I've been a
graduate student teaching
assistant student.
And I'm sorry to say that the
institution the UNM has seen fit
to not allow me to teach.
Due to what they interpret is an
antiquated nineteen sixties law
that was passed that says that
elected.
Are prohibited from being
compensate.
But teaching assistants on
student federal financial aid.
Are there because they are
fulfilling their graduate degree
requirements which include
teaching.
So Mr chair.
I'm no longer in that position
and those positions but when I
was.
Because I was a state
representative and find and had
limitations to teach in the
spring semester I would teach in
the fall.
There was a gap and as you all
know my colleagues Mr Chairman
representative.
We don't get paid as a
legislature.
So as a student I'm relying on
financial aid I'm relying on
contracts to teach teaching
assistant graduate assistant.
And I rely on my fall courses
that were
offered only in the fall because
I couldn't teaching springs so
in the spring sessions so Mister
chair and representative
I can speak to the gap of and
and and and income that occurs
mmhm.
Ross the board.
And if without any compensation.
in my particular case I'm I'm
left with a forced retirement
which I had to take early and I
suffered on on that end as well
in our I took a forced
retirement so I could pursue my
studies so I could
representative of my
constituents.
And I had to take it.
In the contradictory position in
order and and and took a hit on
my social security and
retirement benefits so just
visualize that cycle that
doesn't that's my particular
story Mr chair representative
because I'm gonna let but there
are numerous other stories that
and the reason why I joined in
helping organize the United
graduate workers and faculty was
because I see the deep in
transient institutional
disparities that exist
throughout our institutions in
the state.
And we have to acknowledge.
And respect the voices.
That are coming to us and saying
we cannot any longer Mr Chairman
representative live.
Not only are communities
continue living in poverty but
those of us that are attempting
to pursue our higher education
in order to improve our
communities.
Cannot continue to live in under
these conditions and so I have
no.
Just the I did have one question
Representative and IT founded in
the
I think it was the fifth for
support our.
I.
So
This would fall under the
obviously the department of
workforce solutions and
workforce solutions has already
offered their support in the
committee on how they and and
and being able to work to the
mechanisms in order to make this
work.
So I I guess for your expert
witness the question I have Mr
Chairman representative is we've
negotiated contracts on the part
of the grad workers and the
faculty.
how do we work.
This.
It and alignment with our
contracts and and how do we in
collective bargaining insure
that the institutions
incorporate.
What we're saying a collective
hard bargaining table to include
these benefits.
Chair Mero Representative Roybal
Caballero the the changes in the
law would necessarily require
renegotiation of existing
collective Committee and those
collective bargaining agreements
would obviously be required to
comply with the law and
employers that you're talking
about would be required to
modify those collective
bargaining agreements where they
are in conflict or don't find
the budget set out in this
legislation thank you and thank
you Mr chairman that's an
important point because if the
universities and institutions
are listening which I know they
do they are they need to
acknowledge that and be ready
for that as I know are you sorry
so the last point just one last
point is the institutions have
known.
For years.
That this is been a huge issue.
For us the necessity to organize
the US entering into collective
bargaining and having our
contracts agreed upon so the
institutions have an obligation
to work these items in their
budget.
It cannot be something it has to
be recurring so we do need to
have them begin to prepare their
budgets to representative of
these numbers so that we don't
have an annual issue of that
it's not in the budget or we
don't have the right budget for
the comments that were made
earlier Mr chair and
representative thank you
thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
a bill to the before the
committee
I.
In during my am time in New
Mexico and I worked for northern
New Mexico community college I
also.
Help start the UNM task campus
said that there was a point
where I was in charge of hiring
at check teachers when we first
started you and and tell us and
them I can tell you at both
places and all of our New Mexico
I think we really abuse the at
junk system totally it's a
national problem it's something
we share nationally I have
nieces and nephews who were
involved in that process in a I
think getting tenure is probably
the hardest thing in America
right now and so I think we
really abuse these these adjunct
faculty members and that was
thirty years ago is the same
today it hasn't changed so
anything we can do to.
Help them.
Maybe sustain this until you
know the school can hire them
full time I mean really I I
don't think anybody even
understands how much they paid I
think it northern for a for a
for one class it's like I don't
know three or four thousand is
that correct.
It was chair representative at
that that those numbers are I
said it very close I mean we've
had someone yes but here the
committee that you know we're
talking full time adjunct
professors making between twenty
and thirty thousand dollars a
year
and Mr chair and I expect that
would be high I I'm just telling
you that would be high if you're
lucky enough to make that this
so that would be working three
semesters right you probably
have yes two classes a semester
so eight thousand times three
twenty five thousand yeah that's
that's really what it is and
these are really talented and
some of really the best
instructors because they're kind
of fresh out of college they're
close to that age group they
know how to get students
involved
And anything we can do to
support them thank you for
bringing this bill forward I and
I a strand order I stand
strongly in support of this bill
Mr chair great thank you.
I don't have anybody else on my
lists to what's Representative
Lane.
You know.
I was this.
district in a class of an
opportunity Representative
Trujillo at the table.
Four Mr chair I have a question
on page seven what's the thought
process behind the oral or
implied.
Offers of employment I'm sorry
of the seven line seven.
That is rolled folks that have
just a written offer what's that
Bryant world Mr chairman that
my.
US.
What is his name X..
Expert witness I'm having brain
stuff going on but Jack
Chatfield knew that for him
okay.
Romero Representative Lane at
the particular nature of the
relationship between adjunct
faculty and in the colleges and
universities the state New
Mexico sometimes creates a
situation where we have only
written or oral or implied
agreements to continue teaching
for the next semester in this
language captures kind of the
ambiguous nature of the
relationships between the act
faculty and that the professors
I do what I would note it
mirrors a similar language under
federal law.
Okay so Mister chairs.
I'm not familiar with the the
agent space so are you saying
that it's customary to not get
an an offer in writing.
Mr chair representative lane I I
I don't know that it is it is
customary it is probably common
in the state of New Mexico that
these situations are arranged in
that way some arrangements are
in writing but not all of the
are at substantial enough of
them are not in writing that we
feel is necessary to include
this language in the statute.
Senator that's present at I
guess I think of I read at stage
institutions being maybe a
little more formal than that but
that's my attorney glasses
looking at this because you know
I just any time you have oral or
implied it it opens up on that
point Mr chair.
If you have further questions
will come back to you okay but
Representative Eli thank you Mr
I it opens up you know just the
possibility for for litigation
around that when you have some
the requirement to be in writing
it's it's typically tight and
then it's either in writing or
it's not but if if it's not
uncommon and I guess that would
make sense.
I need to just make sure I
understand so.
The way I understand a lot of
that junk.
Arrangements is let's say
teacher specialty class and
business law for example.
And
my the ability to teach that
class is often contingent upon
if if there's enough students
that are interested in enrolling
my business class and I think
they typically have a minimum
threshold for which they would
do that thing with courses and
so if I if there aren't the
minimum enrollment courses and
offered in that I don't get the
abject contract so in that
scenario Mr chair would that.
Entitled me to receive
unemployment benefits.
Chair Mero at Representative
Lane I believe the answer to
your question is yes there are
six factors identified in the
statute and the six factors
factors based upon the totality
of the circumstances but
specifically section I do that
it addresses the changes in
course programming over
semesters and whether or not
someone would qualify okay Mr
Chairman representative
clarification.
I'm full time practicing lawyer.
if I offer an adjunct class
Senator that we just described
happened so business law class
none of students the courses on
offer the fact that I'm a full
time practicing lawyer in
private practice does that mean
I'm also eligible to apply for
unemployment benefits under this
change Romero Representative
Lane I believe the answer the
question is no if you have if
you are employed up to full time
employment in another capacity
you wouldn't be eligible to
independently recover
unemployment under these
regulations again I would refer
you to the totality of the
circumstances fully employed as
a lawyer and thus wouldn't be
eligible for unemployment under
other regulations associated
with with our an employment law.
So Mister chair this is what
we're talking about is.
At junction other non tenured
faculty that this is their sole
source of income.
Chair representative Lente
generally speaking yes I mean
there there are obviously a
million variants but that is the
design and and the particular
language is addressed to provide
the benefit for those persons
who primarily or exclusively are
engaged as adjunct professors
and and non tenured faculty.
So I'm okay Mr Chairman said
generally speaking so there is
there anything in this language
though that that says a five
part time job or anything else
that I'm disqualified.
Mr chair at Representative lane
not in the proposed legislation
but the unemployment statute
generally provides eligibility
and non eligibility factors
which cover all types of
employment and those provisions
of our law would in that
instance in hypothetical that
you provided.
Render you ineligible to recover
unemployment under those
circumstances okay thank you Mr
I'm expert exposing my ignorance
to unemployment laws you can
tell us.
Don't practices are not familiar
with the so thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative Chatfield thank
you Mr chair Mr chair.
Notice I didn't have a question
for started this but as we begin
to discuss it well that now I do
so oral or implied.
Is that an oral or implied
contract for current work for
for next year for either way I
know the state Mr chair will not
Hey.
any bill that does not.
Initiate from a contract from a
written contract Mr chair so.
I believe me is a little bit of
Need to understand the
terminology oral or implied
because the state for any for
any bill that I submit a bill to
the agency in the state of New
Mexico I have to back that
invoice up with the contract
Universally required some Mr
close what question Mr chair
please yes the the issue has to
include the fact that they that
the employee will have a
reasonable assurance of being re
employed my correct thanks for.
Thank you Mr all right thank you
Representative did you have a
good all right.
So.
What's the will of the committee
Mr chair Representative Lara who
passed second we have a due pass
motion by Representative via a
second by Representative Roybal
Caballero and secretary if you
call the roll to pass motion
please.
Representative aka so.
Representative Chatfield no.
Representative is up have.
Representative corolla yes.
Representative first yes
Representative lane.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid is.
Representative more of a million
no.
Representative Roybal career
yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Mr Chairman yes.
Right.
Seven to five you have a do pass
on house bill one fifty one
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee right thank you
members of the committee thank
you all right so we have
Representative Kevin on house
bill one thirty the.
All right.
Welcome to health education.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
thank you for your flexibility
and patience and getting us
here.
All right when you all are ready
brief introductions and
presentations please.
I'm proud to be here today with
house bill one thirty seven this
is an effort several years in
the making and I am grateful
that we've been able to have
meaningful conversations and
build momentum over the long run
of this for me is about tax
equity.
Just like I hear you all have
outstanding and important
conversations about equity for
our kids in our classrooms this
policy is an extension of that
the four kids get through K.
twelve and hopefully higher and
some day many of them need
somewhere safe to be father
parents are pursuing education
themselves or working in many of
our businesses across New Mexico
as a parent I know how important
it is that our little ones have
somewhere safe to land while we
do our grown up things and we
are going to responsibilities
years ago I was proud to me
Angela Garcia who is a local
small business owner in Los
crucis and Angela explain to me
at the time that while they
serve overwhelmingly kids that
are on CYFD contracts so again
their families have met the
income thresholds to qualify for
child care support and
assistance through the state
these providers have to turn
around and pay G. R. T. on those
same contracts and and
reimbursement rates.
Why this matters is that of
course we hold these providers
to really high standards through
the star level system and I'm so
proud Angela is at the top of
that system with five stars we
expect them to meet the same
outcomes have that same quality
of care and education for little
ones but for the private
providers different than the non
profits or or publicly operated
spaces we expect to do that with
typically and especially in Los
crucis where we have one of the
highest here to use in the state
with less than with a percent or
or more less in revenue so we
say meet the same standards have
these incredible classrooms for
kids but frankly if you're
privately operated do it with
less money that's never felt
fair to me and because I also
get to sit on the tax committee
and have conversations about how
we create a tax landscape that's
friendly to businesses it's
always the loan my minds that we
easily have conversations about
how to get Facebook here but
when I look at health care
providers they're
overwhelmingly small locally
owned
So this bill is very
straightforward it simply
creates a new G. R. T.
deductions so that these child
privately operated child care
providers would not pay G. R. T.
on the contracts they have with
the states of the states on the
skids on a subsidy they don't
pay G. R. T. on that if they
happen to have some private pay
kids in their classrooms there's
not that many New Mexico because
we've been so thoughtful and
making sure the subsidies get to
families that most need them
then they would continue paying
that G. R. T. on the private pay
kids but not on the kids that
are in contract with the state
and here is to provide her deep
expertise
Expansive knowledge on this
issue so thank you Mr chair for
having us under the remarks.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you so much for considering
house bill one thirty seven as a
representative and then I
mentioned this is really to
create parity among programs
like money that provide this
care to childcare subsidies as
well as community based pre K.
because we are also subject to
G. R. T. when we receive the
grants to provide pre K. through
our school by programs and
privately one of the biggest
things at about this is creating
that parity because we all
receive the same reimbursement
rate whether that be through the
public education system whether
that be through a nonprofit
community based system whether
it be through the city because
cities like City of Albuquerque
offered services like this but
they are not subject to the
gross receipts tax at this time
we as private prior to tax
paying entities are the only
ones that currently pay that so
as I mentioned we are it's still
providing the same quality and
we are still serving the same
families but we're doing it
between eight to nine percent
last we want to make sure that
we bring that parity up to these
private providers so that we can
continue to not have any
compromised quality we can try
to look me pay parity we're
working with our workforce
crisis at this time at this time
it will really help private
providers like myself to be able
to consisting quality and
retain and recruit my
professional staff.
Thank you Mr chair thank thank
you all so much so we will go to
support so if you're online in
support of house bill one thirty
seven if you would please
indicate by raising your hand
those in the room in support of
house bill one thirty seven
please indicate there is here.
And please all right so I'll go
to my left hand side ma'am
please welcome you of up to two
minutes if you wish to speak
place you have up to two minutes
welcome.
For the.
All right thank you would you
mind providing your name for the
record please.
Great.
Great thank you so much all
right please welcome you have a
Timmons.
Hi my name is Kim and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico child care and education
association this first of all
I'd like to thank the sponsors
of the expert witness for
bringing this forward this is a
critical piece of legislation
that will level the playing
field before between nonprofit
for profit and government
entities that provide the
services this will allow for
profit providers to take these
revenues and invest them back
into their workforce including
retirement benefits health
benefits and increase wages for
those reasons we hope that you
support this bill thank you so
much right thank you.
Others in support.
All right Sir New Mexico's
Center on Law and Poverty really
if if you would please tell us
your name welcome any of up to
two minutes.
The morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is that
any state putting up on the
internet New Mexico some online
poverty we stand and support
this bill because it will
benefit families that have
previously been unable to access
child care assistance currently
to health care providers can
charge families that use health
care systems the applicables
gross receipts tax R. G. R. T.
for the total cost of the child
care assistance benefit and co
payment and even if the family
has a co payment of zero dollars
per month They may still be
unable to access health care
systems because they have to pay
the gross receipts tax and it's
a too large of a barrier if the
G. R. T. is passed on to family
sometimes that can add up to ten
percent of the family the
families child care costs for
example this could mean eighty
dollars G. R. T. if the total
cost is eight hundred dollars a
month for childcare assistance
and that can sometimes be eighty
dollars could go towards a
week's worth of groceries for a
family so this is a look at
child care centers and adoption
for the G. R. T. and it will
allow them not to pass on this
G. R. T. on to the families and
it'll help parents have a safe
place for their children while
they go to work or to school and
it'll allow families to use that
money saved another family needs
which will help our economies so
for those reasons we stand in
support of H. B. one thirty
seven thank you all right thank
you very needs to.
Any others in support.
All right so we'll go to
opposition is our opposition for
house bill one thirty seven.
Either online in the room give
it some way time.
Okay seeing will come to
Canadian Canadian questions
comments concerns.
Representative Lane.
Early this time.
Thank you Mr chair I think I
think there was one bulletin
come in this morning I was at
the LCS.
Not come on every bill a promise
of.
Mr chair so.
My understanding of how the G.
R. T. system works is.
It's the obligation of the
employer to pay that to the
state is that right.
Mr Chairman representative.
It's the obligation of the filer
yes and in this time this case
would be the employer to pay
that to the state thank you Mr
and so the the issue that I see
is we're we're putting these
providers in this conundrum
where they have these families
that are on the CYFD contract.
And we're asking them basically
wanted to things.
Either you you pass on the the
eight percent to the family
that's already strapped.
Or you asked and eat eight
percent.
And in either way I I I don't
see how that's a good result for
us as a state.
so Mister chair I don't I don't
know if
the Sanchez expert has a sense
of how how often is this passed
on to families verses Eaton and
is this you know I I don't know
how this does from a business
standpoint I can't imagine it's
healthy.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair Representative Lang that
is exactly what happens he there
we as a business have to choose
to pass that on to a family who
again has the state has deemed
to not be able to afford such a
a charge you know I have
families that for instance you
know if I had it might want to
make families mother of three
just two small children three
under the age of three that
means that that tax passed along
to that family would be
somewhere around three to four
hundred dollars a month.
I have never been able to do
that Hey I've always put it in
my budget to take on those costs
as a business rather than pass
that on to my family's but as as
you could imagine they have
three hundred children that is
very very expensive to my
business and what that does is
it takes away from my ability to
put back into my classroom it
takes away from my ability to
retain and recruit my staff you
know so I do know that there are
some programs in certain areas
of the state that to pass that
along to their families but I
you know that there are far more
that don't.
Thank you Mr chairman I know in
in Aztec and Bloomfield there
are some of these private
centers and there there local
municipalities that own their
these are big corporations the
the two that I and I've done
some legal work for them just on
sort of the the business side
and there there are women who
wanted to fill in the in the
community
and they they do feel indeed and
I know and a lot of our rollers
that the public infrastructure
just isn't there.
And so you know I think it's
it's a tough ask to make a
business owner make a decision
do I pass this on to a family
that's already strapped to maybe
put them in a situation where
they can't either keep their
kids enrolled here they got a
cut out something else that they
need every month that they're
sacrificing or do as a business
eat that eight percent and now I
have to figure out do I make
that up in staffing do I make
that up in less supplies do I
make that up and you know
whatever that looks like so
Mr Mr chair representative at
the the bill I was not from
general is unaware that this was
a thing I have a little
surprised frankly but I'm glad
that we as a body looking at
trying to resolve this conundrum
thank you.
Thank you other question
Representative.
I'm thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward and I'd like to
compliment you know it just a
five star is no small it.
I have been on boards of
nonprofits in a working toward
that and it is a huge marker for
a business to attain that for
anybody to ten that said like to
compliment you on that and I
would just like to say.
I agree with Representative lane
yes normally I don't agree with
tax carve outs this one I agree
with thank you Mr chair Mister
chair I might add misstating the
entities themselves on the back
but they did not name that they
are also the owner and operator
of a five star center in
southern New Mexico so shut up
to you daisy for your work as
well and Mr chairman
Representative I also want to
because I know some of them are
watching can I give that credit
to made to my team because that
is who is in these classrooms
working with these children
providing that quality a great
quality for great leader.
Thank you I thank
representatives of.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representative today to your
expert witness thanks in here
today.
Hi one of the notices and it's
from the early childhood
education and care department
the state in here one of their
issues is.
That used clarified that the
entities exit from G. R. T.
under five oh one see three or
other designation do not qualify
for this deduction can you tell
can you explain that hi yes Mr
chair and representative itself
that's just because in New
Mexico's tax code of federal tax
code if you have some of those
nonprofit designations you don't
pay taxes so they they're not
paying taxes because of their I
and see three or other status or
they're not paying taxes because
they are a publicly operated for
instance pre K. early childhood
center that some of our school
districts are taking on okay Mr
chairman I just one of the.
Put out there for everybody that
might not be here today to
understand your Mr chairman of
Representative could data on the
F. I. R. of.
It is stated H. B. one thirty
seven did not meet six out of
the thirteen key principles that
it.
Do through the LFC tax
expenditure policy principle can
you explain why.
Mr chair and representative is
out thank you for that question
I appreciate the little tax
infrastructure matrix it's
pretty significant I would say
that most of the bills we
consider intact also don't meet
their metrics but this I
appreciate is to try to bring
consistency to tax policy to
make sure we're having the most
relevant reasonable
conversations about what these
taxes are and do
I would have some feedback in
that actually this policy has
been vetted it's been something
considered by this body over
many years of first slide
someone is to be my senator John
Arthur Smith who moves that move
this effort in different
economic times and then in
recent years something I picked
up so it's something that we've
discussed at length it's
something that we continue to
provide
Agreement on and the question
has always been is it the right
here where we can include this
within the tax capacity
questions and make this a
permanent the way that we're
going to decrease revenue in New
Mexico for this effort so again
like my experts said this is
about parity I called the equity
up for me I don't see this as a
car about but I see this as
consistency within our tax
policy if we're paying the same
dollars for the same outcomes it
should land that way and be that
way in practice okay the Mr
chairman I think what we're
talking about that and I
appreciate this explanation I
think for any bill that comes
through they do have to meet the
criteria that is set for the
year so Mr chairman that's all I
have thank you very much thank
you Representative thank you
madam Mr chair and madam
Representative here
Representative Madrid.
Mr chairman and and to the.
Representative the thank you for
taking this on and sponsor that
you she does a great job as well
as Angelo and and daisy in our
community protecting money
that they have a facility out
there and I can tell you that we
lack still more day care
services child care services
with the standards that are
we're being already mandated on
them and the sacrifice of person
sometimes it just amazes me how
they're able to still operate in
a community like minded is
really underserved and in the
way of child care services so
when we look at some medium of
granting a and assistance that's
what we will see that as an
outlet to get political and keep
it to the affect of where these
dollars are going to and then
way of enhancing a continuance
of our responsibility to our are
your children are states so I
thank you and and you have my
complete support behind this and
do you think thank you Mr
chairman right thank you
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward Angela daisy thank you
this this is so important for
small communities this is so
important for rural providers
because this gives you the
opportunity to like the hard
like it's been stated to
maintain of the service overall
to hire and keep quality
employees and just to provide a
very positive and
It is a very positive
educational setting because Mr
chair you know we many people
think this is sticker but
there's a there's an educational
component we haven't really
talked about except for the the
mention of the five star program
so our children not only are
being having their needs met
their immediate needs being
taking care shelter love food
everything else but they're also
receiving an education and also
that's so very important to us
Mr chair this Representative
this is something that helps
also the foundational level to
eliminate poverty.
And because of that I fully
supported and I want to thank
you for bringing this forward
Representative I want to thank
all the small business owners
are out there doing working on
this on a daily basis grinding
it out thank you for educating
our children thank you for doing
what you're doing thank you Mr.
With that with some of the
committee Mr chairman over the
past right so in the past motion
by Representative Lara second by
Representative Madrid and
secretary called the roll on a
do pass motion please.
Representative about the
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative Ezzell.
Representative corolla yes
Representative her yes.
Representative Lane yes
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Madrid yes.
Representative more about Maya
yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
And Mr chairman yes.
One zero all right so you have a
unanimous to pass on house bill
one seven you representative
thank you for.
All right so that concludes our
business for today we're back on
the floor at eleven I get a
little bit.
Yes indeed all right we'll see
you all in half an hour.
Thanks to.
