Representative got all
representative headed up
representative lane.
Representative laughter.
Representative madrid
representative mean I will made
about moya here
representative potential
representative mobile cabinet
but a simple representative or
vice church
here.
Chairman romero here.
We do have a chorum good morning
everybody so we'll start off
with house memorial thirty two.
Represent eric please thank you
mr chair thank you committee has
memorial thirty two is the
memorial that's in place of
house bill eighty four if you
recall house bill eighty four
actually had a appropriation of
I believe was forty three
million dollars to cover the
expected expense we decided as a
committee that it was something
that should be studied more in
depths and so a originally
the first draft of the memorial
asked lfc to conduct a study in
conjunction with lsc.
That has been changed so it's
now requesting the higher
education department to conduct
a study of higher education
compensation for both temporary
and non temporary instructional
staff in collaboration with lfc
and lasc someone raised the
question why lsc of their care
twelve the answer is a high
percentage of our er instructors
that work with teacher prep
programs both in four year to
your colleges
are and that that's under the
umbrella lsc but they are they
fit the temporary non temporary
categories with that I stand for
questions all right thank you
very much we will go to our
audience so if you are in favor
of house memorial thirty two on
zoom if you would indicate by
raising your hand please will at
that populate will go to our
audience those in favor of house
memorial thirty two if you
please indicate by raising your
hand I right hand side i'll
start off marines already nobody
my left hand side doesn't
support all right sir you have
up to two minutes please
new mexico we appreciate the
word on the concept
or
we know this is an issue that
going to persist and so this is
the.
Alright sir.
Thank you mr chair members of
committee john the fields with
the new mexico
we think the sponsor for
offering memorial supporters
before
in essence we are standing off
workers barely with fair pay
and a certainly hiring folks are
no except that for those reasons
you think the sponsor against
work pushing
with this great thank you others
please up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning.
German romero members
representative
or the executive director for
the independent community
colleges and we are instructed
supported this week thank the
sponsor for looking into this
weekend maybe for asking for
this study we believe that all
of our tackle to whether they
are full time that they part
time faculty should be
appropriately compensated at the
same time we are of course
concerned with how do we
actually do that so we thank you
so very much for your working on
this great thank you anybody
else in the room and support
already we will go to our folks
o.
Satis good morning you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning can you hear me we
can please.
Okay great so my name is it i'm
a principle lecturer in biology
at you and a main campus i'm a
representative of you a unam our
faculty union and most of the
vice president for higher ed for
a tiny mexical and i'm here to
speak in support of ours
memorial thirty two I want to
think the sponsors
representative garrett
representative backer
representative of sell
representative her
representative more and
representative romero it's clear
that you recognize this there is
a crisis and higher education in
new mexico low pay and exploited
of working conditions are
leading to an accident of
talented faculty out of higher
education and i'm grateful that
you are helping us find a
solution I especially want to
think representative garrett for
her leadership in drafting this
thoughtful memorial it clearly
identifies the problems that
were facing and it outlines a
comprehensive study that will
synthesize the detailed
information needed to address
them I especially appreciate
they're both faculty in
administrators at each
institution will be consulted to
provide a more realistic picture
of what's happening on the
ground at each institution and I
also appreciate that
recommendations for improved
compensation structures will be
considered as well as methods
for achieving those compensation
increases I believe this is a
strong piece of legislation that
will most certainly lead to
improvements at each institution
then I urge all of you to vote
in favor of it thank you for
your consideration.
Great thank you for joining us
good morning you have up to two
minutes welcome
good morning mister chair
members of the committee i'm
married match and i'm speaking
on behalf of the legal whim
voters of new mexico and also
the american association of
university women metal chapter
and we loved HB eighty four
because it actually had money in
the budget I understand the
reason for bringing fourth of
memorial instead but as we heard
in the testimony on HB eighty
four
we have studied this and studied
does and study this
you know I I believe it's going
back to
the early two thousand for sure
and so I hope that they are this
study is not only about bush but
that the that the money gets put
into HB two by the higher
education department so that
that the higher red institutions
can use that money the year that
you know the next year after the
study it's really really
important we heard about the
moral issues when people with
doctorates are getting way less
than you know teachers with
bachelor's degrees and you know
level want teachers so it's very
very important i've really
appreciate the sponsor for brain
is forward and all that because
sponsors and I believe her name
is such a who just spoke she
gave the reason so I would be at
right but don't need to thank
you so much.
Great thank you
anthony good morning and at the
new of up to two minutes
welcome.
Anthony good morning a s can you
hear me ok please okay great
yeah my name is anthony ballas
i'm here today as both an
adjunct professor at northern
mexico college in the department
of arts and human sciences and
as a member of the northern
federation of educational
employees local forty nine
thirty five first ball i'd like
to think my fellow members of
the local for their tiles
commitment to the to in support
of this bill HB eighty four.
In the first instance had a
adjunct issue more generally and
to AFT new mexico and others and
support of this bill.
As ought to be well known by now
continue faculty temporary non
temporary adjuncts like myself
including graduate workers the
count for something like seventy
to seventy five percent of the
work force and higher education
nationwide address in particular
suffer under the weight of
semester dismissed her teaching
appointments which are not
always guaranteed we rarely have
ever a granted access to health
or other benefits all while
suffering under the weight of
substandard wages at a fraction
of what has afforded the full
time continue track faculty even
though we perform the same
instructional labor to students
and very often serve on the same
committees as our tenured and
full time colleagues this bill
and now this memorial rather it
represents a beacon of hope.
I believe not only for
contingent faculty in the stated
mexico but consider precedent
for agriculture she's moving
wide in in in the in the
nationwide so for these reasons
and others I I urge the house to
move forward with this memorial
and eventually with a vote in
favor of this bill thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
All right is there any
opposition either online or in
our room.
The.
We'll go to mary mary good
morning of up to two minutes.
Good morning chairman romano and
members of the committee I was
wanting to speak in support not
opposition okay two minutes is
going.
I just wanted to think of the
sponsors for this bill
especially representative
garrett we do have a crisis in
higher education
pay equity and I strongly
support this bill and think all
the sponsors for bringing it
forward thank you.
Thank you alright any opposition
seeing known committee members.
All right representative.
Mr speaker thank you for mr
chair thank you very much
I have read over this and i'm
not in disagree with with it but
I was just wondering if somebody
can answer a question for me how
much of our budget does go to
higher it can in body answer
that.
You'd get somebody back okay
mr chairman and representative
is all about fifteen twenty
percent fifteen to twenty
percent okay.
Okay substantial then mister
chairman and representative okay
go ahead.
If I may very sorry madam chair
represented garrett a
representative is a higher red
budget used to be that high it's
now just a little bit over
twelve percent of the general
fund okay.
Thank you for that response oh
and the reason I bring that up
is a
my concern is is this gotta be
be able to be sustainable and
with this increase if if it's
not there.
Money wise every time we set up
a budget are we going to see her
to wish and rates
madam share representative that
is certainly a fundamental point
of study
that's my concern but basically
I do support this I think that
I think you've got everything
covered this morning that's all
ahead thank you very much.
The.
Thank you mentioner
so I I have concerns about the
more on what the sort of.
The ingoles for the study.
Um just to be real frank with
you
I love lsc
and so this is this is more a
question that a status shorter
guidelines eliosi.
And not in regarding earlier
student eliosi itself and so how
do we ask less you to study
something that statutory it
doesn't have the authority
madame chair and and leader lane
precisely this lac committee can
study teacher preparation
programs that dimension of her
education comes under eliosi and
because a great number of the
instructors and teacher prep
programs are temporary non
temporary staff it's related.
A manager
but at I thought the studios
deal with the sort of salaries
of
of nontinued.
Faculty is that at the higher
edable correct
medium chair and representative
many of the people in the
teacher prepare grams fall into
that category.
Non ten year temporary
many are hired to supervise
student teachers to teach
certain methods courses and
that's why they are included in
this study.
Manager and I mean I I just
under that they could study
engineering they could do a
study on law school I mean.
All of those students at some
point are going to have
an adjunct faculty member and so
i'd again I just.
I'm concerned about the goal of
this I think were tried to put
our finger on what the source
should be for a higher end.
And I think this is a sort of a
backdoor wait to justify that.
And so I think that that needs
to be a fight between higher red
institutions and their own
faculty.
I don't think the legislature
should be dictating that and I
think this study is sort of a
long term way to accomplish that
and so I I can't support it
seems like doctor one of it has
some comments or she'd like to
make.
Madam chair and
for later lane I would just
offer that and behave of lia
what I would hope to
support or offer from our staff
is
earned analysis of the landscape
of those employees
I think you are right that it's
really in the per under the
perview of the higher education
department in the legislative
finance committee in terms of
salaries themselves
that being said I would hope to
have some input because I think
that
as representative garage has
said
a number of those these types of
employees are educated prep um
faculty adjunct faculty or are
such and so just understanding
that I think supports us.
Thank you mentioned
unfortunately have to go present
a bill so I don't think i'll be
all the vote on this but I I do
have concerns as i'm not walking
I promise I have I have
expressed my concerns if but
couldn't be any more clear so
thank you managed and met up
here and representative I will
add as you so eloquently stated
on the floor saturday night that
we need to include connect or
rents of education well said
then.
The.
I think you represent a relay we
have another question from
representative over about cabana
thank you madam chair and think
you representative I I fully
understand
what we're doing with this
memorial and I just wanted to
say very strongly that if we set
back and we wait where the
instatutions to make these kinds
of.
Assessments reviews and take
action on behalf of what we've
already heard in in the
testimony or from an institution
that has not been responsive
to graduate workers to adjunct
all these years
then we're not going to make
progress and I think that the
graduate students in the adjunct
faculty and everyone has been
working asing on campus for
years and that are living in.
Below poverty standards as as a
result but yet they're carrying
the heavy load of the
institution
will continue to be distant
franchised and not be responded
to and they're looking madam
chair and representative to the
legislators legislators and
legislature to push.
The separate forward so that
there could be some strong
legislative intent behind
our strong statements in support
of recognizing whose carrying
the heavy load so it's students
for the first first and foremost
who pay um a great deal of to go
to school then it's the
graduate workers and the adjunct
were carrying the teaching out
and benounced to most of the
population so this study I think
just gives us impetus in that
direction so madam chair and
representative thank you and I
fully support the memorial I
would have preferred to have
pasta be a before but.
I fully support that.
Thank you representative
representative letter did you
have the question disvounter
thank you representative for
bring this forward I think.
Doing these type of tired it
studies are making these tester
requests as a proper way to go
and I thought I know we talked
about it before I know the
chairman has and I think this is
a a good step forward when it
comes to this type of
discussions and in looking into
this because as we know you
we want to compensate everyone
and we want to compensate them
in a manner that they feel that
there are respected that they're
that they're part of the process
and we also need to study this
to ensure that we're competitive
with other states then
competitive with other regions
in in in the country so we can
get the best body educators that
we can so they want to thank you
for bringing this forward and I
and I support this thank you.
Mmm.
Representative you sell madam
chair thank you very much I
guess my after reading the over
again the fiscal their fire on
the second page of it under
significant issues it is stating
this general appropriation act
twenty twenty four contains
forty two point two million
dollars for a total of four
percent salary increases for
higher back
who makes the determination on
how that money is distributed
matter chair representative
guarantee you know and if you
doubt that's okay
somebody else can answer it man
i'm sure i'm gonna ask a doctor
hocker to speak to that
thank you madame chair ranking
member is
representative garage the way
that the general appropriation
act is currently written there
is two percent across the board
for all higher education
employees it's funded off of
general fund and then there is
an additional two percent that
years
left to the institutions
discretion higher education
institutions have been asking
for a discretion are so that
they can put additional salary
increases for those targeted
positions where we know that
there are issues okay thank you
for that response
to it delivered up to the
schools themselves to deal with
other two percent on that
whenever i'm reading the house
committee analysis report under
substantiative issues
i'm kind of concerned whenever
they cannot retain those workers
that are not making adequate
because it says sometimes the
inadequate pay at times is below
the national poverty
that's no one seen it at all for
these certain people's to remain
on staff there and that's very
concerning to me.
Oh
so it I guess I am asking why is
there such a big griff between
the colleges all of our higher
ad
schools and.
Where are they not taken into
consideration the lower pay
scale for these adjunct
faculty members
and i'm chairman get it ask or
doctor hugger to come back
because that's not enter my
review
and I don't I don't know she can
actually answer it okay.
Thank you representative garrett
madame chair ranking member is.
Higher education.
Finance budgeting is a.
Much like what you are faced
with in building the state's
budget and there are significant
differences between how the
universities what they need to
take in the consideration the
community colleges what I can
point out as some of our smaller
speaking for the community
colleges luna community college
very small general fund
appropriation very small mill
levy revenues but they they are
doing their best to serve their
community so taking into
consideration the revenues their
students and trying to do the
best that they can now ask to
exactly how much they are paying
I do know that luna is on the
lower end for their full time
faculty and in fact luna
community college this last fall
last two full time faculty
members to the public schools.
And madame chair and
representative guarantee
appreciate that responsibility
just gave me I think this should
be an eye opener for higher
aired on what we need to do to
have the retain age that
shouldn't be happening so madam
chair thank you very much thank
you representative gear.
Think you representative and I
don't see any other questions
are representative would you
like to summarise your.
Madam chair
I think we've both in their
discussion on house bill eighty
four the discussion today we've
identified that there is a
number of issues
that we have to look at when I
come here i'm not seen and
therefore i'm going to do this
and accession no I think we need
a comprehensive look at all the
issues doctor hockey pointed out
to when we were looking at
hospital eighty four that we
have a whole new
e teachers deep dive teachers so
there's a
huge range to look at and
consider
so I recommend can I make the
motion
oh she's thank you
actually I I would like to just
make one brief comment and I
should have done it before asked
you to summarise but I I have
been concerned about this
problem for years I was a the
development officer at northern
when it was a community college
and it was the same problem
twenty years ago.
That it is now
we had a adjunct back alter
living in poverty
and and that this is not a state
problem this is a national
problem all the the best schools
in the country hire faculty had
higher adjunct faculty at
poverty wages so I would like
for new mexico to kind of take
the lead i'd like us to be kind
of one of the you know best
studies on this and uh and i'd
love to see change in this state
that could be replicated and
other states and with that I
will then ask representative of
good
to.
Second emotion to do past from
representative good all that and
a second birth representative
robot card cover yetter has been
made the clerk to call roll.
Representative backer.
Representative chat field.
Representative is a
representative good ola yes
representative lame
representative ladder yes
representative madrid
representative made up on moyer
yes
representative at a horn.
Representative mobile cabinet
yes.
Vice jerk yes.
Chairman romero.
Madam share here yes.
Uh you have a do pass unanimous
thank you
and I guess now represent a
gared I would call you to prison
house bill to a seven
public school capital outlay
grats
thank you madame chair and with
me is my expert with missus met
paul executive director public
charters of new mexico.
A house at two oh seven
has one word change and that's
from a made to shall the spill
makes a simple change that
formalizes a current practice
but can have a big impact for
charter schools pursuing long
term facilities so two years ago
he passed a bill making a change
to lease assistance and creating
a revolving fun a revolving loan
fen for charter schools and that
then was to be run by the new
mexico finance authority when
animal fee was doing their due
diligence to start the program
they heard from bond holders
that the current statue stating
that the public school capital
outlay council may provide lease
assistance is viewed as caring a
considerable risk to bond
holders it means that lease
assistance could go way at any
time because of the word may an
interest rates for charter
schools within be higher than
other opportunities during
significant economic downturns
lease assistance at its very
worse is a flat field it was
never eliminated however as
suggested by may so as a result
this bill remedyes this issue by
changing them me to shall which
will provide stability for
charter school facility funding
and insure that the revolving
fund
long dollars and other mf
programs can go further in the
main thing that in ms really
allows his lower interest rates
because of their triple eight
bond reading
with that i'm gonna ask my
expert witness to add to it
met him chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here this morning.
I don't only add one thing the
purpose of that original could
you say your name is i'm sorry
manager back paul with public
charter schools of new mexico
going back two years to the
intent of that original bill our
schools when they finance
facilities right now they
generally use bonds from out of
state or use a bank to do that
we wanted to keep those dollars
in new mexico and have them be
charged lower rates and the new
mexico finance authority is able
to do that this will further
that by allowing for lower
interest rates or the best
interest rates really possible
for charter schools and allow
more of that lease assistance
money to go towards the actual
building rather than financing
costs so it's really just
um furthering the intent of that
legislation to keep new mexico
money in new mexico for these
facilities
and without we stand for
questions
thank you represent advise chair
vice checker at a are there
members in the audience you
would like to speak in favor of
this spill
okay what's start back there.
Thank you madame chair my name
is jady pollington and i'm
speaking on behalf of the
greater of a tricky chamber of
commerce that supports this
legislation it takes a lot of
work to start up a new charter
school and it it takes a lot of
money to the revolving fund that
was created two years ago
revolutionized charter
facilities funding and this
appropriation is going to make
it possible for more of our new
schools to take a full advantage
of it and the chamber is also in
full support of the changes to
the lease assistance program
here which will create some more
predictability our charter
school students deserve safe and
comfortable facilities where
they can learn and grow and we
urge you to support this belt
thank you jb members on this
side sir
yes my name is stewart in them
see commissioner district six I
would stand and strong support
of this i've been looking into
this issue quite a bit and I
want to express the total
schools do a very efficient job
and it's really assumed that
they have to spend some of their
person funds to
finance and to pay their leases
but a traditional public schools
are based with this issue so I
would just strongly ask you that
you would support this measure
thank you sir.
Ah who else on this side.
Nobody else are do we have
anybody on.
The.
A patty
gibson.
Yes thank you very much madame
chair are paid to give some
chair and public education
commission but pc stands and
strong support of the spell
anything that can be done to get
our schools into
adequate and safe our facilities
we appreciate the sponsors work
on this and support for that so
thank you very much.
Thank you calling in
sing no further
participants that i'm the same
i'll now turn it over to the
committee for questions
I representative you sell.
Madam chair thank you very much
you know that I would have
questions on this mrperiod paula
appreciate you being here today
the way I am understanding the
comments i've had regarding this
particular build at sometimes
there's
some of the discharge schools
feel like they're being riped as
far as what they're having to
pay leases and it's very
troublesome to me whenever that
could be took to better use to
the student
that
what I took from the comments
i've heard
I noticed in your appropriation
section of it on page ten
section two starting online
twelve madame chair and
representative gear that ten
million dollars is appropriate
from the general phone to the
excuse me the department of
financial administration
can you to explain me why it is
going to defeat.
The.
Madam chair and representative
is alve at the intentions for
that to end up at the new mexico
finance authority and I think
when we talk to drafters they
felt like that was the
appropriate language that that
quite sure why but but that was
that was the intent okay madame
chair and representative of
mister paul and that was my
concern to why not just put it
in the in mfa charter school
revolving furned so that that is
a concern I have and I
understand the generally
changing one word in the entire
bill in this good from the may
to a shell and I do appreciate
that part of but
madam chairman and ranking
members also in it she have seen
the probational stripped.
Oh okay.
Okay so it possibly could go to
where I stated which would be
the
new mexican finance adore to you
charter school revolving firm
which makes more seats
away okay never mind I want to
state that I want state the
article obvious madame chair
thank you very much.
The.
Mentor overdo past hospital to
your son
we have a due pass by
representative letter and we
have a second by representative
my image meet about click to
take r.
Representative.
Representative chatfield
every sanity is yes
representative good
representative lane
representative latter yes
representative madrid
representative made about moyer
yes representative perhaps.
Representative mobile cabinet
yes
face track yes chairman roman.
Madame chair here yes.
The.
Well representative gear you
should go play the lottery today
looks like you got another
second you got a second
unanimous phone on your
legislation thank you committee.
Well at this point I really
don't see either senator number
or senator souls here so.
Um.
Oh i'm sorry he asked that we
text someone restarted so we're
just texting them now if you
wouldn't why don't we stand in a
recess for about five minutes
until they come is that okay.
