Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Representative vice chair
Garrett
Chairman care we do have a car
awesome.
Thank you hi everybody hope you
all are doing well
So as I mentioned this is going
to be a zombie day so these are
bills that we have heard before
and they've come back with
amendments are committee subset
been sent out
so for each of these bills we
will not be going to public
testimony but we'll be hearing
what the bills are since we've
already done all that it will
jump straight into the committee
sub amendments and committee
questions okay.
Thanks spelling faces it's
always good all right on we'll
go ahead and get started so
we have Representative Figueroa
with house bill one fifty that
should be presenting the
Changes to the committee said
for house bill one fifty for
Representative bash so whenever
you're ready Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative bash indicated
that a doctor Sabian from you
and them might be available as
an expert witness this morning
I'm not sure we need him for the
small changes that were made but
if used in the intended Rome and
would raise his hand
you can move him over all right
I could do that and we'll do
that so we'll promote Dr sapien.
And we'll give it a moment.
All right good morning doctor C.
will be here for questions thank
you for joining us
Representative Figueroa please.
All right so we have a committee
so Mister chair do we need to
make a motion.
We don't motion will be for I do
not pass but and then pass on
the committee.
Excellence the committee so if
you have an open and go to page
four page for has to changes
that you would want to note on
page four under scholarship
recipients or those eligible.
Item number one is different.
Scholarship criteria shop
provided awards will be made
available to graduates of high
schools in New Mexico and high
schools located on the Navajo
Nation including you John
Arizona.
Okay and then the second number
two has also been changed its
a course starting given to
individuals who have graduated
from New Mexico high school and
in New Mexico postsecondary
institutions.
Continue.
To.
Well I lost it.
Line fourteen were sent to
individuals who agreed to
practice that was part of our
discussion in the previous
session Mr chair that we needed
to do to make sure folks we're
going to work in our shortage
areas in the rural areas are
shortage specialties so now
there's specifications that the
individuals will read it will be
part of that contract that is
elsewhere specified in this
legislation
that they agreed to work in
those areas and those are the
changes committee staff Mr chair
Dr sapien I don't know if you
want to.
Yes what we.
I'll be happy to add Mr chairman
if time allows I'll be happy to
make comments.
Please please about the
committee said.
I got to get this mute and
unmute button down my it says
still clumsy after all this time
for me I'm sorry so well thank
you good morning and thank you
for having us here greetings
from from two more New Mexico
and then we'll go into county
which is where I'm at right now
I just want to start with a
little bit of a story about one
of our students and then give
you some numbers perhaps may
have been buried in you know in
some paperwork in the past I
want to highlight them the first
one is a story briefly about we
have a second look day at the
end of the application season
every year all excuse me I'm
associate dean for admissions
for the school of medicine so I
would run and oversee the
admissions process for the
medical school every year we
have a second look day which is
a recruitment day for
individuals that we've offered a
soft spot in our medical school
and is it's a recruitment events
they bring their families they
listen to presentations during
the days when we will also
pull applicant's aside and offer
them any scholarship money that
we may have we routinely have
about two or three scholarships
a couple of years ago there was
one individual she's from
Espanola had attended the the
second look day with her father
and a part of that second look
day isn't it financial aid
presentation at the lunch during
the lunch hour we pulled her
aside and and gave her told her
the news about her scholarship
and she just started crying she
was so happy and the reason was.
No doubt because she got a
scholarship but she said you
don't understand she said we
were there in that financial aid
talk and my father turned to me
and said me how we can afford
this and in here she had worked
so hard to get all the way
through I mean the number of
people that try to get into
medical school and she had been
successful yet it was hinging on
or at least in her family's
perception on the cost of that.
so scholarships are really
really important for for the
students and recruitment in our
state are
our debt for more medical
students is about a hundred
fifty thousand dollars at the
end of their medical training
well below the national average
but none the less still a
substantial amount a hundred
fifty thousand nationally it's
about two hundred and five
hundred ten thousand dollars at
the end of their medicals term.
And then the other piece of
information I'd like to share
with you is as dean of
admissions I do track those
individuals that we offer spots
too but turned us down and
decline their spot in our
medical school routinely we go
anywhere on to our alternate
list into the twenties high
twenties twenty five to thirty
over the last seven years when
I've looked at those individuals
that have declined our offer and
on to other medical schools two
thirds of them are actually
graduates of New Mexico high
schools yet are choosing to go
to a medical school other than
ours and so just some some brief
math over the last of five years
that would it with the
scholarships if they had agreed
to the stipulations and the
scholarship may have resulted in
an additional eighty three
physicians for the state just in
the last five years and I'll be
happy to sit for any questions.
Right thank you all so first on
my list Liz Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and doctor stuck
in my question is on page four
where we change to say a word
shall be given individuals on
online nine actually graduated
from the New Mexico high school
and a New Mexico post secondary
educational institution I just
wondered about students New
Mexico high school students who
may have gone out of state for a
bachelor's and want to come back
to a UNM medical school would
they not be.
this scholarship not be open to
them.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative I
was not party to the discussions
that made the committee so so
I'm going to ask doctor sapien
do you know why that's in New.
I also was not privy to the
conversation I don't know why
it's in and of that number I
gave you of the high school
graduates I did not look at
whether they went to New Mexico
second post secondary schools
are not so I can't give you that
number.
Thank you for that and Mister
chair I just think it's
something to consider we
wouldn't want to to have an or
necessarily because
that would maybe bring in a lot
of out of state people who
wouldn't have a connection to to
our rural and frontier parts of
the state but I still think the
and is a little problematic
because I know from my high
schools a lot of students to go
to Arizona or Texas for
undergraduate it would be
wonderful candidates for medical
school in the state to stay in
New Mexico so I just point that
out as as just a concern thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative doubt please.
Chairman thank you
Representative I think kind of
along the same lines like we
wanted to use what the intention
the sponsors of the bill but by
seeing how graduates from New
Mexico high school I think our
intent was people who live in
New Mexico we may have
inadvertently excuse the next to
the the house what did you need
to exclude students who
graduated from home school.
Mr chair
Senator.
I don't remember that is part of
our discussion when we first.
Well.
And I don't know if we thought
of home school.
Time so that would probably be
why it wasn't in the committee's
job the committee sent trying to
incorporate all of the comments
that were made in our first
committee meeting Madam chair
representative you're so right
and I didn't think it
was Representative Sweetser is
talking about in school.
And and drive safe in you have
your hands up you don't you
don't need to raise your hand
the panelists just make sure you
go through the chair please and
find a time when it's quiet to
respond Mr chair if I may um of
respond to Representative
Switzer.
Thanks yes so routinely as we
take a hundred and three
students into the medical school
every year and approximately
half of them are from New Mexico
colleges the other half are are
not from New Mexico colleges yet
about seventy five to eighty
percent of them are from New
Mexico high schools so she is
exactly right is that is that
might be that restrictive.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser did have a response no
I just am I not surprised by
those numbers honestly because a
lot of students to leave and
come back and I do think that
that might be problematic and Mr
chair.
Thank you so Representative Dow
I'm sorry about that we jumped
over was that your question read
through the question.
Yes that was just if we're doing
some cleanup on the amendment
with one exclude homeschooled
students graduate from Mr
wondered if doctor sapientia
dressed how many home school
graduates high school graduates
have been accepted into the
school of education school of
medicine do you.
You know it would it would be a
might my senses so not can
assure accuracy but not more
than two or three a year.
Thank you Mr chair.
All right so we'll go to
Representative Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Sweetser biggest
is thinking like a lawyer I
don't know what that says for
her because I have some concern
about the and in in paragraph
two and the other scenario I
think two is is not just one
school kids but you think about
you know maybe a student who
doesn't make the best choices in
high school drops are ends up
getting a GED so I don't think
that's a high school graduate if
I understand the GED program and
then maybe they could go to
school out of state those the
type of people we want to prop
up the courage to make sure that
if if you know they turned
things around so to speak that
they have an option to receive a
scholarship under this
but beyond that I think what my
my main concern is.
I do appreciate the
restructuring.
but as I understood the
testimony you when this was
first before this committee is
the the amount that we are
funding this will provide one
hundred percent of the students
that go through the medical
school and so I don't think it
at the end of day it is does
anything because of that to
address.
Getting.
Qualified medical professionals
docks into the rural areas so
because there's no incentive to
say I agree to go to a rural
area if a hundred percent of
students receive scholarship and
so you know just sort of
brainstorming this morning that
you know one one thought was you
know maybe structure at that
twenty you know like maybe
percentages so maybe maybe I'm
just throwing numbers out there
but maybe twenty five percent of
the recipients
have to agree to go to an
underserved area or something
along those lines to make sure
that we do have.
Thomas is from applicants.
That they will go and serve our
rural hospital areas which is I
think we're a lot of demand wise
but I I would like to the
premise which is less encourage
people into the medical field
and and let's figure out a way
to do that and I I don't have a
problem as a state with with
putting for scholarship money is
to put behind that I think that
makes sense to me.
but I think maybe we need to
structure a little more specific
to to guarantee that a
percentage of those applicants
will be going to our rural
hospitals thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative I
just think that concerns isn't
dressed in line fourteen a page
for a hundred percent of the
scholarship recipients now are
and greeting it says the course
shall be given to individuals
who agree to practice in
specializations which health
profession agencies are
difficult to fill and then
fourteen showing given to
individuals who agree to
practice in rural and
underserved or rural locations
so that has now been made to
specification for all the
students to receive this award
which means that some students
might refuse and say no this for
my own education thank you
rather than agree to do that but
everyone you received these
awards is now agreeing to work
in those areas thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair right so I think that
would would make sense of state
only fifty percent of students
entering.
Would receive scholarship money
isn't so there'd be an incentive
for students to agree to
practice in a rural area but if
a hundred percent these
scholarships are being funded I
don't think there's that same
incentive is that's how I read
the text of this.
Mr chair and and Representative
I think that's specifically what
the sponsor was amending out
doctors say you can correct me
if I'm wrong but not a hundred
percent necessarily into
students will receive this
scholarship there is funding for
a hundred percent if they all
agree to work in rural areas but
those who receive the
scholarship and then also shall
be given to those who agree.
Now.
Then.
But does that mean that this
award is not given to students
unless they agree to work in a
rural area.
Right we have a a scholarship
committee that would process the
applications in the situation
and and then we have done this
in the past we do have a to your
generosity we last year we did
receive some funds for health
equity scholarship for a few
students and some of those
students are on today but also
in the past with some B. A. anti
money at I also direct that
program we have given some some
scholarships to medical school
with a rate that component so we
do have this set up it's just a
matter expanding and and yes
they would have to agree to to
all of that in in addition to
agreeing to the stipulations
that we have internally in the
school such is good academic
standing.
Mr chair good maybe maybe
I could just appointed to the
text in this section for that
says that are all scholarship
recipients must agree to
participate in rural areas or
underserved areas.
I'm sorry Mr chair
representative was that a
question about where in the.
Which is is.
Yes.
Mr chair is on page four line
fourteen.
The word shall is restrictive in
that line award shall be given
to individuals who agree to
practice in rural and
underserved urban locations so
there might be somewhere in that
they have to be identified as
under serves.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
I'm certainly not trying to be
argument all just I'm trying to
explain how to interpret the
actual language so on that same
page for if you look at
paragraph it says scholarship
correct criteria shall provide
that.
And then it lists six different
criteria.
And one of those criteria does
happen to be individuals who
agree to practice in rural and
underserved urban locations as
referenced in line fourteen but
that's not the same to say that
out of scholarship recipient.
can choose not to serve
according to paragraph for nap
person not be excluded from
receiving a scholarship.
And so this that brings back
original point which is a former
funding hundred percent of the
use.
There's no motivation for me to
be to fall into category number
four because I know I'm gonna
get a scholarship whether agree
to go to a role in underserved
urban location regardless
whereas if if we structured it
to say a certain percentage of
scholarships go to category one
certain number scholarships go
to to a certain number of bills
of three and four then I think
there's more motivation to make
sure I fit into one of those
categories or something along
those lines
and I that I think is one of my
biggest concern with this bill
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative all
right next on my list is
representative Lente please.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning everybody.
And this has to be difficult to
try to figure out for
Representative Figueroa because
I don't know if you have the
authority to make these
amendment to the make these
changes that we're proposing
but in regards to the language I
have to agree completely with
the sentiments of Representative
Sweetser Dow Wade in regards to
the focus of the scholarships
because again I am a true
believer that I would rather
have the I would rather spend
the state money on state high
school graduates period and and
that's just where I'm at but but
but to the another point that
and maybe perhaps this is a
question for the doctor safety
and Dr CPA
did does Utah or Arizona have
the same type of scholarship for
students in their medical
schools.
the chairman Romero and
Representative Lente
I know Colorado has a program
where it's very similar to this
they do have a a pay back
component Arizona has been I
think it's in front of their
legislators legislature this
year I don't believe we Utah has
that okay thank you doctor and
and the reason I bring this up
is because there is the the.
Stipulation in the bill now the
substitute that the the Navajo
Nation as as large as it is they
would be allowed to partake in
this scholarship program
especially those students that
are in Arizona and Utah and I
know of that based on my
interactions with the chapter
houses in New Mexico
specifically on the eastern side
of New Mexico the Navajo Nation
in general that there is a
sentiment of I guess concerned
that maybe the Navajo Nation in
Arizona and Utah get better
services better better treatment
better better services so for
for their members as opposed to
those ones in New Mexico and
eastern part of the chapter
house in New Mexico and so I
would see that that now that.
The the Navajo Nation students
in New Mexico in my money should
be put on a priority list as
opposed to those that are in
Arizona or Utah because if they
do have a sense of purpose
they're then they're they're
gonna get double the exposure
double the chances of having
this in their favor as opposed
to our students here
you know this is take miss
Toyota chapterhouse in Cuban New
Mexico you know bright students
billion students and and should
they have to to compete with
those in Arizona if this is a
New Mexico program.
I I don't I don't think that's
very fair so those are my
sentiments I don't know Mr
chairman and and and
Representative Figueroa is if
these types of concerns are
those are going to be taken back
Representative bash and then
brought back or or how do we how
do we suppose that we're going
to do for this bill Mr Chairman.
I think.
In terms of this case I mean
where we I have similar issues
with the language Representative
lane was pointing out on line
fourteen because it says
practice and I'm not sure about
the medical field but it's also
like very open ended right like
you get a position Sir for five
months and then quit but you're
eligible I mean I I would think
that some sort of time parameter
at least a year could be
included in the language and
then I think what we're hearing
from multiple members see is
this issue about New Mexico high
school students and that the
requirement for for
postsecondary education here and
then I think Representative is
bringing up the issue about and
and I have similar feelings
about allowing parts of the
Navajo Nation that are not in
New Mexico to also be eligible
along with our New Mexico
students for for this so so it
is.
If I may if I may finish and
then you may respond but I but.
I mean I am trying to find out
who who was involved in the
drafting of this so that we can
kind of get it situated and I'm
making notes of the particular
points that that members are
having SO Representative
Figueroa please.
I am also making nose would be
great if we can compare notes
and making sure I capture them
all the requirements for years
of service is elsewhere in the
bill remember that this is one
year of service to New Mexico is
required for every year of that
discoloration is granted so
X. in that.
Could be restated here but I
think that might be duplicative
and unnecessary.
If they agree to practice.
In these areas that there for
years of practice if they
stepped in four years of the
scholarship so I think the
timing piece is in the bill
thank you and I have taken notes
on the concern about
requirements for graduation from
and New Mexico postsecondary
institution and I would agree
just as a member of the
committee Mr chair that that
seems unnecessary graduate at a
New Mexico high school and New
Mexico resident whole school
grant
we can talk about the GED I
would just drive sapien just say
do we have GDP requests.
Coming to the school and so we
just add that line New Mexico
GDP requests as well.
Trying to address is the
eligibility piece
I am still not clear I think the
language says that everyone who
is discussion is agreeing to
work in a rural place and I
think that's a very requirement
or rural or underserved shortage
area because that's what we want
to save money to target I think
that what this language says but
Mr chair Representative lane and
you both seem to have concerns
about that so we can send it
back to a drafter and try and
make that more specific more
clear I'm okay with it being a
hundred percent of the people
who received this award shall
work in a shortage or rural
area.
Right no I don't have that I
should also give back to
Representative bash.
And and Representative I
appreciate that.
That it may be in the bill can
you point that out to me just so
that I can pinpoint and I was
trying to scan it briefly what
you were talking point it out do
you know where that is.
Of the terms.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
It is and Dr stadium feel free
to jump in if you have it in
front of you and you find it for
years I just remember it from
our previous discussion.
Lines.
Award recipients show completing
here to receive credit for that
year.
Okay completely distortion
credit.
Yeah I know that.
And Mr chair sorry interrupted
Representative Sweetser
statements out and elsewhere
please representative would I
did thank you it's on page three
section five starting online
eight.
This.
The pool okay great no I
appreciate that clarification
Representative Figueroa
Representative Sweetser
it seems like that is in order
but I I certainly would like to
compile these notes about these
possible changes for for
Representative bash and how
comfortable with
I am with amending somebody's
bill who is not present and
whomever she may be also working
with on the draft if it's
somebody from the school I'm
certainly bring them aboard as
an expert for for the next time
but I think if we could just go
through the list of everybody
that I have if there's some sort
of intersection or new issue
that's.
Are you really what would like
to see the funds follow the
student and not necessarily
institution I know that was
points Mr chair that were
brought up that yes if you and
this is C. schooling yes that is
correct.
But with this far as I am the
way I see it is you student
choice so there's one other
medical school in our in our
state.
In that young person Mr chair
wishes to become an osteopathic
doctor I think they should have
the opportunity to do that and
that's why I believe that the
that the scholarship should
follow the student not
necessarily the institution and
in this I I believe this ties
into the previous conversations
about up Mr chair with the whole
school students with our making
sure that they are there New
Mexico graduates GDPR are
recipients so this this student
to meet Mr chair this is really
important because I truly
believe that the scholarship
follow student it not
necessarily the the up the
institution and I I I think that
we're going to get this
opportunity to to to New
Mexicans to pursue their medical
degree you know that's let's
give them options as well I I
just I just that's one of the
things that so really sticking
point for me other than that I
think the bills of it's a good
idea I supported I think this is
something very important and
necessary for state Mr chair
once again I really do feel that
the scholarship should follow
the student and not necessarily
the institution thank you Mr.
I may ask a clarifying question
follow the students to a New
Mexico institution or a follow
the students say they want to go
to you know university of
Chicago.
Mr chair representative that
would be to New Mexico
institution.
Thank you Mr chair that in my
notes.
Right thank you Representative
Next we have Representative care
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Figueroa for
doing this for Representative
bash I just on page four line
fifteen I think I should say
agree to practice in rural or
underserved urban locations and
offline I'll send you some
language to include graduates of
New Mexico home based high
school programs and high school
equivalency programs but I'll
send that to you offline.
Put it in the yeah I'll send it
to you.
Thank you Mr chairman that's it
thank you Representative
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr chairman also
looking at page four million
though you see a list of options
to be considered for the award
and then they are a list of
options to receive preference
and the I agree that the eight
line fifteen the end should be
or I also think in line fourteen
if you put the word only behind
the shell it becomes more
restrictive award shall only be
given to individuals.
Practice in rural or underserved
urban locations.
By March second.
That was more COVID my question
is why is it this chart
currently containers the budget.
Mr chair thank you all.
I'm sorry I do not have the
answer to that question if
someone remembers it from our
previous discussion.
To hear it.
Mr chair
Rachel your might be able to
shed some light on the.
Mr chairman I think you're
asking is there money for this
scholarship program in the
higher education department
budget HFC has preliminarily
approved a budget but they
haven't adopted one in so I'm
guessing that because of the
renewable it wasn't included in
the LFC recommendation and I
would expect not to see a
specific line item because it's
new in HFC unless the sponsor
worked with HFC to get it funded
but I will say the.
The way financial aid funding
works to my knowledge there's
about at used to be fifty five
million dollar part of money
that goes to each of these some
of it is targeted for certain
scholarships and some of it
isn't so there may be some
flexibility within the AGD
Department budget to fund this
if they wanted to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very.
Thank you for that question so
it's so great to on that point
about the the the higher
education budget has any of that
information I know I think there
was already the the subcommittee
on on higher education that
preliminary preliminarily
adopted the budget for higher
education do we have any of
those materials
So Mister chairman
HFC met today they did what they
call catch up clean up so they
have gone through all of the
agency budgets catch a cleanup
is the stuff they've missed that
they need to add based on their
preliminary adopts what I think
I understand is the public
adoption was to support the
legislative finance committee
recommendation I will
I don't have those materials and
I think they're planning on
coming back in on Monday maybe
Representative Trujillo could
given not on that I think
they'll have a bill drafted
hospital to bill draft a seat
Representative Sweetser nodding
yes as well on Monday
So that's when they will be
approving the final bill draft I
will if you give me a few
seconds all see if I can't get a
hold of LFC analysts and see if
I can get you an answer to the
question.
Yes.
Appreciate that because I think
it's sitting on an important
point that that we are not privy
to that information and I don't
know exactly who might be if
this information isn't public so
when we ask questions about like
what is or isn't finance I mean
obviously we don't know because
nothing has officially been
voted on as far as the committee
of the whole but certainly
there's a framework available in
and questions like this is yes
it's it is it in the budget are
obviously relevant but it's it's
difficult if we don't have
any of that paper work to really
look at
So.
I I think.
We have heard from the committee
the issues that may or may not
be
We unfortunately do not have the
the bill sponsor here with us
but we have an awesome note
taker that standing in place
I think we've heard the
committee installations I mean.
We can have
Representative bash to relay all
these potential changes
and see what she may want to
include or may not include
before hearing it next time and
then being able to take a final
action at least as far as this
committee on what the
Billsponsored decides to do with
that so director gradual did you
have some yes so Mister chairman
I just spoke with the LFC staff
there is not money specifically
for the scholarship program
though there is a hundred and
eighty thousand dollars in the
higher a department budget for
free medical tuition I think
that's something chancellor
brought put in last year for
this this fiscal year.
Okay we do would this be
something that could be funded
we've heard this before with
with supplemental funding for.
Media supplemental Mr Mr
chairman you absolutely could so
as you know there will be junior
bills I think HFC is looking at
making announcements next week
Senate finances already
announced what the Senate is
going to be doing I think
there's going to be some guard
rails around the happening
remember Representative Garrett
is grow your own bill initially
started out as junior ads and so
it's something that members
could allocate their funding to.
Likely.
So members take note Mr chair on
that point.
Representative Trujillo place
yes Rachel you were there when I
asked that question about the do
renewable I know that we haven't
been told in the house what that
amount is but the Senate was
told do you know what that
amount was.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe that a male was
somewhere around two eighty per
member so roughly about twelve
million dollars if my math
serves me correctly for
the Senate I think in past you
guys have had the same amounts
and split them up
Amongst your members.
I can get an exact number if you
would like I just remember the
chairman announced on the floor
last week I believe.
I I the reason Mr chair is
because I raise this question
and HFC it doesn't do us any
good to submit bills.
And then find out after we've
done the dog and pony show
pretty much about presenting
them that the the budget is
already created and there's no
hope for the bills that were
barely working on now and the to
me we've got to find a better
way and Rachel I'm sure you you
know you've been.
Wirth you used to work with the
LFC and now you work with L. E.
S. C. and the LESC so you
understand the frustration and
I'm sure many of our members do
so hopefully we can work to try
to figure this out.
Thank you Representative.
Yes.
So I mean I will add that it
looks like in the in the
secondary ed piece that there
are things that passed out of
this committee with support that
have not been included as well
is unfortunate and and
problematic especially a hold
harmless but I'll leave it at
that for now thank you
Representative Figueroa
Dr sapien if you would get these
two to Representative bash as
soon as possible we'll continue
to work on this but will we'll
be having this back in the and I
would certainly encourage you to
drive safely and
To to be involved in the
drafting of this and and
Have whomever may have been
involved in that process to to
be an expert as well E. in that
so we can you know take final
action fully understand what the
intent is
Behind it.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Well to be continued.
Right here in committee and I
was remiss in in knots also
giving doctor McGraw's apologies
for not being here she had
another engagement so thank you.
No we totally understand it
thank you all so much all right
so we will go to house bill two
thirty two.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
I'm talking.
Okay I'm sorry I was given the
wrong the chairman.
did I need to promote anybody.
Yeah I I I'm Mr chairman members
the.
Yes Mr chairman I just want to
let you know that I turned off
my video as usual because it
just said your internet is on
stable so if I keep it on I
think I'll be blacked out after
awhile so yes I do I have some
presenters and some in case and
that.
Mr chairman I have some
individuals fall expert witness
just to and some technical
question.
Hello from New Mexico
construction industry.
All right clay can you read your
E..
Play would you raise your hand
on the attendees list so I can
easily pick you out please.
I do not see in in the.
Attendees less not more.
Do you have somebody else
representative typically.
Okay.
Only because.
Only because I'm I'm energy
balance and integration LFC.
All right so we're promoting
Tony.
The Anthony kind of threw me off
but I have a brother in law
named Anthony we come to.
Do we have some sorry I think
I'm John Hamilton.
John Hamilton.
Okay.
John and is with us.
I'm Christopher last.
What.
Okay I'm
Stephen.
The legal questions speaker.
And
Stephanie Lee.
Stephanie Curtis I I think we're
gonna take to we're gonna have
to cap the amount of people and
our list I mean for as.
The amount of experts.
Mr speaker I presented.
I'm okay that's fine.
Okay.
And it helps me.
Keep house honors in screen.
All right okay so we are on the
committee you have a committee
sub is that right
Representative.
So if you could walk us through
the angels from the original
from the original bill.
Whenever you're ready Mr
chairman the changes from the
original bill.
All can you hear me.
Yes.
Can you hear me.
And can you can you hear us.
Yes okay so Mister chairman that
changes includes
That once the system has been
assessed the district a prize
for the award and secure was a
contractor and the contractor
may have a workforce of up to
twenty percent of graduate
school on a print what part of
apprenticeship program
statewide.
And that the the work.
Conducted by a certified
technician.
Approved by the construction
industry commission.
And that our priority would be
given to schools who who may not
have local resources to improve
their ventilation system through
the local P. SFA Max.
Projects that are critical for
we open in schools and projects
required for the health and
safety of students and school
personnel and Mr Chairman that
the act creates that fund and if
a state appropriation is made in
that fund the program will
follow the methodology in place
for the PS C. O. C. Awad's and
those are the changes Mr
chairman.
All right so we've already heard
public comment we've talked
about this we have a committee
sub I know they're going to be
questions about the committee
some.
So members so we have
Representative Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair
you know I I still have really
the same concerns on page three.
Subparagraph G. as in.
As in Gallup line for and I you
know we're we're defining a
skilled and trained construction
work for some and that's that's
the standard yes that's the bar
that must be met in order to
receive these kind of contracts
and we dropped from seventy to
forty.
but we heard testimony from
experts that there was no
objective reason why we were
where we were at a hundred
why weren't zero or anywhere
between.
And so I I guess I just want to
know what's the reason for the
drop from seventy to forty Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative
laying.
You started that day and.
You can't have seventy percent.
Of.
I'm.
Train construction workforce
that are part of the registered
apprenticeship program so we
know we do have apprenticeship
program statewide.
And.
And we know that in some areas
of the state there may not be an
apprenticeship program in NMAA
in Moscow it may not be so
instead of using the fact of a
certain number.
That would look like.
Communities may not be able to
receive services based on
somebody who is an
apprenticeship.
I know what the amount.
In a lot of that.
We still keep in mind that the
apprentice the apprentice sees
that is statewide may be able to
work on this particular project.
But we also communities will
burn would be able to select of
the areas all of the people who
don't have to be part of an
apprenticeship program.
I Mr chairman I'm I would have
perhaps
John Hamel done all.
Respond to that please.
Hello hello Mister Hamilton are
you with us we can't hear you
yes I am I think she said to
people I was waiting to hear
from.
Would you prefer to hear from.
Whomever may be ready seems like
you're on Mr Hamilton.
Yes so they just wanted to make
sure that by lowering that down
they said that might be a little
bit of a struggle in rural areas
to then the amount of work
that's going to happen so they
wanted to make it a little less
restrictive on the repair side
to make sure that they can get
in there and bring these are
schools up to the proper
ventilation rates.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I I was not one of the
ones named but if if if possible
I'd like to comment on this as
well.
And this is Steven Curtis then
you may Mr chairman.
Yes.
I certainly I think what they
the policy here and this is a
policy question but it's one
that is already been established
by this legislature in section
fifty dash seven dash one we
have a declaration of policy as
it relates to apprentices I'm it
is declared to be the policy
this act to encourage the
development of a partnership
systems to the voluntary
cooperation of management and
labor and interested state
agencies and in cooperation with
other states and the federal
government to provide for the
establishment in furtherance of
standards of internship to
safeguard the welfare of
apprentices and to aid in the
maintenance of an adequate
skilled labor force
so and the policy the state of
New Mexico has already been
declared by this legislature to
encourage the development of the
prevention programs in order to
make ensure that New Mexico as a
whole as an adequate skilled
labor force I'm and the just
between seventy and forty it's a
policy decision it was a balance
that is being made between
furthering or at least not
diminishing the goal of
encouraging the development of
the inspection programs.
Balancing that against the
availability in the current
workforce to meet those
standards.
Thank you Mr chair so again
there the there's no objective
reason given for those specific
number.
you know and now we're being
told that the purpose of this
bill is to help establishing
appreciate program I thought the
purposes bills to secure safety
in the classroom so I I I have
even more concerns now in light
of that.
And I I don't see why we pick
forty
I think what this is going to do
is your local role school
districts are gonna have a real
hard time.
Securing someone in the area to
come and do this type of work
and so what it's going to mean
is it's gonna cost me more as a
school district to get somebody
to come from urban area to come
in and install and maintain the
systems.
And I just I disagree finally
with the premise that you have
to have forty or seventy or
whatever percent qualified
graduate from a qualified
appreciate program before
they're capable to install and
maintain the systems so the
premise is to get our schools to
a safer level with regard to
COVID ventilation that should be
the purpose of the bill it
should not be to try to
establish in problem appreciate
programs so I still have
concerns of those thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative
How the.
I still have questions as well
and I think Representative Lane
somewhat touched on what my
concern is my biggest concern is
that we're talking about federal
comment dollars that
appropriated to our school
districts all of our school
districts are asking for these
funds in my case I have school
districts that putting capital
outlay requests for their.
air quality systems.
And this has an emergency clause
on it and this was a beautiful
bill Representative staples
section G. was added.
Change the intent of the bill
which is to get our kids back in
school.
Clean high quality indoor air
quality systems and to do it
urgently and quickly as possible
there was no emergency costs and
yet.
There's not all we're being told
that the bills about
apprenticeship programs and we
are committed to ensure program
for bonding expanding them but
this bill is to make sure kids
are safe speaking about school
that's what this bill is about
and so I'm just I don't
understand why section G. is
necessary we do have a skilled
workforce
Are you familiar with the
consolidated educational
services division.
Am I familiar with what.
The.
Question maybe.
Thank you great now yes.
Consolidated education services.
No I'm not Mr Chairman
representative that we thank you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative what's the
that's New Mexico's system that
the state uses for selecting
Services think that the
contractors that can do work in
public schools and that's
they're they're the only.
Purchasing cooperatives so I'm
just wondering.
What ever asked you to add
section G. I believe that Act
purchasing cooperatives are
Cooper educational services
that's our contractors to do
work in New Mexico public
schools is not adequate.
Mr Chairman.
Representative
I will have Christopher to
answer that question all anyone
up my
Expert witnesses.
Except Mr chairman and
Representative Dow.
Just so you know I never said
that this bill is about.
Our apprenticeship programs I
said that apprenticeships
registered apprenticeship
programs who has graduates.
I'm.
Construction occupation who are
skilled trained construction
what was members which does not
mean that you and your district
where you are hi is somebody
else that is not apprenticeship
you are making it sound like you
can only hire.
But that doesn't mean it's the
home state you don't have to
hire somebody that is an
apprentice that has been an
apprentice you have to because
it only says forty percent.
So your question regarding
the services.
I'm.
That you requested I don't know
Steven if you have the answer us
someone of you have done so far.
I think the answer is that
And I think maybe my statement
has been misconstrued I believe
Tony has the numbers regarding
who would qualify under this but
the state is recognize that
apprenticeship programs are the
gold standard I think the policy
and again it's a policy issue
the policy inherent in
subsection G. is that our kids
are worth it to have high
quality workforce installing
ventilation programs to keep
them safe that I believe is the
policy behind relying on
apprenticeship programs and it
ties into already existing state
policy that recognizes that
apprenticeships are the way
towards a skilled and
Competent workforce.
Mr Chairman.
And Mr Curtis we don't disagree
that there is a policy and that
there's no intent to for
developing retention programs.
We are in the process of
developing prevention programs
our state has a shortage of
teachers yes Representative
nurses shortage of doctors
shortages social workers we have
a shortage of qualified people
who their conditions see I see
approved program and so I do
believe that this has good
intent.
In the previous year what who
are registered with qualified
for this because I don't
understand the language to say
an average of forty percent over
all.
So in my area when I called the
superintendents called my
contractors the superintendents
do not have anybody qualified.
Into the existing process.
What
the time they don't want to take
the time what schools to re open
and so I I understand your
intent but it seems that the
section G. is actually slowing
down this process and to make it
more burden or whatever stand
were registered apprenticeship
programs in the certain focus
all of your County that the
majority of the school districts
around the state and it limits
the resources in this bill so we
either have to give it to these
for the folks that are part of
this apprenticeship programs.
Maybe sixty percent of the maybe
sixty percent of the projects
will be that would be
burdensome.
In rural New Mexico have to wait
until those folks are available
and to make their way around the
state to be able to do this
What are schools open in New
Mexico.
Just as much as the parents want
the schools to open in APS.
Mr chair
Representative Dow may I answer
that question.
My name is R. twenty concerned
I'm I'm a contractor here in New
Mexico I've been working here in
New Mexico for almost forty
years now
I've been on the premise I've
gone through an apprenticeship
program I currently do a lot of
work right now for PS FAA across
the state of New Mexico I work
as a contractor through the
whole state of New Mexico with
all of the contractors that are
available in most Carroll of
that area for sure you have a
difficult time getting
contractors to get there it's
not because of apprenticeship
programs however it's because
there's not a place to stay in a
place to eat and so contractors
have to be able to take that
burden on when they're looking
at that work the forty percent
came up because the average
crude sheet metal on a on a
typical small job is going to be
to our mechanics on a job that's
just saying that one of the two
people that are on that job
received an education in that
craft this supported him enough
to be able to do the job
correctly you can go in New
Mexico right now get a license
of German sheetmetal license if
you meet the requirements of of
work and if you can pass that
test what this is doing right
now though is also making sure
that they have somebody there
that has not only learned on the
job but through the school
through a partnership program
that gives them that ability to
do it.
My experience because I do
what's called testing balancing
I yes those projects to those
contractors installing those
rural areas
Representative Dow I I'm sure
you would agree with me that
because you have a shortage in
teachers you wouldn't just allow
anybody to come in and start
teaching just because we have a
shortage of teachers.
We do not have a shortage of
contractors a bill able to do
this work there are a lot of
contractors that are available
and meet this criteria I was on
the phone yesterday speaking to
quite a few of all.
They can travel they can go to
these areas there is more than
the capability right now to do
this work because they're doing
it now through PSSA.
The intent of the forty percent
was there to ensure that there
was a workforce in place that we
knew were going to provide
quality work I think it was
brought up earlier that federal
funds are going to be used for
this.
We all know what happens when
the light comes on across the
country there's federal funds
available we start getting these
fly by night companies coming
into New Mexico bidding this
work against New Mexico
contractors.
At prices The New Mexico
contractor can't meet and it's
they're doing that because are
using labor that isn't available
to do that work.
I was talking with the
superintendent of miss Carol
yesterday and I mentioned to her
that this bill is specifically
set up for somebody like herself
because they don't have the
funds to be able to do the
upgrade from this girl this bill
would allow that to happen but
the worst possible thing that
could happen is that the funds
that would be available within
get installed by a contractor
what's going on right they came
in and gave or something worse
than she has now.
And that's what this intune to
this bill is the intent of this
bill is to use these funds in
the best way possible to make
sure that our students or
teachers or parents all get what
they're do
and the best quality that they
can get.
I understand career more than
anybody does because I do work
on the east part of the state
and I know how difficult it is
sometimes to get contractors to
do work and even go into some of
those rural areas House New
Mexico is not the greatest place
to want to stay as well but
these are all small rural areas
that may need some work.
My intent on supporting this
bill and the reason why I'm here
right now is because I do see
the quality of work through New
Mexico I know what good quality
contractors there are in New
Mexico I work with those quality
contractors all the time through
PSSA throughout the state of New
Mexico and I know that that work
can be done.
This is put into place right now
to ensure that we just don't
have those people coming in here
with the snake oil kind of
remedies to fix something and
that's what this bill is done
it's allowed to be assessed
correctly my qualified people
it's a lot about assessment to
be viewed by by professional
engineers who do their job in
the state of New Mexico right
now.
then it gets installed by
contractors who Mexico has made
to be sure by licensing program
or qualified to do this work.
that forty percent is there to
try to help stabilize that it's
there to try to say okay we've
got a quality that we want to
meet and it's not fair because
you happen to live in Moscow New
Mexico you have to accept
quality that's less than
somebody that lives here in
Albuquerque and that's the
intent of this is to make sure
that that is available my
grandson my granddaughter go to
school in the scare.
So I have a great deal of of of
Care and what is being done
right now here and so
Representative Dow I understand
where you're coming from and and
Representative lane I hear what
you're saying and I know that
that in no construction field.
May not mean much to you but
somebody who's in construction
and a contractor who hires these
people to do work it means a lot
to me to know that at least one
guy that I have a two came from
a registered apprenticeship
program who learned a trade and
is going to do a good quality
job.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative and
thank you Tony for that answer.
The amendment is an error it
would be fifty percent not forty
percent but we do we have
shortages of teachers you got to
be a shortage of teachers yes.
He classrooms of long term subs
and I'm not saying that's ideal
but that's what happens the
money that we see this bill is
saying is that forty percent of
the teachers to graduate from
you and.
Because programs and people as
considered skilled and qualified
and we are using policy to
disqualify them from working and
so I I don't I don't follow your
logic I just don't because we're
excluding graduates from
community colleges from through
your programs people with
degrees are qualified
technicians by definition
quality care skilled or capable
you're you're.
The testified to the inquiry.
Which is about forty percent and
I don't know if you were here to
the first committee hearing that
was actually like an arbitrary
number that one of our members
and one seventy seven forty so.
Yes I just my questions to the
sponsor Mr Chairman
Representative Stapleton are you
willing to take any additional
amendments to section G..
I think that you could some of
the language on page six
on page eleven lines eleven to
fourteen perception G. yeah
stand in section G. or if we're
concerned about in state
residents are in state
contractors before before.
I think we can all support that
we look at this to New Mexico
providers.
Was assuring adequate workforce.
We still haven't seen the
workforce numbers and finding it
difficult let's let's find what
percentage of them are graduates
of the of the CI si depression
program information programs
unless the movie change language
you have to be seen I see
approved apprenticeship
graduates okay.
Okay so are women section G. to
New Mexico.
Doctors would take care of
people Water State still these
contracts for New Mexico
residents.
Can we
look at look at
CVS to make these decisions.
Said quite a what is your
question.
I think that Representative I
think the question was if you
were
willing to make amendments that
Representative Dow is
suggesting.
New Mexico contractors would be
the ones would be eligible what.
Mr Chairman representative that
would be for New Mexico
residents the contractors would
be to be New Mexico residents so
that out of state vendors would
not come into the state and take
these projects you know from
local contractors and then that
C. E. S. would determine their
eligibility.
Instead of the.
The construction division for
the state of New Mexico we'll
see the.
Not sure about your last time
but I don't have any problem.
C. S..
And see if he is.
Not.
So Mr Chairman representative
see is the procurement agency
and I do see I do yes I would be
happy to see IT yes C. I. D. the
construction industry division
yes ma'am that would work.
Maybe Mr chairman Max Stephen
curry's
my legal counsel to answer that
question please.
First of all if you would go
through the chair though please.
Yes chairman Romero I certainly
apologize from the lack of
decorum on that
that chairman Romero members of
the committee I'm not entirely
certain what the question is but
there one point of order is that
the registered apprenticeship
programs that are registered by
the department of workforce
solutions not CENIC the there's
a state apprenticeship council
that for any company or union or
contractors association that
wishes to registered
apprenticeship program there is
a rigorous
Presentation that has to be made
identifying the curriculum
identifying the on the job work
requirements
and that has to be approved by
the state the state prison
Council excuse me.
Access by everybody to determine
whether or not it meets the
criteria for permission and then
it allows that to go forward
There as a lawyer I will say I.
It would be cautious about
limiting contracts to New Mexico
restaurants that can be done but
there are certain constitutional
issues surrounding that such as
the dormant Commerce Clause the
privileges and immunity clause
the federal constitution I think
as a state as a market
participant the state has more
leeway say we want to spend our
money in a certain way however
there are still
issues saying.
Only New Mexico contractors
could do that I think the
manifesting tantrums subsection
G. which has been described are
already is that we want to make
sure that these programs are
done right not just that they're
done that they're done right and
that for that we need a skilled
and trained construction
workforce in the best way to
ensure skilled and trained
construction workforce is to
ensure that a certain percentage
of them at the least are have
gone through the rigorous
programs that make him qualified
to perform this type of work.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative
Mr Curtis I don't I can't name
the sections of loss as you get
for the apprenticeship program
but I can tell you that this
legislative body has made a
priority to focus on New Mexico
programs and to prioritize those
folks who are residents of New
Mexico and to target to the
state this is a veterans and
businesses that are owned and
operated by and people of color.
Is also a priority that we the
state so I I don't know all the
languages okay for friendship
but not for New Mexico resident
or I guess we do use the word
prioritized.
But he's never heard from your
answer if that would be a
friendly amendment.
I am.
Mr Chairman Romero members of
the committee I think missed
Stapleton would have to
Representative Stapleton rather
would have to answer students
from the amendment I don't based
on the intent of the bill as a
whole I think it would be viewed
as an unfriendly amendment in my
opinion but that is I don't know
that the question was directed
to me.
Mr Mr chairman.
I'm Representative Dow based on
my legal counsel in regards to
the laws and the
constitutionality hi at this
time will not accept the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton.
Right thank you representative
Representative Baldonado please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative Dale
for revisiting this bill for us
I kind of want to just take a
couple seconds to
ask when one specific question
we heard that the last time
Stephanie Lee from if he was on
the call I don't see her today
but she had mentioned
Representative Mr chairman
some some pot of money that
senator Heinrich had secured do
you can you explain what that
money is Representative
Stapleton.
I'm as Mr chair.
Representative Baldonado as far
as I know I believe I could be
wrong but Rachel gradual can
probably correct me if I am I'm
not sure but I was told that
there was I think it was about
part of money that came from the
fed's that now is in PED in
probably already out to the
schools and there is additional
funding coming in
to school districts.
Representative we do have we do
have state my correct can be
excellent.
Yeah I think it.
Okay.
So so director god so if you
wish to address and then we can
defer to to to Stephanie and I
can bring.
Yes Mr chairman I if you can
defer to Stephanie there are
federal dollars spent I think
that the question is what
specific dollars and so is this
the correct funds I think is
what Representative Baldonado
might be us or is there a
separate part of the federal
funds for capital and what I
will say is we've not been able
to find on a separate allocation
from the federal government
specifically for ventilation but
the state's receiving about four
hundred and forty million
dollars from the latest round of
state funds and there is
language attached to those funds
that allow us to be spent on
retrofitting facilities.
So.
We do have we're here
Representative Baldonado think
shifted they are
We do we do have Stephanie lease
all bring her in our hand went
up and down.
Allowing to speak on this.
Steep here with us.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so Senator
Heinrich sponsored by keeping
schools safe act which intended
to provide billions of dollars
in financial support for a wide
variety of school air
decontamination efforts UV
happen filters portable units he
secured language in the December
COVID nineteen relief package as
follows he uses the fund a local
education agency that received
funds under this section may use
the funds for any of the
following number fourteen
inspection testing maintenance
repair replacement and upgrade
projects to improve the indoor
air quality of school facilities
including mechanical and non
mechanical heating ventilation
and air conditioning systems
filtering purification and other
air cleaning fans control
systems and window and door
repair and replacement the PED
has focused efforts and the Merv
thirteen filters which is the
start I'm sorry I can go into
more but which is a start but
most school H. fax systems don't
have the capacity for the Merv
thirteen filters so schools need
to take other medications steps
like providing the very
important all fell duration
units as a stop gap the above
language basically says Eleazar
can apply that December cares
funding for what we need to do
to get our classrooms in a
state.
Learning environment.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Stephanie for
providing that that gives me
very very specific and
information and Mr Chairman
representative I think I want to
direct a question it at director
got so that we would Stephanie
just read sounds very specific
in federal law that that money
would have to be spent in in
those rounds of of of the
schools can can we even change
them is even is this money
already directed to their more
doing this bill for no for no
reason almost that I'm trying to
understand that Mr chairman and
director so Mister chairman the
language I believe this
Stephanie just read to you comes
out of the the Chris of funds so
there's four hundred and forty
million dollars forty million of
which will be maintained by PED
four hundred million of which
will flow out to school
districts through their title
one formula so proportionate to
the title one funds they receive
and there are multiple uses of
those dollars so in addition to
ventilation systems you can use
them for broadband issues you
can use them for anything
districts and and and public
schools can use them for
anything that's allowed by
federal law virtually so Perkins
uses title one uses title for
professional development
and the state doesn't have the
ability to tell districts how to
use those funds that flow
through through PED and
districts have to make sure
they're complying with the
federal requirements PED will
keep a set aside and they have
some broad authority to
determine how they will use the
for that.
The forty million but the state
the state can't direct the
department how to allocate those
funds so similar question was
just raised in House
Appropriations about some
language in the General
Appropration Act around federal
funds and the answer Mr Abbey
again HFC was we have very very
little at thirty at the state
level unless the feds give it to
us to mandate dollars get spent
in certain weights.
When it when they're
appropriated from the feds if
they're not just general
appropriations to the state.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you director Kudrow
you know we we already discussed
this bill at length a few days
ago and I have expressed
reservations and I was the
member that arbitrarily
throughout that forty percent is
one answer that kind of you know
what we pick this number
edges still really feel like we
have a poison pill in this bill
and I'll say it frankly I I feel
like this is a good thing for
school districts and getting
kids back to school but putting
those requirements on the
contractors and all due respect
to the to the gentleman
contractor that's on today it
sounds definitely to me like
your budget your business would
benefit from this and and maybe
the small guys in the more rural
parts of the state may not may
not get some of those contracts
or even the opportunity to bid
on them I do agree that
that you want quality work and
the gentleman used an example of
of a shortage of teachers and
things of that nature but I also
understand that you know there
are there are people in the
trades that have been in the
business for you know twenty or
thirty years maybe they never
went through an apprenticeship
program but they were pretty
darn good at what they do and so
I think it's disingenuous to to
put that requirement in front of
folks again to to represent Taos
point you know we we don't just
prior to the certain teacher for
certain school that went to a
certain university and it
doesn't work that way and so I
just feel like this bill still
is not ready for prime time I
really feel like we're we're
just you know legislation
somebody's job is what it
amounts to so but I do yield
Mister chairman and thank you
for the time.
Thank you representative
Representative Chatfield please.
Yes Mr chairman the funds that
we're talking about this is
probably a right to question Mr
chairman of the they available
only to I don't want schools.
So Mr Chairman representative
they are and so you'll know that
there's a number
there's a number of public
school districts and charter
schools that will not receive
the distribution of the they did
not receive a distribution of
the hundred and eight million
that was sent to the state must
PED mated distribution of them
nor will they receive a portion
of that the four hundred and
forty million that's coming to
the state so for example muscari
was one of the one of the
schools that will receive a
distribution the other thing to
note about the funds is because
they're flowed through title one
districts received very
different amounts of funding
compared with their operational
funding so as an example Los
Alamos will get about point six
percent of their operational
funding in this newest four
hundred and forty million
dollars where's Gadsden will end
up with about twenty five
percent so it's because it's
based on title one students
those districts with higher
proportionate I don't one
students get a bigger chunk of
the dollars.
So.
With those districts of.
Well for this funding to date in
this bill.
Yes.
Mr Chairman Representative
there's no funding in the bill
so
the bill sets up a grant program
and I think if I understand what
misli said it at last is it was
earlier this week's meeting
there's an intent that PED uses
their forty million dollars set
aside to fund this program but
if the department doesn't
deposit any portion of that
forty million dollars into the
fund they won't be required to.
spend dollars consistent with
the act I think that the
eligibility question is yes
there federal dollars any
district is eligible for a
distribution of those dollars
but it would be dependent on
help you do decided to to use as
funds so Mister chairman bill
does not the set up in the
funding it just seeks to control
of funding that are you.
Mr Chairman representative.
I I believe based on what misli
said at the last meeting at your
last meeting on this bill there
is an intent that PED uses part
of that set aside from the
caress of funds to meet the
intent of the paragraph that
mislead just read to you that's
one of a number of
the types of things PED can use
these funds for.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Great further questions from the
committee.
Mr chairman I move a do pass.
All right so we have a due pass
will.
So it would need to be a do not
pass on and I'm just clarify
Representative Dow just make
them
I do not pass on house bill
thirty two thirty to be passed
on committees has Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill thirty two by
Representative Trujillo I would
second that but Representative
Dow with the motion to table so
we're on a tabling motion for
the committee substitute for
house bill two thirty two so
yeses to table no is to not
table so.
Madam secretary if you call the
roll on the tabling motion
please Representative chairman
who seconded the motion for
tabling I I don't believe you
need just can't for going on but
that all as soon if
Representative Baldonado what
missing he's wanting.
All right Representative
Baldonado.
For a table motion.
Representative.
Representative Representative
Baldonado for.
I don't know.
To table.
Sen.
This is the table in motion well
the Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado for
cable motion.
on a table in motion is yes
okay.
Representative Chatfield forced
his motion.
Yes.
Representative doll yes to
table.
Representative Figueroa.
Sh noted table.
Representative Lane.
Yes able.
Representative Lara.
No to table.
Representative Madrid.
Hello to table Representative
Lente.
to table.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Hello to table.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative state no to
table.
Representative Sweetser no.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
No.
Vice chair here at.
Excuse me no to table.
Chairman.
No to table it the the motion
has failed.
The motion is failed we'll go
back to the original motion the
do not pass committees house
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill to thirty two but
I do pass on I think I I messed
that up.
They do not pass on house bill
two thirty two but a do pass on
the house Education Committee
substrate for House Bill two
thirty two made by
Representative Christine
Trujillo I seconded that madam
secretary if you call the roll
on a do pass motion all right.
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative L. L..
Representative Figueroa.
Yes I'd like to explain my boat.
Representative remains.
Okay.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative let them.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Yes.
Representative Sir.
Yes.
It looks.
Representative.
Christine Trujillo yes.
Vice chair care at.
Chairman.
Yes nine to five all right but
for a officially announced the
vote Representative Figueroa to
explain about please.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I still have some concerns
about that section G. the intent
of this bill to have highly
qualified people shaking the
systems in our schools being for
students and teachers go back is
of such as visual importance
that voting yes knowing that I
and my students will be back in
those buildings it is especially
important to me and for all the
students and teachers across the
state thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you Representative
Figueroa I a certainly share
that sentiment is a teacher
myself I appreciate those
comments on.
So Representative Stapleton you
have a nine to five vote in
favor of a do not pass on house
bill two thirty two but eight to
pass on the house Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty two thank you
Representative thank you
experts.
Right.
Members of the committee.
Great thank you all right so
we'll go to our next bill house
bill two sixty six which we.
Have heard.
Representative Figueroa I do I I
mean I need to clear house a
little bit here so give me a
moment.
On.
Thank you chairman emeritus
getting asked how I can leave
this but so watch so I'm just
I'm changing your role now Mr
Curtis thank you very.
Yes the squares shift when I do
that C. maintenance.
All right Representative
Figueroa did I need to promote
anybody.
It is Ellen burns seeing this in
the attendee list you may want
to move her over that we have
discussed this at some length
story I'm not sure we'll need
her okay over Representative
just in case thank you.
Mr chair you know we have an
amendment so that probably needs
to be moved for discussion.
I'm the amendment.
For discussion thank you also
for discussion and.
She number if you would like Mr
chair.
Please if you would.
Two one nine nine three four
point one.
All right so should it it's on
the bottom of my.
Share files the missing
equipment for everybody.
Two sixty six school all right
thank you Representative.
Mr chair and we've discussed
that this is an attempt to
address alternative licensure
pathway since that is now.
Hearing sixty percent of our new
teachers or more and that trend
has been increasing for their
several years so we took into
account with the amendment the
discussion in this committee
about some really excellent
level to licensure teachers
across the state who could be
doing this supervision teaching
with alternate licensure
candidates and added that line
so now level two or three.
Special education teachers can
do the.
Teaching supervision and peace
that is the extent of the
amendment Mr chair.
All right thank you.
Shortline big implications.
Right questions from committee
comments concerns.
Motion on the amendment.
Mr Chairman motion.
Last.
So we have a motion to adopt or
just on the amendment says
motion to adopt.
Second by Representative Garrett
thank you any opposition to
adoption of the amendment.
C. line you haven't amended bill
Representative do you think your
your explanation was sufficient
to explain the change to the
bill overall.
I.
Senator excellent I agree so
committee questions comments
concerns about the amended bill
now.
Representative Derrick please.
Your muted Representative
Garrett.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for making that change that
satisfied satisfies my concerns
by adding level two thank you
very much.
Thank thank you Representative
Garrett.
Further questions motion.
Mr chair.
Representative Lara please do
for the past.
Okay I'll give that to
Representative Lara thank you
Representative us to have a
motion for the past house bill
two sixty six is amended a
second by Representative
Stapleton does that work.
so madam secretary of the call
the roll on a do pass motion for
house bill two six six of them
and.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative was that no.
There was no.
Representative doll hello.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane.
Representative.
Lara.
Yes.
Representative death.
Yes.
Representative Mitch read yes.
Representative R. Volcom bye at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Thank.
Christine Trujillo yes.
I'm gonna go back to
Representative Baldonado I see
him I don't know if he hears me
Representative Baldonado.
Representative while he's not
hearing me.
Representative lane is on but
okay.
Vice chair Garrett.
Chairman.
Yes.
We go about Representative
Baldonado I see him on the
screen.
I'm sorry okay that'll be
Ten to to to.
All right.
I voted tend to to you have a do
pass on house bill two sixty six
is amended thank you
Representative Figueroa we
appreciate it.
Thank you.
All right so that concludes our
business for today members we
were reconvene at eight o'clock
on
Monday we're Representative
Sweetser place.
Thank you Mr chair I just wanted
to let you know that House
Appropriations will be convening
at nine o'clock on Monday to do
a final vote on the budget so it
is imperative that we all get
there and I know there are
several members who serve on
both committees I just wanted to
give you that heads up yes yeah
I I appreciate that I mean I
didn't know till till a little
little bit ago about that we'll
have to figure out what we're
gonna do but will you still have
a few bills to go through will
try to go through them as
quickly as possible.
thank you for that
Representative Sweetser
Representative Garrett please.
Mr chairman I wondered
representative Lente can
introduce the adorable companion
sitting with them.
Representative.
Absolutely this is a this is
Easton led the the.
Is our son he is the thirteen
months old and he's about ready
to go to the field so he's.
We're we're packing up soon so
good to see everybody thank you.
Hopefully it's to watch and not
work Representative loss
against.
Members to give in and let the
farms.
authorities do not know all
right cool well with that I hope
you all enjoy the rest of your
day have a nice rest of your
weekend and we will see you all
on Monday thank you everybody I
Happy Birthday to a little boy.
My yes.
Thank you yeah I think people
will have a okay thank you yeah
we just celebrate yeah okay
seeing you Monday
bye everybody I have a nice day.
