I
Sure.
He
right, thank you, Representative
Lindstrom, please.
House Bill 48.
Well, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and good morning
committee, um.
I'm here today to talk to you
about House Bill 48 and with me
this morning is Sabrina Isel.
She's our chancellor at UNMG in
in Gallup.
So House Bill 48 is a result.
Of um.
A lot of work, but for me
basically on December 3rd, we
had the governor out in Gallup.
From 5:30 p.m. to about 11 p.m.
that evening with between 250 to
300 folks.
At a town hall on public safety.
So when we thought about all the
issues that were brought up
regarding public safety for our
community, this bill as a
result, and I, and I did, Mr.
Chairman, talk to the judiciary
chair.
And asked, Is this the kind of
bill that might be rolled into a
bigger package regarding public
safety, and it was her
suggestion, though it's more
education based and it's still
uh public safety, but basically
in a nutshell, what we're trying
to do is to reestablish a law
enforcement training academy
that was once in Gallop. It, uh,
discontinued in 2005, primarily
because um the director had
retired.
We couldn't find a licensed
director.
The idea behind the bill, of
course, is that we would be
growing our own. I know that
this committee is very familiar
with growing your own when it
comes to education
professionals, uh, particularly
because.
We've had hard to fill uh
teacher positions throughout the
state, so that is the same issue
that we have in Gallup, it's
hard to feel law enforcement,
uh.
Professional, when we have the
academy up and running, they're
in Gallup.
Both our current chief of police
and our current sheriff were
graduates of that program.
So what we're, what we've seen
is that um.
Unfortunately now our city has
about a 30% vacancy rate.
Or police officers, which is
untenable.
And um we're trying to grow our
own.
So I thought, Mr. Chairman, may
I ask our expert to make some
more comments. Please welcome.
Morning, Chairman Romero and
members of the committee branch.
And I'm here today to help fund
existing law enforcement
academies.
For I and G intuition do not
cover the combined cost of
instruction material, including
the director and adjuncts.
UNM Gallup is in the process of
bringing back our law
enforcement academy.
We currently have 12 police
officer vacancies at the Gallup
Police Department.
Only 2 cadets in training.
We also have 4 vacancies at the
McKinley County, On the UNM
Gallup Police Academy is
certified, we would also
benefit. All House Bill 48 makes
16 additional higher education
institutions eligible to receive
funding should they begin a
certified law enforcement
program.
There are only 3.
Currently approved.
Higher education institutions
operating a reach the approval
of new regional basic police
academies is governed by the New
Mexico law enforcement
Standards.
Higher education institutions
requesting to operate.
A new regional basic police
academy.
May only law enforcement
standards and training council.
The recent history shows that
Dona Anna Community College was
denied approval for operating a
regional potential for new
higher being approved for this
funding is limited.
At the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Standards and
Training Council.
And based on statewide training,
the current projection of law
enforcement protection fund cost
is for the existing 3 eligible
training programs.
There is not a current
projection for approval of new
regional academies.
And given the existing statewide
needs, it is not projected to be
more than one.
For a total of 4 higher
education institutions.
The period of FY 26 annual total
of $400,000.
Funding will enable a first
collaborative system.
Of education and training
between the New Mexico law
enforcement and Training
council.
In higher education
institutions.
Operating basic regional law
enforcement. This will result in
improving the quality and
availability of training and
education for police officers
and telecommunicators.
And provide for the ability to
develop.
And maintain the latest and most
advanced law enforcement.
Given this information, please
consider passing this bill to
help our rural law enforcement
academies support public safety
in their communities.
Alright, thank you all of you
all stand for questions. All
right, so we'll go to our
audience, so the folks on Zoom,
if you wish to speak in support
of House Bill 48, please
indicate by raising your hand on
our zoom.
Right? Or let that populate for
a moment, um, I'll go to my
right-hand side in the audience,
those that wish to speak in
support of House Bill 48, please
indicate by raising your hand.
OK, sir, you'll have up to 2
minutes.
Please, once you grab the
microphone.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Bill Lee, president and CEO of
the Gallup McKinley County
Chamber of Commerce, we, uh,
stand in support of HB 48, um,
hours like many other small
rural communities are struggling
to fill many vacancies within
our law enforcement departments,
um, 20 years ago when the
academy was serving the McKinley
County and northwestern New
Mexico region, um, we saw that
it was very successful in
filling gaps with um upwards of
30 graduates per program.
Um, seen gainful employment in
our law enforcement agencies our
county and city chief and.
Of police and and sheriff as a
representative Lindstrom
mentioned are graduates of this
program and we would really love
to see it revitalized to stop
the
Continual recruitment from each
agency, our sheriff recruits
from the city, the city recruits
from the sheriff, and we never
make any real gains in that
area. Our school district is
also planning um with its
programs through the pathways
program to start a law
enforcement pathway, which would
be a natural pipeline into the
program at UNM Gallup, uh,
creating a real um sense of
community growing our own and
also making it very available
for those.
Who are um very much
transportationally challenged in
the Gallup McKinley County area
to get to law enforcement
training otherwise for these
reasons and others we stand in
full support of HB 48 and ask
that you give it a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Great, thank
you so much. Others on my right
hand side that wish to speak in
support of house 48.
Right? We'll go to my left hand
side, those who wish to speak in
support of House Bill 48.
right? You don't see anybody, so
we'll go to our folks on Zoom,
uh.
Um
This one is all together, so if
I mess up your name, I'm sorry.
The petty.
Good morning.
Good, good morning, Chairman.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Thank you. Uh, chairman and
members of the committee, my
name is Frank Cippetti. I am the
city manager for the city of
Gallup, and I am speaking on
behalf of House Bill 48. We
would love to see it passed. Um,
I'm not going to repeat what Mr.
Lee and the, the
Honorable legislature has
already spoken on, but I want to
say that Gallup is trying to
tackle a a growing transient
drug and crime problem that
we've seen throughout New Mexico
and of course we're seeing it
here in Gallup. Um, we are
looking to hire 10 public
service officers. That's
non-certified officers to take
small stuff off of our certified
officers so they can tackle the
higher crime.
The public service officers are
a natural recruiting system for
us to bring them in as
non-certified, work with them
until we can get them to an
academy, um, unfortunately, and
we have to ship them off to
Santa Fe, which creates holes in
those openings as as their in
Santa Fe over the time, having a
natural
Um
Program here in Gallup at the
local university that has been
proven in the past what would
help us keep those, keep those
people here in town.
Um, keep them engaged and and
work towards fulfilling our
openings. We thank the
legislatures for all of the
incentives to recruit and retain
officers. Those have been a
great help, but again, we, we
still have the openings that
you've heard and, and need to
fill them and we think this
would be a wonderful program, a
great tie with the county and
with UN M Gallup, um, just a
very win for our community if
passed. Thank you for your time.
Giovanna Hanks.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes, please. Good morning,
Chairman. Thank you for your
time. My name is Jovanna Hanks.
I'm the deputy superintendent
for the Gallup McKinley County
Schools, as was mentioned by the
prior individuals, the Gallup
McKinley County schools has a
full pathway system which is
college career and civic
readiness. Civic readiness is
very important to the McKinley
County schools, and we currently
have a very robust program for
individuals to go into the
military as well as EMS and
fire. This would open up
an additional avenue for police
enforcement within the
community. I was here in Gallup
when the law enforcement uh
academy was up at UNM Gallup and
it was extremely successful, um,
we are also feeling the similar
items that was mentioned by city
manager Cippeti in that we have
students who are unknowingly
taking um edibles with THC in
them. It is a
problem in our community, the
products are marketed like
candy. We had 3 middle school
students 2 weeks ago that were
hospitalized due to actually um
eating.
Uh, items that they were unaware
were laced with THC, um, and so
making sure that our community
is safe, making sure that our
kids are safe, while also having
to grow your own program for
these individuals within our
community is very important. We
are very much in support of this
bill. I think the chairman and
the committee's time.
Great. Thank you so much.
Right, so we'll go to
opposition, so if there's
opposition on Zoom.
Would you please indicate by
raising your hands, so this is
opposition to House Bill 48.
Let that populate, um,
Is there anybody in the room
that's in opposition to House
Bill 48.
I did see one hand, so the
microphone will come.
And then you'll have up to 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Sylvia Serna, and I'm the deputy
secretary for the Department of
Public Safety. While we support
the concept of this legislation,
we would ask that quite possibly
another uh an alternative
funding source be considered.
The law enforcement protection
fund, uh, feeds, uh, many
different sources of um funding
for the for the law enforcement
community across the state as
well as for the Department of
Public Safety. Currently, we
receive funding from LEPF for.
Our law enforcement retention
fund, uh, which has a
significantly low fund balance
right now, um, and we also
received money to the New Mexico
State Police out of this fund,
um, as it stands right now,
we've been unable to draw down
on these funds from DFA because
the fund is diminished. And so,
um, once again, I'll say that
while we do support this
legislation, um, and the concept
of it, we would ask that another
funding source be located. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you. Is there
anybody else in the room that we
speak in opposition to House
Bill 48?
Right? I don't have anybody
online, so we'll come back to
committee, so represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative and
presenter.
Have you, I like your concept.
And I know that what a fitting
day because today's law
enforcement day on the House
floor, and, you know, we love
our law enforcement.
Have you spoke with our state
academy and what do they think
about this concept.
Mr. Chairman and representative,
um, I have not spoke directly to
the academy, I, um, about this
concept, I do, I have talked to
staff in the governor's office
about it and generally they've
been a little bit wobbly in
terms of support. I, I don't
have a better term than that,
but it gets back to, we all know
what it, it gets back to the
funding source, I believe, and.
When you look at the FIR and and
you can see Mr. Chairman that.
Um
Parently there's only 3
postsecondary institutes
satellite academies, Central,
New Mexico, um, and then New
Mexico Junior College as well as
Western.
They don't serve in Western New
Mexico.
We thought that.
Let's just bring this back up.
It was up and running up until
2005.
And just due to the fact and it
gets back to what most rural
communities suffer from us, we
just can't get the certified
people.
We could not get the certified
director.
So I think they're a little
wobbly right now, but um, that's
what the legislature's for,
Mister Chairman. Sometimes we
can figure out how to get things
done.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that answer.
And that's, that's one of the
reasons I like you as you say
things direct, just like I do
and I wish I could go a
different route. I just have to
say I'm pretty direct.
Um
Would it be, would it be the
same curriculum that the state
is teaching now and would we
have the same kind of
instructors teaching the Chair
Representative Vincent.
The curriculum would be very
similar to what is already
approved by the other
institutions that are teaching
the law enforcement academy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
whenever you're teaching them
through Western, would it be an
associates type degree, would
they just be taught the, the law
enforcement side or would they
have uh an opportunity to go
through and get the, the, uh,
didactic the more of the um
The
The credits that they need to
have an associate's degree, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, most of the higher
education institution programs
do have certificates for the um
police academy and they
articulate with a
So from my community.
Um
Because I was a fire chief, but
I, I heard the police chiefs
talk all the time about when
they have to lose an officer, a
non-certified officer.
They can work up to a year.
And then whenever they have to
go to the academy, they lose
them for approximately 6 months.
Is that the same length of time
as this academy?
And the reason I like this
concept.
Now that I've, I've heard your
presentation. The reason I like
the concept is you take away a
lot of the motels.
Take away a lot of the per diems
and it saves a lot of money.
Mr. Chair.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, the program length
would be between, um, it could
be one semester.
Uh, usually 4 months or it could
be up to a year, depending on
the structure of the program, I
believe, I, I shouldn't, I
shouldn't guess that's my
understanding of the CNM
program, Western, and um New
Mexico Junior College.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
fair enough answer. I appreciate
that.
Will other communities have
access to this funding.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, there will be, um, this
program would, would.
Support multiple communities,
not just gallop.
It would also support the Navajo
Nation.
It would support Cibola County.
And um any surrounding
municipalities that needed the
the uh service.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that answer. And, uh,
something that just sparked a
question that I heard from.
Uh
EPS was.
Because of the funding in the
law enforcement protection fund
would, could there be?
If we could balance this out,
could there be another funding
source for this program.
Mr. Chair
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
I think it would be very
appropriate that there be an
appropriation through the
general appropriations Act into
this fund.
Uh, we see that there's a, a big
need. We know that one of the
best strategies for um.
Fighting crime is having people
on the ground.
And I would definitely advocate
that there be more funding put
into the appropriations Act for
this fund.
I haven't looked at this fund
carefully in the last couple of
years, but I do know that it has
been diminishing.
It, it just, just because it has
been, but why it's not why it
couldn't get a special one time
appropriation.
It, it could.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your answers. Appreciate the
time.
Resumed Chatfield.
Turned my turn my microphone on,
you can hear me better. I
started to say, madam chairs in
the budget.
cause,
cause
she has asked me that many a
time,
uh
So, I guess my, I'm, it sounds
like a great idea. I think that
we need to
We need some well-trained law
enforcement to keep people going
in my, in my questions are.
Budgetary
100,000 seems fairly minimal to
pace.
To pay the the staff and all and
and so on, so.
My first question is that, is
it, can you do that with
100,000?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
$100,000 is to get it up and
going.
I believe that this could be a
part of the ING budget or
higher, higher ed because
they're gonna be the staff would
be uh an instructor.
And that's generally where most
of the cost is, I do believe
that when a city or county sends
somebody into this training
program they're paying for it
also, they, so there is a
revenue generator also to get
the people trained
appropriately, but this 100,000
is, is a small amount of money.
That could generate a lot of
results, particularly for rural
communities. We're never gonna
compete with.
With Albuquerque.
State police, we got to grow our
own.
So
For sure
Um, I, I think I've seen so many
times when these small
communities are totally
untrained people to fill those
positions. It doesn't work out
well.
Uh, is the funding source the
same as before when
When this
Program existed previously.
I was it funded from the law
enforcement protection.
Um, I don't know for sure, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, but if
it was a certified program.
I would assume that it had would
had to have been approved by the
state law enforcement board that
that has oversight to this. I
know that has changed over the
years and how the structure
works.
But certainly, uh they'd be
responsible for certification.
It was up and running before,
had great success and.
The basic
piece of the budget could be
paid for by ING. That's a good
question. My expert doesn't know
she's fairly new into the
position as chancellor, but we
could certainly find out.
Where
Mr. Chair, where what is the
source of funds.
Or the Lord. If you like, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Representative
on your FIR, the law enforcement
funds come from a from a number
of different sources.
It's usually it comes from an
insurance source.
Yeah, if, um.
OK, I see it. Do you see it?
I do see it, yes.
Yeah.
So it, so there's things that we
could do, Mr. Chairman, we could
either increase those, those
allocations, so more goes into
the fund.
That would have to be an
amendment to the bill.
Um, I could do that.
The other thing is, is you and
your colleagues here on this
committee that serve on HFC
could also do a supplemental to
this program.
Supplemental appropriation if
that hasn't already happened.
For for you all.
But I think um.
We could change those
percentages. I don't know how
many people that bring out of
the woodwork.
Um
But we could do that, there's,
there's, there's a couple of
different ways we could make
this work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You, you
know, I think, uh,
Represent Gonzales.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
just wanna echo.
A little bit of some comments,
um, but also just down to the,
the financials a little bit. Um,
I also want to say that, you
know, in rural community, rural
northeastern New Mexico. Um, we
are also facing very similar
issues there, um, you know,
again, with this training
facility there in Gallup, it
would be the only northern New
Mexico facility, um, still quite
away from a lot of my areas just
wanted to point that out, um, I
do have the same concerns about
the funding source, um, it
coming, um, I, I do agree.
that, um, I think recruitment
and retention are both
absolutely necessary to serve
all of these areas, um, I guess
just
My concern is through this
funding source, um, we're
focusing more on the recruitment
piece, and it would pull from
the retention piece within this
particular fund, and so, um,
maybe not more of a question,
but 100% from an educational
standpoint in here, I, I fully
see the need for this bill, um,
but maybe an ask is um maybe a
look at different funding
sources to not pull from an
already strained fund that does
go to retain in these areas, but
from an education
standpoint, um, just want to
offer, you know, my support that
I think this is an absolutely
needed, um, educational thing at
at our different or rural New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
you're, you're right, it is the
focus is, is recruitment.
But because we're recruiting
from a population base of people
that want to live in our
community.
We think that solves the
retention problem on the back
end.
What really has hurt us is
bringing people in from the
outside, and they're there for a
year and then they're gone.
That because we'd be recruiting
from our local folks.
Who want to live there.
They're gonna, they're gonna
stay.
Mr. Chair, if I can just do a
follow up. Um, so with, with
that, I mean, in in the in the
FARs reported that any
additional, you know, money from
this request does get reverted
into the retention fund. And so
with that, there is, you know,
balances that are reverted to
the state, you know, fund for
retention across. And so I
absolutely believe that this
will retain in the communities
that are needed, um, I think
that is extremely important to
recruit and retain locally, um,
but, um, with the dwindling
fund, I guess just my concern
fiscally is.
um,
You know, where, you know,
worried about other efforts to
to keep officers to keep law
enforcement officers across the
state, but from an educational
perspective, um, through higher
education. I do think that
something like this is needed,
specifically targeting our
smaller community.
Thank you for, thank you for
your input and thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Um
Almost don't want to be
repetitive, but of course these
are.
Some of our concerns, um,
particularly whenever I'm
reading the analysis.
Um
They're like one of the analysis
without this funding and MSP
capacity to carry out the uh
critical activities will be
severely diminished, leading to
a reduction of public safety
measures across the state.
So obviously we're we're
definitely concerned about
depleting the fund, um.
Pretty low right now, so.
Personally, I would like to see
the funding coming from
different mechanism then this
particular fund, um, but Mr.
Chair, I, I do have a question,
so if I'm reading this right,
this bill will allow salaries,
benefits, and structural
material to be used out of this
fund, which currently isn't
allowed, is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, it would, it would
be allowed for that, um,
depending on what the program
is.
Um, and I think this is
primarily a request of.
To help Western uh university
because they are one of the.
The 3 that are listed here now
with um.
Central and New Mexico Junior
College and Western.
Each one of these as I remember.
Have
Oh
whole different set of budget
issues.
At this time and what I mean is
that.
There's a couple of them here
that do very, very well.
When it comes to a higher ed
factor in their budget, and
there's to come in. So if you
get a decline in population at
higher ed, it changes the
funding formula for them. And I
think one of them, I believe
it's Western, is how to decrease
in the population.
And um
That's true, I think that
everybody else that.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I think
everybody agrees it's needed,
but it's really the funding. My
questions for the Chancellor.
What has UNM Gallup requested to
support this in your budget
that's being presented now and
is it a line item?
How are you approaching this?
Particular thing.
Chairman Romero Representative
Garrett.
Oh, this budget cycle we do not
have it in there as a line item.
Our budget was submitted this
effort, so it's.
Monsieur, that's what concerns
me.
Um, I'm familiar with CNM's
program, in fact, um, Sheriff
Ellen, the Berlio County
Sheriff.
was in charge of the program at
CNM until he got elected to be
sheriff.
They have a certificate program
and now they're developing an
associate's degree.
Which also makes it eligible for
students to use the opportunity
scholarship and the um lottery
scholarship.
So that's my concern. It's like
I understand.
That
Having the governor come with
the public safety.
Event really drives home what's
going on, but my concern is that
it should be first.
A project of Unim Gallup, the
first source of funding should
actually come to the higher
education budgets, that's my
big.
Concern here.
Um
My other question, and I don't
know if you can answer this.
in the past, the program was
certified by the law enforcement
standards and Training Council.
Does that recertification have
to take place since the
program's been defunct since
For several years.
Um, Representative or chairman
Romero and Representative
Garrett.
I, I'd like to go back to the
first statement, um.
We would be we would have to
fund the director position
without this funding.
Um, I could potentially do that
through reserves, or I could
potentially do that through
share through cost sharing with
us while we're waiting to get
certified for this funding until
we were certified.
Um, and yes, we would have to be
recertified, we would not be
able to fall back on the prior
certificationculum would be the
same.
I believe it would change.
So Monsieur Charon and Madam
Chancellor, I like that, Madam
Chancellor.
Um, so actually, even if they
bill passed, you couldn't get
the $100,000 until you were
recertified. Is that correct?
That is correct.
OK. Thank you. I'm, I'm just
feel like.
This needs more precise work.
Again, it's not the issue if
it's needed, it's, it's the
mechanism to do it. Thank you. I
don't have any other members on
my list. Um, I would suggest
representative, if we could roll
the bill so we could get
together with the Department of
Public Safety because we still
have lingering concerns from all
members of committee about the
funding source for it and some
concerns about the law enforce
law enforcement protection fund.
Um,
Would you mind doing that?
And we could roll the bill, Mr.
Chairman, and.
I'm happy to work with them.
I assume it's the lady that made
the present.
I think so. I lost track of her,
but yes. Oh, OK, cool. All
right. So yes, um, and then once
we have those amendments, we can
reschedule the bill or what the
solution may be. OK, thank you.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
All right, so our vice chair.
Garrett will give her a moment.
I did see some
Young folks walk in, which I
assume are students, um, if you
all wouldn't mind introducing
yourselves quickly to everybody.
Can we get a microphone from the
sergeant at all.
Or that
When we have a change here,
where the students, if you
would.
We have the sponsor, teacher to
make an introduction, please.
Welcome.
So much. I'm just as nervous as
they are. So I'm Francine
Benner. I am the librarian and
diversity, equity and inclusion
and belonging coordinator for
Cottonwood Classical Preparatory
school. We have are we the
people competition class here
with us today. You'll see lots
of us kind of bouncing through
the building and this is our
group here joining you in
committee today. All right.
Good morning. My name is Lady
McConnell. Uh, good morning. My
name is Mire Webelow Gruner. I'm
also a student of Cottonwood
Classical, um, and I'm here with
my class.
Hi, my name is Alejandro
Armenta.
Hello, I'm Richie Zaragoza.
Hello, my name is Huckleberry
Walshilley.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Barrett Weems.
My name is Audio Sanchez.
My name is Lia Dai.
All right. Welcome to House
Education, folks.
Right. So.
Expert. All right, please,
Representative Garrett. House
Bill 195.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. I'm here to present
House Bill 195, school nurse
salary tiers and minimums. My
expert witness with me today is
Joshua Landry, who is a school
nurse at Chaparral Middle School
in Alamogordo.
Um
And I do have a teeny tiny
amendment that I'll present
after I explain yeah, we'll,
we'll present and then we'll
present. OK.
OK, um, I think everybody here
knows how important nurses are.
I've sat on the steps of a
portable with a child in the
middle of a severe asthma
attack.
I've had the nurse call
emergency services when someone
swallowed a ball bearing in a
physics experiment, um, we have
children in therapeutic foster
care we have children with
serious medical, uh, situations,
so our nurses are a vital.
Roll, they play a vital role in
our educational system at every
level. So House Bill 195
establishes a three-tiered
school nurse licensure system
that Meares would already exist
for public school teachers. Uh,
the bill outlines the criteria
needed for school nurses to
receive level 12, and 3
licenses, and it's based on the
standard structures existing in
the nursing profession as well
as our.
A school structure.
It establishes the same minimum
salaries as teachers, the
appropriate license level, and
it includes national board
certification for nurses as an
itemized program, uh, within the
level 3 structure.
Um
I think what's important, it
just brings clarity. There are
schools throughout the state,
districts throughout the state
that actually already meet these
salary structures out of their
own funding mechanisms this
clarifies it and makes the
structure within the system.
Um, and so with that I'd like to
have my expert witness, Joshua
Landry, at a few words.
Good morning, Mr. Chair Rome
um
distinguished board members.
Joshua Landry, National Board
certified school nurse with the
Alamogordo Public Schools.
I'm on a full-time basis there.
I'm also at the New Mexico
School for the Blind and
Visually Impaired. I've been on
a part-time.
As needed basis there working
evenings, weekends and summers.
I've worked on both districts
since 2012. In addition to these
roles, I've been advocating for
student health.
And school nurses.
In various capacities in New
Mexico, school nurses
Association since 2017.
Most recently, as the NMS in a
chair, legislative chair.
I'm here today asking for the
advancement.
House Bill 195, the school nurse
salary tiers and minimums bill?
Currently our professional
colleagues and school nurses of
school teachers, sorry.
School counselors.
And
Administrators are all on a uh.
written into state statute.
From a shared pass bill to be on
a three-tiered salary schedule.
it's level one being at 50,000.
Level 2 it's 60,000 and level 3
it's 70,000.
School nurses currently.
have a three-tiered licensure
system with New Mexico Ped.
Uh
But have no statute regulating a
minimum pay level for these
tiers.
SNA uh conducted a survey in
October of 2024 asking school
nurses from across the state.
If they're on a three-tiered
system for pay.
If they receive compensation or
recognition for a national board
certification.
Uh, like the annual stipend.
Uh or advancement in tears that
teachers in New Mexico currently
receive.
The survey identified that all
of the largest districts.
my document.
My apologies. The survey
identified that the largest
districts in the state are on a
three-tiered pay scale similar
to or exactly the same as
teachers in their district.
Several districts in the state,
including Alamogordo,
Albuquerque, Las Cruces,
Gadsden, Santa Fe.
Identify that they are given an
annual stipend.
Uh, advance to a next tier in
pay or both for that national
board certification.
Some districts have identified
that they are.
On no three-tier system at all?
Are paid hourly
We paid at a lower rate than
teacher, uh, the teacher pay
schedule.
NMSA supports this bill in the
hope to create parity and pain
for all school nurses across the
state.
in order to retain the school
nurses that we have.
And a highly competitive nursing
healthcare market.
began to attract professional
school nurses from other states.
To our own to ensure that
students are receiving.
High quality physical and mental
health care.
which has proven to improve
attendance outcomes for
students.
School nurses perform so many
vital tasks for our students.
From emergency management daily
chronic pair of diabetes,
seizures.
tube feedings.
Medication management
individualized health plan
development.
504 and IEP accommodation
planning.
Reintegration team involvement
for students returning.
Inpatient mental health care.
And this is just to name a few.
And I'm going to also add that
these are all billable events
under Medicaid expansion.
Uh, for districts and that
increases district funding.
Thank you for your opportunity
for letting me to speak on this
bill.
The amendment, yes, the
amendment, uh, does everybody
have it,
do we all have it?
OK or should be in the hand.
sent out on Friday.
OK.
OK, thank you.
Confirmation that we do.
All right, is there a motion to
discuss the amendment?
All right. Thank you. Also,
I
I represent
representative,
On the amendment, yes, OK, so
the amendment on page 87, the
amendment strikes the word or.
And line 8, line 10, it strikes.
Uh, the word and that's it.
It's just
To grammatical corrections.
Directions, any implications of
this grammatical.
Or
000 and.
Well, not remove the end.
And
Charomero, uh, the intention of
changing that to an end to just
ensure that the level 3
licensure.
Uh, requires a high level of
education.
Either the NCSN, the National
Board certification.
Or a post-baccalaureate degree?
As it would read presently, it
would allow an associate degree
or bachelor's degree nurse to
advance to that level 3 without
those.
educational requirements.
Great. Thank you. Questions from
committee about the event.
Representative Vincent, please.
It's just the amendment.
OK. We got your name on the list
already.
Right.
No questions. Is there a motion
on the amendment?
Mr.
I move that we adopt the member,
right.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment by Representative
Blata, seconded by
Representrola.
Any opposition to adopting the
amendment.
A
We have an amended bill. We're
back on the bill. Are you all
done with the presentation?
Yes, and with that we stand for
questions Mr. Chair.
Cool. Thank you all so much. So
we'll go to our folks on Zoom.
So if you're in support of House
Bill 195, please indicate by
raising your hand.
folks on Zoom. I'll let that
populate. So on my left hand
side this time, are there folks
in the audience that wish to
speak in support of House Bill
195.
right? So ma'am, in the front,
you'll have up to 2 minutes.
Microphone.
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Representative
Representative Romero and
members of the committee.
My name is Lynn Wheeler. I'm the
director of nursing for
Riarentia Public Schools.
I support House Bill 195 because
it promotes national
certification.
Nurses that are nationally
certified demonstrate nursing
excellence and competence, which
translates to better care for
students, such as the students
in this room.
I also support House Bill 195
because it increases nursing
salaries across the state,
making the salaries more
competitive with hospital
salaries.
As a director of nursing, it is
not uncommon for some for me to
recommend someone for hire, only
to have them turn it down,
because they can make more money
in the hospital.
Hope 195 with increased
salaries, which could support
recruitment and retention of
school nurses. Thank you.
Great. Thank you.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes. Good morning, Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Myrna Barbie Lee. I'm
the nursing supervisor for Santa
Fe Public schools, and we are
one of the districts that is
already implementing a program
very similar to this with the
three tiers, recognizing the
national certification and
giving a stipend for it, and I
can um just speak to everyone
here and let you know that um
this has helped our recruitment
retention efforts. Um, we are
fully staffed at this time. We
don't have a lot.
a nursing vacancies, um, like we
did previously, and I think it
is in part due to um the pay
parity that is more similar to
other nursing set. Thank you.
Next
have up to 2 minutes. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gloria
Doherty. I am a nurse
practitioner and a nurse for
longer than I care to admit.
I am here on behalf of the New
Mexico Nursing Association and
the New Mexico nurse
practitioner Council, who stand
in support of this bill.
Certification means extra
education, more skills, and
proving competency through
passing of that certification,
which can only relate to taking
better care of our students.
And on a personal note, it's why
I became a nurse, my school
nurse growing up, I was a sick
kid, always in the nurse's
office and the compassion and
empathy that she showed me was
amazing. For my children's
school nurses helped with
finding behavioral health when
they had a loss of a schoolmate
suicide, and another one with an
accident.
So I really urge you to support
this so we can recruit and ret
return nurse recruit and retain
nurses to our schools as they
raise our future. Thank you.
Thank you.
Please welcome. Good morning,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, John Dich with AFT
New Mexico. Um, we stand, uh, in
support of this measure, largely
because we believe nurses are a
critical part of our schools,
uh, ecosystem. Nurses are
critical as our teachers and all
the other folks that make our
schools run. And in addition,
you know, we represent many of
the districts that have already
done this locally with
discretionary budgeting with the
ability to bargain that into
their contracts, but we see this
bill as an opportunity for maybe
smaller districts, more rural
districts that don't.
Have the ability to pay the
differential to recruit away
from better pay at a hospital or
in the private practice and we
want to see nurses in schools.
So we are standing in support of
this legislation. Thank you.
Great, thank you.
books on my right hand side that
was speaking sport, right, if
you would please line up.
You wish to speak in support of
House Bill 195.
Please
Ma'am, welcome. You have up to 2
minutes. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Lily May Ortiz,
representing the New Mexico
School Board Association and the
school board association
supports school-based health
centers and they support student
safety and nurses in our schools
make our students safe. We
support, uh, also increasing the
school based health centers and
also increasing the numbers of
nurses. Well, we support the
concept of this bill, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, we requested an
appropriation be attached as
identified.
in the LASC and analysis so that
it can become a funded expense.
Right now there is no
appropriation and the cost
estimate and the LESC analysis
ranges uh cost of 467,000 to 1.3
million to implement if not
funded, the monies and this bill
passes, the monies will have to
come from somewhere else in the
budget. We support the concept.
We ask the, uh, we thank the
sponsor for submitting that we
do ask for consideration on
appropriation. Thank you.
Thank you. Please, sir, you have
up to 2 minutes, Mr. Chairman,
stand rounds for the school
superintendents and the
coalition of Educational
Leaders, we stand in support of
this bill as Lily May already
pointed out our one reservation
is this is not in anybody's
spreadsheet as we look at
current appropriations Act.
To make this viable to make this
happen, to assure the purpose of
this occurs.
It requires funding and so we
ask that you are sure that that
happens. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Others I wish
to be sport in the room.
Right.
Doesn't look like it. So we'll
go to
folks on Zoom, so Elizabeth.
Good morning, Elizabeth, you
have up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Great. Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Chairman Romero and the members
of the committee. My name is
Elizabeth Dixon. I'm faculty at
the University of New Mexico.
I'm a registered nurse, a former
school nurse, and I work closely
with the New Mexico School
nurses Association. I'm speaking
in support of House Bill 195. As
previous speakers have
mentioned, while not all schools
have school nurses, all students
need a school nurse in their
school as the only healthcare
provider in the school space,
school nurses provide a diverse
level of healthcare to students
with
a wide range of health issues.
School communities need school
nurses. Educators and
administrators are concerned
about chronic absenteeism and
evidence has demonstrated that
the presence of a school nurse
can significantly reduce
absenteeism rates. Communities
need school nurses. School
nurses are often, as I said, the
only health care provider is
students, and they are key to
linking students to other
resources, as we saw during the
pandemic school nurses were
responsible for implementing
constantly changing public.
He orders. Finally, this is a
workforce issue, as others have
said, and as many of you are
aware, the state of New Mexico
and the country is in the middle
of a severe nursing shortage
that is hitting our rural
communities more harshly. This
shortage is not predicted to end
anytime soon. We need the
support for school nurses to
recruit and retain the best
nurses school districts can
hire. School nurses make on
average $33,000 less each year
than their registered nurse
counterparts in clinical
settings.
Finally, as a parent of children
whose physical health was quite
literally saved because of their
school nurse. I ask you to
support this legislation. This
is long overdue, and our kids
deserve nothing less. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right.
So we will go to opposition. Is
there anybody in the room or on
Zoom that is an opposition to
House Bill 195.
All right. Doesn't look like it.
So we'll go to committee
represent Vincent. Now's your
opportunity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters.
And uh representative.
Some of the questions I had was,
so I understand or I'm starting
to understand the tier 1, tier
2, and tier 3 teachers.
And you mentioned you briefly
mentioned about the tier 12, and
3 nurses.
Would you briefly explain what a
tier one, a tier 2 and a tier 3
nurse looks like.
Mr. Chair.
And of my expert witness talk
about it, it's, it's also listed
in the bill itself.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Vincent.
Um, so a tier one ped licensed
school nurse presently is an
associate degree nurse.
Um, tier 2 is a bachelor's
degree.
And uh tier 3 is a
Master's degree or in leadership
position. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And you've mentioned that school
nurses work with emergency
management, local emergency
management, how so, so for
myself at my local school, I'm
on the emergency, uh, like
disaster preparedness committee,
um, and so I bring to that like
the medical expertise and how we
would plan for like a mass
casualty event.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, the school nurses
work under medical supervision
or medical direction, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Vincent, uh, so presently we do
work under um.
Guidelines from the state
And then we
Have work under the Department
of Health.
Under the um
The doctor in charge of uh
Department of Health.
our region.
OK, so you're actually working
for the state.
Medical direction, not any local
medical direction.
Uh, Madam
Mr. Chair, representative also
districts have, uh, their
nursing supervisors of which I
think you heard from 4 of them.
So there's within the district
or the charter school system.
There's also supervisors.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative.
So I have a
And now I'm a Gordo. I work
under a
Health Services director.
Um, for the public schools.
But our medical guidelines are
stipulated as I stated
previously.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and just
so I can understand that your
medical direction is gonna be
coming from the state and not at
the local level.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And then, um, also another
question I had was
Do nurses or do they work in the
schools as standalone or do they
work under school-based health.
Sinners.
Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent.
Um
So a school-based health center
is something different, um,
that's where we have a
practitioner, um, maybe a nurse
practitioner.
That is running their clinic
within the school.
Uh, school nurses, we work.
Within the
Our district
Um, under the guidance of our.
Director for school
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the time and I appreciate
the question, the answers.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
couple of clarifying questions.
So this is basically doing um
two things one, creating that
national boards for um
certification for school nurses
and then the other is creating
that salary, uh, scaling,
correct?
Chairs representative, uh,
Miral.
Correct
Thank you. Um, I really like
this. I, I, I appreciate our
school nurses. I actually used
to work before I became a
teacher at Belen High School. I
was the secretary for our
district nurse, so I, I got to,
I got to deal with all of the
school nurses and buy all of
their supplies and, and so that
I I really got to see a lot of
this, not to mention in science,
um, as you said, um, I think my,
my neighbor, this is the reason
why I don't teach chemistry
cause things don't blow up in
physics, um, so that's why I, I
like physics, but
ist ry there was a one gentleman
that set fire to his hand, uh
last uh last year, so I was
like, nope, I'll take math is
not dangerous, OK? Uh, so, so
I'm good with that. So I
definitely appreciate this. My
other question, um, Mr. Chair.
Is, um, you're in here and, and
you say that it should be the
same as the the tears with the
with the teachers, so that means
if we um raise the teacher's
tears, these in turn will be
tied to it and they would raise
also, correct?
Mr. Charon and Representative,
yes. OK, perfect. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Don't have anybody else on my
list.
Oh, Torres Vasquez.
Please turn on your microphone.
You don't already.
I, I really need a little help
with the financial piece, um, I
love the concept that you're
talking about and when I started
teaching, we had a nurse at
every school.
And then all of a sudden,
anybody that could put on a
band-aid was called the nurse,
and because of funding,
And we really do need nurses in
our schools for all the reasons
that you mentioned.
Um, what I need some help
understanding is the piece that
was brought up by the LESC in
terms of the money that would be
needed.
Um, in order to operate.
pieces of this, and so with the
fiscal impact, there's a number
of 650,000 that would be needed.
Can you help me understand.
What that money would do.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
I'm gonna ask LASC Director John
Cena to um.
Speak briefly about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
representative Tomas Velasquez.
So, uh, the way that we usually
estimate these kinds of things
is we try to get as much data as
we can from PED in school
districts, figure out what,
essentially what average
salaries are for these kinds of
folks, and estimate what it
would cost.
To bring them to those minimum
levels if they weren't already
making them. So,
We had to make some pretty,
pretty heavy assumptions in this
analysis just because we don't
have really accurate data.
school nurse salaries.
Um
But that's where that number
comes from is trying to make
sure that
If there are folks
Assuming if there are folks
below these levels, what it
would take to get them.
And so you, that's why you see a
pretty big range, I think it's
650 to a little over a million.
Because we just don't have that
accurate data to be able to get
a little bit closer to that
actual number.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters, um, so, um, I'm
wondering, would that mean that
then the districts would absorb
the cost of those races.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
and I think you heard from one
nurse today from Santa Fe Public
schools where folks are are
making those local decisions
using their own operational
funds. I will add that um
without knowing the specifics
from district to district.
That
school nursing services are also
Medicaid billable in some cases,
and so that also adds to the
complexity of how the state
tries to fund.
these positions because it's not
strictly state funding that
contributes to how we pay some
of these folks.
Thank you, and Mister Chair and
presenters. I'm, I'm curious,
and, and you may have mentioned
this and I missed it in the
introduction, um, but there was
a, there was a point where, um,
nurses, we had so few nurses in
our schools. I'm wondering, um,
do all of our schools have
nurses now? What would it take
to get to that point and what do
you think that this might
Increase, um,
The, the hiring of nurses.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
gonna ask our expert to
Um, talk about that, but as you
heard from the nursing
supervisors, this makes a
powerful case in competition. I
know at my elementary school, we
had a terrific, um.
The nurse who doubled her salary
when she went to work at UNMH.
So this is an attractive thing
of parody and equity across the
state.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Torres Vasquez.
Um
So in the report, um.
Here on the legislative.
Education Study Committee bill
analysis.
Um, it does indicate that
currently in New Mexico 27% of
school districts in New Mexico
do not have a school nurse.
Um
But I do know the largest school
districts in the state.
Or
Because of the competitive pay.
And the incentives that they're
offering for board
certification.
are close to or fully staffed.
Um, Almogordo, for example, is
fully staffed. uh, we did have
somebody that's transitioning
out but we're currently hiring
for that position.
And that's with uh 17 school
nurses.
Uh, Las Cruces public schools as
well, um.
Because of the incentives
they're offering.
are very close to fully staffed.
Santa Fe Public schools, for
example, had mentioned that they
are also very close or fully
staffed at this time.
Um, and so I think.
The biggest issue
is in the rural communities
where we're lacking the school
nurses because of the
competitive pay.
And Mr. Chair, if I may ask one
more question. Um,
I, I guess, um, all of that
sounds wonderful. I completely
understand it, um.
How, what can we do to keep this
from being an unfounded.
Chair and Representative, thank
you for.
Always a good question.
I think it's important to
realize that schools and
districts have been coming up
with discretionary money.
We also have to look deeper into
the Medicaid.
Uh, reimbursement.
And so that will be an ongoing
point to see what we don't
actually know the true cost.
Uh, so that will have to be
studied.
And one more, Mr. Chair, I'm
sorry. Um, do school districts
budget for nurses, and they just
don't get hired or is there, are
there funds in the districts
where this type of
Uh, I can speak from experience
from my own district. We do make
funding available for that.
I couldn't speak to the.
smaller communities.
I bought Mr. Chair and
representatives.
Resume call.
Mr.
I did have um a question in
reference to um.
Management or coming up with the
the.
Qualifications for each level.
It is actually directed to head.
OK
Board of nursing or department.
There are reasonable
Um
In that
Um, profession
I've been, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Cullen, I've been
in communication with Ashley
Garcia. She's with New Mexico
Ped and she's responsible for uh
the health services and
Medicaid.
Um
I'd asked them about the tiered
system that was set up, um.
And how they established the
different tiers and they had
just said it was guidance to
allow the local districts to
determine pay levels.
Um, Mr. um.
So when will this go into
effect?
Yeah.
Mr. Chair and representative
would go into effect 90 days
after it's signed, is that
correct?
OK
Um, and also, um,
Uh, my concerns also.
Stated earlier is that
I've had to do
Years and it's really costly and
very hard.
Yeah.
Um
You're having to take from
somebody else.
The programs to be able to.
So that is my.
This is that we don't.
You represent Vincent for a
quick follow up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, your
gentlemen, for letting me have
one more try.
So, one question that I had was
so for for a nurse that's a tier
1, tier 2, tier 3, and we have
nurses in the hospitals and just
say there's a 6 to 1 ratio and
they're dealing with cardiac
monitors and and drip machines
and all kinds of stuff. How do
we ensure that we keep our
school nurses up to that
standard, Mister Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent.
Yeah
So by implementing the NBCSN,
the national certification.
That ensures that uh nurses are
at that high standard of
education and practice.
Also, uh, by promoting a level 3
with that post-baccalaureate
degree.
Um
That gives the incentive for an
associate degree or BSN nurse to
try to advance to those levels
of skill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, just to
comment and I hope, I hope this
resonates with the nurses in the
room.
You know, I know that our, our
hospitals are struggling
sometimes for nurses.
Is, is there any way we could
ever borrow one.
Drama school, if we needed one
in a local community, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and representative
Vincent, uh, during the
pandemic, uh, in Alamogordo, we
stepped up and helped with the
Department of Health and all of
the screening, vaccines, things
of that nature, uh, to be of
aid, you know, to our community.
Um, additionally, um,
I work additional jobs, right?
So I'm working at the New Mexico
School for the Blind and
visually impaired. I know it's
another school district.
Many of uh
My colleagues in nursing also
work at nursing homes or
hospitals.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Appreciate
the question. I mean the answer.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for this, um.
This is sparked a question for
me. Do you know more or less the
ratio of nurses schools average
in our
state district.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Um
So the National Association of
School Nurses, um, which is our
national organization, uh, has a
recommendation of one nurse to
every 750 students.
Um
But with the current analysis,
uh,
I saw that number when I was
reading over this. I apologize.
I'm I'm trying to track it down
for you thank you.
what I had seen that New Mexico
is a little above that, um.
I'm trying to find that number
And I think Mr. She panel I
think they give us an idea and
that's what was what was my
point. We have been in school
and we see one nurse with 750
kids, of course, the 750 kids
are not gonna need it, but it's
more than once at a time, so,
uh, when I ask us to go to the
to the nurse's office, Mr.
Chair, we know it's gonna
probably stay the rest of the
day the rest of the class.
Because of that lack of, I mean,
it's it's limited, that's what
I'm trying to say, 11 nurse for
10 for 750 students is it's a
huge ratio. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Chen representative,
I'll add that many schools have
an uh EA who is not.
Actually, a nurse and often not
a CNA.
Yeah
And he ate, Mr. Chair and
Representative, if I could add
to that, um, yeah, so in
Alamogordo and many districts
across the street we have what
are health assistants, um, and
they go through uh New Mexico
PE, um, and they get a
Certification to be that health
assistant.
They go through a two-day
training. It used to be in
person, now it's online, um, to
prepare them to assist us.
Uh, and then the nurse is the
immediate supervisor to that
health assistant within the
school, um.
Should they be in the same
school together?
You in Sheffield.
Thanks Chris.
They laid on this question.
It
Harlem School
Locally, I, I have 6 counties,
so I'm not talking about my
whole district, but the one
where I live.
Two of them share a nurse.
She's highly qualified.
life
Uh
He decides to retire. I don't
think there is anybody. We can't
get a nurse.
Does this bill requires to have
a nurse? Is it, I mean, because
there's nobody lives there that
is a nurse.
Uh
Does it prevents sharing and
does it
Wire
First
Lastly
Does it change the funding
formula or formula uh chair and
Representative Chaffield, uh, so
it does not require that a
school have a school nurse.
We're hoping that with this
bill, you're, we're able to
track the nurse to that area for
you, um,
the
That financial incentive would
be there. Thank you. My hope is
the same.
Thank you. Um.
So
I guess part of the concern that
was raised, like the previous
bill was about funding how, I
guess I'll ask the question now,
right? I how comfortable
you
That's correct.
Or
Um
rather look for
An appropriation for it.
Your chair, it sounds like we
need to work on an appropriation
and appropriations.
For this bill.
And so, as you know, vice chair,
we try to pass these bills out
as cleanly as possible with a
funding mechanism attached to it
like we did for the previous
bill. So if that's the route
we're gonna go, I think it would
be best to get with the LESC
folks to.
Um, come up with
an appropriate cost estimate.
bill if we
We're gonna go that route
I felt that that was gonna be
coming.
So, we will um work very
immediately.
with ISC and come back as
immediately as possible.
roll over day apparently.
All right. Cool.
Thank you. Thank you. So we all
House Bill 195.
An amendment.
House Bill 260.
Good morning.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
committee.
I
60 I mean law to clearly define
what restrain and theclusion
ball is and is not. People also
the requirements for school
safety plans, training
requirements for educators and
reporting for both for schools
to be.
And the parents, um, how 260
came from a memorial from the
Senate.
To, um
The what is allowed in your
school to do um.
You have it in schools,
classrooms.
Some things we are wondering,
can we do this? Can we stop a
fight? Can we intervene here.
I'm not getting into trouble.
And also when we read along
there's something that um
And update it needed to be
updated, so hopefully this house
bill, I will clean up the
language, to feel more um.
Safe in our work with the
students and the students will
be in a safer place also, and
with me is me Andres, who is a
senior policy analyst for LUC
and she was part of the working
group, uh, that developed this.
As representative Roa mentioned
working group, um, led by the
develop this bill is LESC
endorsed.
And it recognizes that restraint
and seclusion disproportionately
impact students with this group
in the Martinez Dasi lawsuit.
More clearly defining restraint
and seclusion and reducing the
harmful impacts of improper use
of restraint seclusion.
help keep all students and staff
safe.
In addition, research shows in
order to maximize learning.
Mentioned this bill arose from a
working group facilitated by the
developmental disabilities
Council and numerous
stakeholders, including school
board members, superintendents,
administrators,
Ss, parents, advocates, and LESC
and PD staff were included.
The working group met for a year
and a half.
draft a report and this bill
arose from that report.
Provide a little bit of national
context.
Despite, despite widespread use,
the US Department of Education
reports, there is no evidence
that restraint or seclusion is
effective in reducing the
occurrence of problem behaviors.
Data from the Federal Office of
Civil Rights at higher rates
than the general education peers
in the 20202021 school year.
Even though students with
disabilities made up 17% of the
population. They comprised 58%.
On January 8th.
2025.
Former US Department of
Education Secretary Cardona sent
a letter stressing that the use
of restraint and seclusion
practices is inconsistent with
our shared goal to ensure every
child is treated with dignity
and free from abuse.
And commended states and
districts that prohibited the
use of seclusion and limited the
use of restraint in schools.
The latter encouraged training,
educators and evidence-based
positive behavioral support
alternatives that support
students and prevent the need.
Which this bill does through its
training requirements.
In this bill, as representative
Broa mentioned, it more clearly
defines or strengthens
seclusions and other terms in
response to comments from the
working group.
As an example,
As current law stands, staff
indicated that they were afraid
to intervene when a student was
running into traffic, for
example.
For fear this could be seen as
restraint, and the proposed bill
clarifies that staff can touch
or hold the student's hand,
wrist, arm, shoulder, or back.
induce an eloping student to
walk to a safe location.
Physical restraints would
continue to be allowed if and
less restrictive interventions
are not working.
But chemical restraint,
mechanical restraint, and prone
restraint would be prohibited
under house Bill 260.
seclusion without continuous
line of sight supervision would
also be prohibited.
Definitions, such as time out,
which is not seclusion or
clarified to keep.
The bill also amends existing
law regarding school safety
plans to ensure plans address
supports and strategies to
successfully reintegrate a
student who has been physically
restrained back into.
the classroom.
The bill clarifies existing
training required and at least
one designated school employee
at each school.
Finally, the bill clarifies
reporting requirements on the
use of physical restraint.
Including reporting to ensure
PED has accurate data on the use
of physical restraint, and
parents are uniformly notified.
child is restrained.
And with that, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
by
questions.
Did you hear something?
Thank you. And that's all we'll
add that we start the questions.
All right.
Thank you. All right. So we'll
go to.
first, so we'll change things up
a little bit. Is there
opposition on
to your house Bill 260. If so,
please indicate or raising your
hand.
Good folks in the room as your
opposition to house Bill 260.
Right, sir, you have 2 minutes
once you get to the microphone.
Chairman Stan roused with the
superintendent who sat on this
committee.
We provided input
2 times restraint and elopement.
They're really important because
words matter.
And how we design statute
matters as a backdrop.
4 years ago, we worked on this
issue for 4 years to get today's
statute that's in place.
We are superintendents are still
interested and concerned about
making sure we did.
is safe. However,
Prone restraint.
is one of the issues that we
have a concern about the way it
is in this.
Because in the event of a
student in high tension.
Acting out
It appears that there's little
give for the use of that, that
kind of restraint that you find
yourself in.
On a CPI, I was a CPI uh
certified individual.
A lot of times I've been stomach
down with the, with the student
having to set them up, which is
where you want to restrain him.
Mr. Chairman, elopement, which
we believe we've made good
progress on this still an issue,
and I just want to get as a
runner.
And runs off campus and goes
out.
the first instance is how to
keep them safe.
And in that regard we're not
certain that the way this is
defined gets us quite home, so
his chairman, we recommend you
pass this, but you put a new
date on it and relative to July
of 26.
And allow us this next interim
to go through and tease out.
Those kinds of issues that may
not quite be ready for prime
time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Is there any
other opposition in the room?
To House Bill 2160.
Right. So we'll go to support
for hospital 260, so folks on
Zoom, if you're here with us to
join in support of
260, please indicate by raising
your hand.
That populate and
folks in the room
on my left hand side of the
folks in the room that wish we
support possibility.
Right, you folks would start
lining up, please, at the
microphone, and if anybody on my
right hand side that was just
picking support.
OK.
These line up a good number of
folks, if you would, please be
brief.
All right.
Good morning. Good morning,
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Whitney
Holland, president of AFT New
Mexico. I stand in strong
support of this bill because it
supports the vision I have for
our public schools, that all of
our students, including,
including those with complex
needs feel safe and supported.
Students can't learn if they
don't have their most basic
needs met, and Maslow's
hierarchy tells us that means
feeling safe and secure. We can
and must prioritize training,
modern best practices, and
culturally responsive work in
our school cultures. Thank you.
Thank you, please, you have 2
minutes. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alice
Lee McCoy. I'm the executive
director of the Developmental
Disabilities Council. We have
programs ranging from the
special education oned program,
um, all the way through adult
guardianship. So we see
New Mexicans living with
disabilities from birth all the
way to end of life, and we can
say that.
When
Students experience restraint
seclusion in schools. It affects
them for their entire lives.
The trauma that they themselves
and their families go through,
it stays with them and it
how successful they are.
And so
In this work group, uh, you
know, we
very
We were very um
Interested to see, um, when we
brought all different voices
together, special education
directors, um, assistant
superintendents family.
Teachers,
everybody together. What kind of
conversation we could have in
this group. We did have a very
comprehensive conversation, and
we tried to address everybody's
needs in this work group. So I
hope Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
that you will
But for this.
We put a lot of work into it, 2
years. Thank you.
Thank you.
2 minutes.
Good Morning, Mr. Chair and
Committee. My name is Doctor
Margaret Cage, deputy secretary
of the Office of Special
Education at the public
education department.
I strongly support House Bill,
um,
260 because it prioritizes the
safety and well-being of
students, especially those with
disabilities and behavioral
challenges, and it also supports
and protects our educators. This
bill takes the necessary steps,
um, in limiting the use of
restraint and ban banning
harmful practices like seclusion
that contributes to the trauma
that our students and educators
alike often um seem to share.
We know that outdated
disciplinary measures,
disproportionately affect our
vulnerable students, often
escalating situations rather
than de-escalating them.
Every child deserves to learn in
an environment where they feel
safe and supported.
This bill is not just about
changing practices. It's about
protecting students, empowering
our educators with better
technical assistance, support
and training and fostering the
school culture built on respect
and understanding. I urge you to
support HB 260. Thank you.
Thank you.
2 minutes.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Loretta Trujillo and I'm
the executive director with
Transported in Mexico and we are
um here to speak on behalf of
the Yasi Martinez lawsuit and
want express appreciation for
bringing this bill or yeah this
effort forward. I think it
highlights the power of
collaboration, um.
The involvement of a study
group, uh, stakeholders meaning
and putting this into a bill
that does some very good things,
specifically what we appreciate.
Is that it
Uh, would only be allowed when a
student's behavior presents an
imminent danger of serious
physical harm.
And also uh involves increasing
training opportunities
specifically for Amen, which I
think is important.
So I wanted to speak on behalf
of students with disabilities,
uh, we support this effort.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hold on 2 minutes. Good morning.
Chair Romero and
representatives. My name is
Michelle Trigembo. I'm the
special educationaled for the
state of New.
I do work for the developmental
disabilities council and did sit
on the working group.
Uh
discussing uh supporting both
children.
Families and staff at schools to
create a better understanding of
restraint when to use it, when
not.
To use it and to ensure that our
working group
intentional conversations with
families and staff from upper
upper levels all the way to
teachers, um.
Educational assistance about how
to create a supportive and safe
environment for children.
Uh
Restraint and and seclusion can
be very traumatic for these
children.
And again, our yearlong study,
uh,
brought more clarity to how to
ensure, uh, again, safety for
children and
2 minutes.
members of the committee, excuse
me. Thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
260. I'm Carly Mortenson, a
parent advocate of 3 children in
special education from McKinley
County.
I shared in Mexico IDEA special
education advisory panel.
Panel supports this bill.
A belief key improvements are
necessary, particularly
regarding the training
component.
In December, the panel gave
policy recommendations to the
Office of Special Education,
mainly on restraint and
seclusion and supported the
Senate Memorial of 68 working
group recommendations.
We appreciate the bill
director's efforts to address
those policy recommendations.
Or we appreciate the inclusion
of less restricted
interventions, positive behavior
supports, and de-escalation, and
that the required training
includes elements of modeling.
practice. We're concerned that
the bill places too much
emphasis on physical restraint
techniques.
This approach risks undermining
the goal of preventing restraint
altogether.
We strongly urge the use of
evidence-based behavioral
training.
Emphasizing practical trauma
informed strategies such as
addressing antecedents,
modifying the environment.
Teaching replacement behaviors
and fostering a positive school
culture.
Additionally, trains should be
tiered based on personnel roles
and include ongoing technical
assistance, modeling, and
coaching, particularly for.
To ensure capacity for SEA
oversight and guidance to
support such a shift, we
recommend that PED dedicate a
full-time employee to oversee
and implement this critical
training statewide.
We urge the committee to
strengthen the language to
prioritize prevention and equip
educators with the tools
necessary to reduce reliance on
restraint and exclusionary
practices.
Chair and members of the
committee. The panel is, of
course, happy to provide
additional input on this and any
other issues. Thank you.
Thank you.
Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes. Thank you.
Good morning, Chair, committee
members. I'm Laurel Nesbitt, an
attorney with disability rights
in New Mexico, and I speak today
on behalf of DR&M. I also served
on the working group, though I
do not represent that group
today with my comments.
DRMs generally supports the
bill, which makes strong efforts
to respond to recommendations of
the working group and others,
but we also have very serious
concerns about certain elements
which require amendment.
First, the elimination of
seclusion is a much needed
improvement which aligns with US
Department of Justice efforts in
recent years.
In defining seclusion, the bill
appropriately focuses on focuses
on involuntary confinement that
creates a very problematic
exception by including the
language and without continuous
line of sight supervision.
That language should be
stricken. If a child is alone in
a locked room or a room they
believe they cannot leave, being
watched through a door window by
an adult that is still
seclusion.
And because the bill no longer
requires documentation and
reporting of seclusion, neither
the family nor PED would know
what happened.
There should also be language
clarifying that periods of time
out should be brief, and timeout
does not necessarily occur
outside the classroom.
On reporting and monitoring,
unlike our state's rule on
restraint.
There is nothing in this bill
that addresses school district's
data reporting obligations, and
the PED's obligation to monitor
the use of restraint by
districts. That section needs to
be included here.
Also, the definition of physical
escort should specify that the
touching or holding is
non-forceful or without force.
uh, also in terms of the
elopement, which was really a
big topic of conversation in
our, in our working group.
We feel that may cause confusion
and more uh more frequent
restraints because that's
included in the core legal
standard.
Only elopement which already
meets the other two elements of
the standard justifies the use
of restraint. So Section C3 is
extraneous. We agree elopement
should be defined and
specifically addressed. Those 2
minutes. Thank you so much.
Thank you, chair and members.
All right. Welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
coalition and as you've heard,
um, students with disabilities
are disproportionately subjected
to these disciplinary um
practices so we have a very
strong interest in this bill,
um.
It became clear in the time
since the legislature enacted
the law governing the use of
restraints and seclusions that
we need to revisit that law and
make some clarifications and
strengthenings to it. Um, one of
those needs is in the area of
further clarification on when
these practices can be used and
when they cannot be used and
exactly what they are. And that
became very clear when the work
group presented its findings to
the LESC last summer.
It became really clear that the
schools, the teachers, the
parents all agreed there was a
need for further action in this
area to clarify what was and was
not permissible, and if I'm
remembering correctly, Mr.
Chair, you were one of the
people who expressed that. So I
think we have general agreement
that this needs further
clarification, and we support
these efforts to do so. The
other area which really needs
strengthening is the reporting
both because the state needs
better data in order to act in
this.
area and to monitor what's going
on and also because parents need
to be kept informed of what's
happening. When you look at the
reporting at PED, you would
think there were virtually no
instances of restraint or
seclusion happening, and yet
parents report to us all the
time that this has happened.
These are traumatic experiences
we need to really address their
use, and I urge the committee's
support for the bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. So we have
folks online.
We have admin.
Which may not be.
But if you would, please state
your name.
Admin, you have up to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Vice Chair.
My name is Nat Dean. I'm
apologize that I can't seem to
change the presentation of my
name. I am a person with
disabilities and I am a
disability advocate, but I want
to bring the lens of not just
disability but for any person
with or without a disability,
that when we model appropriate
interactions when presented with
difficult or challenging
behaviors, we learn how to
address
difficult or challenging
behaviors. When children witness
or young adults witness
behaviors to control undesirable
actions. Those actions and
become the learned experience
that we use to address
Difficult situations.
And then we learned that and we
model that as adults. It is
difficult when I am brought into
a case.
To help.
A family who has elected to
attempt to purchase a
straitjacket to confine their
Adult
Who may or may not be disabled
as a mechanism to control them
when they have done physical
assault to try to control them,
and that is learned experience
that a parent may bring to a
child or an adult child.
As the only thing that they
understood as a way to deal with
difficult behaviors. So I try to
look at this through a broad
lens, and I support this bill,
House Bill 260, because I
support any way that we can
teach better, more kind, and
more appropriate, um, responding
behaviors to difficult
situations, I think that we're
building a safer and stronger
community overall. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee
sponsors, and advocates.
Great. Thank you so much. All
right.
Uh, Krista
Good morning, Christa. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Krista Coolidge. I am a special
education administrator with Las
Cruces Public schools, and the
former special education
director for Farmington Public
Schools and Aztec public
schools. Um, I was also a member
of the working group, um, for
the Senate Memorial, and, and
the past president of New Mexico
Council for Administrators of
Special Education, as well as an
IDEA panel member. However, I
speak
today on my own behalf, um, I do
support this bill. I believe it
provides a significant
clarification around restraint,
which is absolutely necessary as
a special ed director, I have
witnessed schools be afraid to
actually touch children and keep
them out of danger for fear of
getting in trouble and being
quote unquote restraining the
child when in when in fact
they're they're trying to
support the child. Um,
I also know that restraining a
child is traumatic for the
child. It's also traumatic for
the adults involved. And so
again, providing this
clarification, I think we'll
Give schools a much better
guidance around what is
restraint and what it is not, as
well as really kind of
clarifying the expectation
around training. Thank you very
much.
Thank you so much.
Right, so I don't have anybody
else on the list or in the
audience or represent. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
For those of you that have
been here for a while, you know,
that I serve for.
4 years
Treatment foster parent.
Uh, treatment, foster parents,
in kids that.
Serious, serious.
Behavioral problems.
And uh
I
Also was certified in CPI.
extensive training on
was safely put a hold on a
child.
And when to safely put a whole
lot of child.
And we also underwent uh
Long-term training on
de-escalation, exactly what
position to stand in.
What to say, how to act.
Uh where to look.
I can tell you it also works
with adults.
Um
I needed it probably.
It it's great training.
My, my concern is this.
The key words that I heard when
folks, uh
Stood up to
to.
Speak in favor of this bill.
was
All of our students.
All of our
Oliver O of our students are not
the perfect.
Some of our
Some of our students are the
victim.
And I, I fear that we oftentimes
Prioritize the rights of
The perpetrators
To the point that the victims
can't get an education.
My daughter-in-law is a highly
qualified teacher.
Not only does she eat well and
Oh, but she also
That I do.
special ed certification.
taught in some of our smaller
rural schools very happily.
My son was transferred, they
went into some bigger city
schools.
He quit teaching and she pulled
all her kids out of school.
So she said I cannot teach.
The down
I cannot teach whenever they're.
Screaming curse words.
And they won't behave. They, I
cannot teach them.
Those
It's that are acting out.
They stopped the other kids from
getting an education.
So how do you fix that?
I wish I knew.
Yeah, uh, it's not like I
haven't ever been exposed to it,
uh.
Most people don't know.
What it's like to put a 10 year
old in a hole and
Don't give up and
It might be an hour.
Um
I, I did that because I care
about kids, buddy that.
That has been around my place.
Knows that that's a priority.
Yeah
Oh
everything that it takes for our
grandchildren and everybody else
is good.
Our, our house is the kids'
place.
And so that, that is my concern
is just prioritizing the
Right to the perpetrator over
the victims.
And I think uh we have, we're
Alright, we're like forty-ninth
and 50th or.
52 1 time. I don't know we're
really down there on our
education field.
Unless we come up with, and I'm
not telling.
Y'all that I have the
pure
Somehow we're going to have to.
Get kids to sit still and listen
before.
Be there, so.
When you prioritize the, the
perpetrators over the victims.
You lose that
You lose that ability and I, I,
I don't.
Hey, I know the answer, but I
probably won't support this bill
because I don't think it gives
you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would give the
Representative a chance to.
But
Thank you Mr. Chair. um, I do
believe that.
Being in the classroom is a
holistic approach and all the
students have the right to learn
and I'm gonna um let uh Mary to
explain more about the training
that is included here.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, I want to start by
acknowledging how important your
question is, and part of the
reason we had a working group
that met for almost 2 years is
to make sure that everybody's
perspective was.
Represented and that everyone
feels safe.
We already have training
requirements and, but we didn't
have training requirements
regarding what you're talking
about, positive behaviors are
equipped to deal with some of
the increasingly challenging
behaviors we're seeing what our
bill does if you look on page 6,
is it spells out what training
shall include, and I believe
that this could help address
your concerns by helping to
equip educators to deal with
some of the challenging
behaviors we've seen that we've
heard have increased since the
COVID-19.
pandemic.
Thank you.
Or me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I believe I was.
supposed to be on this whole
thing and I never could make any
of them cause all the meetings
were, well, I had students in my
room.
So, um, so I really regret not
being able to be a part of the
conversation, um, but, um, a
couple of things, um, I too
share the concern that um Mr.
Rounds um expressed during his
um
His um
A public testimony, um, because
the reality, well, I know that a
lot, a lot of what I hear is
about uh students with
disabilities, uh, which I 100%,
you know, and and those kind of
instances, but I teach in high
school.
Um, and there was an instance in
which.
Um, a 62, uh, very uh physical
uh gentleman, we were, um, and I
was involved in it breaking up a
fight.
And uh this gentleman was, um.
preceded, thank God I wasn't
close to him. I was more towards
the other ones because he was a
lot bigger than I was, but even
though I'm kind of a mean little
chihuahua and you never know,
uh, there, there's there,
there's, you never know what uh
Hispanic girls are gonna do, but
Um
But this, this, uh, this student
who was a lot bigger than most
of the people that were trying
to keep him from hurting another
student.
He proceeded to hit everyone and
had butt a couple of them and
injure, I don't know how many
adult men around there.
Then the only way.
that it took him to calm down.
was to hold him prone until the
cops arrived, and then as soon
as the cops arrived.
It took 4 cops to restrain him
too.
And this is so in those
instances.
That's not something that, I
mean, it's, it's reality, it's
reality in our high schools.
It's reality. There are some
boys that are bigger than a lot
of our security guards, as much
as they would like, you know,
um, and there is, who knows,
there's lots of drugs in our
school, so if they're hyped up
on something.
And, and those are the kind of
things that weather is now that
your.
Uh, on page 4 on C where it says
that it's a public school may
allow physical restraint
techniques on any student, and
then it gives it, you know, if
there's um imminent danger for
the student or others.
And less restrictive
interventions, you know, we try
to, yeah, you know, break it up
and, and, and, um, and nothing,
um, you know, nothing would
work. Does that include that
that physical restraint, does
that include prone or is prone
never?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your question and I have
students trying to.
fighting and trying to break up
fight and.
Afraid that I was gonna hate to
um restraint is still allowed.
And actually, it helps us, I
don't know if you have
experience, Mr. Chair, or um
committee anyone in the
classroom or in the schools.
When stopping a fight or when
intervening in a situation like
this fear of my crossing the
line I'm gonna get in trouble.
So this bill is going to help us
to say, OK, restraint is allowed
to go in this case. I can't do
it because I'm protecting the
students.
I'm making a safe.
safer for everybody. Um, it
gives
Clear guidelines, what is
allowed, what is not, and also
provide training in how to deal
with situations like that. Um,
I'm sure students have their
Um, educational plan,
specialized students on what is
allowed and what is not allowed,
so it reinforce all those areas
and clarify the language, uh,
Mr. Chair, um.
And representatives, hopefully
this is gonna give us a clear
indicator of what we can do
without feeling a fear of, of uh
a stopping and doing something
that is needed, uh, Mary, you
want Mr. Chair Representative
Mirabel Moya, Representative
Grola did a great job. I would
just underline that own
restaurant would be prohibited.
Physical restraint would still
be allowed and under this you'd
have better training to make
sure that you're able to handle
situations like that. I hope
that helps.
Um, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, to be honest with you,
I witnessed this whole thing,
nothing but pro worked. We tried
everything, and many were
injured in the process.
Many other people, which
I mean, to be honest with you,
uh, how, I don't know very many
if that happens too often.
Um, that's why we don't have a
lot of security guards because
they're not going to put up with
this for the, for the amount of
money they get paid. I think
we're just trying to raise them
up to 50 or 30,000, I'm not
gonna put up with that for
30,000. Um, you know, those are
the kind of things and, and I
get calls from APS teachers
constantly that are getting
stuff thrown at them and hit and
nothing is done.
And, and, and I think that is,
that is the, the biggest
frustration with a lot of
teachers is that um there is,
there is nothing to.
Keep them safe at that point.
Um, my other question, um,
The, uh, Mr. Chair, is um.
page 5 is where you start
talking about the school shall
established policies on uh
starting at 10, uh, line 10, um,
procedures for training and
positive, uh, uh, behavior
interventions and supports
de-escalation and so on and so
forth. Is that just CPI or is it
others? Is that uh uh an all
inclusive type of training, is
there, is there different stuff
that's out there?
Mr. Cheappla, um, it will be
called white and it will
actually emphasizes an
administrators being trained.
OK, um, so, Mr. Mr. Chair, so
this is, this is a school, I
think, but then.
here, uh, I think somewhere in
there's says that you need at
least one, teacher, or is it
just one administrator that's um
in in each school.
That is trained by these.
That Mr.
Chair, um,
what big emphasis on that in
this bill is um including the
administrators be part of.
The training but also one
teacher in the school.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
because, um, that is important
for like the smaller schools.
Hopefully there's more than one,
mostly because on page 7, it
says that physical restraint
techniques, um, shall be only
used by employees that are
trained, and many CPI holds are
done with 2 people, so you only
if you only have 11 person that
is trained and I know uh I mean,
I love my administrators, uh,
but many times, uh, the one that
may changes may not be in on
campus, um.
I just worry about people
getting in trouble because
they're helping out to keep
others safe or that student
safe. But sometimes they're
trying to hurt themselves.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
for. That's exactly why we put
the language here because we are
afraid of doing something and
get us in trouble, um, nothing
stops the school to be trained
everyone to be in the training,
uh, but it's it's established at
minimum one person to be
trained, but uh hopefully also
will include some language and
some of that uh educational
plans for for some of the
students so what is, what needs
to be done in specific cases.
Mr.
OK, um, thank you, so.
Mr. Chair and and
representatives, so you're the
school that she adopt um
established policies, so they're
they're required to teach the
entire staff then, but they'll
establish the policies is that.
Is that what it uh what you're
saying, or just?
Mr. Chair represented Mirabel
Moya. So we're just adding
clarity to existing
requirements, schools already do
school safety plans, there is
already broad language around
training as representative Grola
said, we're establishing
minimums here. The idea is, is
that if a school wanted to do a
trainer of the trainer model,
particularly for some of these
things like around positive
behavior interventions they
could, but the school could
absolutely elect to train their
entire staff. I hope that
answers your question. OK.
All right, um,
I think
That's all my questions for now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right, thank you, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you presenters.
I went through this bill.
Quite a bit this weekend.
And
I actually prayed this morning
what I was gonna say about this
bill.
Because sometimes Mr. Chair, I
think we've lost our way.
I really do.
And I don't see a whole lot of
school teachers in here, and I
do see some.
But nobody's thinking about the
ones back home that are too
afraid to come out.
And talk about why are we 50th?
Why are we having to pay our
teachers more money.
For what they have to put up
with.
And they do put up with it,
ladies and gentlemen, Mister
Chair.
I hear the stories.
I know that you're a teacher.
I know that
The representative is a teacher.
A lot of people here.
Mr. Chair, I know you're a
teacher in a very well respected
one because I've talked to your
school.
When do we stand up for the
teachers?
I know that
I'm kind of new to the education
side, but I am a common sense
person, and I heard Mister
Reynolds talk about a while ago
when a kid runs into traffic.
is a teacher, what's going
through their mind is, am I
gonna get in trouble for going
after him.
Are you kidding me?
I was in public safety.
When a kid ran, it's only
happened one time in 25 years
that I was there.
They called, they called the
parents.
All the teachers
Went out to to find the kiddo,
they call fire and police.
You think we're worried about
what if we're gonna get in
trouble.
We worried about the kids'
safety.
When the children, I've got 2.
Well
I've got 2 kids.
And my family,
that have disabilities.
Do those two kids misbehave? No,
ma'am, they do not.
They know how to behave, and
when they misbehave, they know
what happens.
Kids are never going to respect
adults unless we give them
direction.
Adolescents need direction.
And that's how we're going to
get the respect.
Back to what Representative
Chatfield talked about, what
about our kids that do behave
that want to learn, what about
their safety?
Mr. Chair
What about the teacher's safety.
I promise on a Bible.
one of my teachers before I came
up here told me that it's not
uncommon, uncommon for a kid to
tell her to bleep off.
On a daily basis.
That didn't happen when I was a
kid.
Why is it happening now?
Are we getting too soft?
And the reason I'm bringing this
up, Mr. Chair, is cause I know
there's a lot of professionals
in here.
And I know that you're gonna be
knocking on my door and I'm
asking you to.
You either educate me or let me
try to educate you.
We have to get back to a common
sense approach, we have to treat
kids.
Kids.
Mr. Chair
Kids are a lot smarter than we
give them credit for.
They know
That there's nothing you can do
about it.
Nothing. I just heard the
testimony.
And they're right. There's
nothing you can do about it.
We're too afraid.
We don't know whether to put our
hands on them.
We don't know what to do, Mister
Chair.
How do we get back to the common
sense approach on this.
Have we always been lagging in
education.
Or is it just been since we
started getting so soft.
Why do we treat our, our people
in the military. Why do we give
them direction?
Why is there consequences?
Those are the people that
protect our homeland.
Kids want the same thing. People
in general, all they want is
direction.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Repres.
Thanks Mr. Chair. This is
kind of a minor question.
Why are we on page 8? Why do we
delete the word guardian.
It says the school employees
shall provide the student's
parent or guardian.
And guardian is removed several
times.
Why
Thank
you, Mr. Cha.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, that's actually a
drafting issue, I guess how
parent is defined in the public
school code, it includes parent
and guardian, so it's a cleanup
and.
The request of our wonderful
drafters.
Thank you.
with grandparents, foster
treatment folks.
Sometimes what's in the code
doesn't really communicate to
the general public.
OK, thank you, that's my only
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. I do have
a couple of questions.
Um
It's it in the FR it says that
there's a there's the funding.
a million dollars over 3 years.
Can you talk about that and how
that's distributed or how, how,
how that.
Is going to work with the school
district and the charter
schools.
OK
Mr. Chair, Representative Lara,
so training requirements already
exist. This is just adding
specificity. So, um, school
districts are already at the
hook.
For providing training. I hope
that helps.
Suture if I might, uh,
represented a lot. I just wanted
to mention as, as Mere said
training already is required.
school districts probably use a
variety of sources, whether, you
know, special education teachers
received this kind of training
on a regular basis in school
districts probably already use
funding either state or federal
special education funding.
On some of this training.
Um
Obviously, we've, we've
included, you all have increased
at risk funding over the last 5
years significantly districts
are.
Obviously able to use any of
their discretionary operational
funds as well.
And so we feel like this is
something that we're not, we're
not adding to or codifying a
law, something that's already
been.
Thank you for that response. I,
I appreciate that response.
Thank you. I was just trying to
figure out in my mind, you know,
how much.
How much of an impact would it
be on the on the school
districts and charter schools
when, you know, when we're
talking about the 3 million over
3 years.
Another question that I have,
Mr. Chair, is
So, and the FIR it says the
analysis was solicited but not
received from Nimmsia.
Very interesting. I'm very
interested as to why we didn't
receive a response from NSA.
You, you figure, Mr. Chair, that
with this additional training
that that staff is getting.
Uh, with all these measures that
are being put in place, you
know, it would uh help to reduce
the cost.
The insurance costs, so I was
wondering why we didn't receive
a response from NIMSA, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lara,
I can only speculate, but I know
that often it's hard for
agencies to turn around in time.
I would just assume it's
something like that.
Yeah, thank you for that. I was
just wondering because you know,
this is such an integral part of
of what they do.
And I figured that would have
that we would have a response
from those I would be very
curious to see uh what their
response would be in this and
whether they would see this as
uh the additional training,
especially as, as a benefit and
as a potential cost savings.
That's all I had, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
And you represent Colin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had a
question on
Page 4, when you're talking
about restraints.
Um, the students' behavior
presents an imminent danger of
serious physical harm.
Or others.
What constitute
Serious.
Mr. Chair, one of the examples,
and it was used here.
teachers who were part of the
work group chair is like I'm
grabbing the student before
crossing the street, uh because
I mean it's dangerous cars
coming. So that was one of the
examples that it was given
during the work group.
Because my concern is.
Depending on
You know, there's
No, no clearer definition of
what a serious harm is, and
obviously, you know, I my might
be different from somebody else
for them to be able to.
You know, if they
They consider it serious harm.
You know, so they restrained
them.
But then somebody says,
But
It wasn't possible.
So
Mr. Chair, my, my concern is, is
I went to a school board meeting
for a presentation not too long
ago, I think.
But
There's teacher coming for their
public comments for the board.
They're being abused.
My children.
We have a lack of teachers right
now.
Especially special.
And I'm concerned for our
teachers out there.
I think we're going to start
seeing more shortage.
It
abuses happen to them.
to other students. I mean we
were having chairs.
Being beaten up.
The students are
getting
And so my concern is, is the
definition of serious harm.
And she's
These definition is that
We need to protect our teachers,
we need to protect our other
students as well.
I mean, just a couple years ago,
there was another state.
For a student, he was first
grader.
his
We have never seen behaviors
like this before.
And it's continuing.
And it's said
Gotten worse, we've seen it
before COVID. It's gotten
considerably less.
I mean, considerably more after.
And we need to really look at
the behavioral health.
consistent with schools in our
definition of counselors.
And providing more assistance.
counseling in our schools.
And I'm concerned with our
teachers being physically
harmed.
And we're going to just start
losing them.
More and more.
So, um, that's my, my, my
concern with this definition.
Oh no definition, and I think
it's left up to people.
Making decisions
serious odd and concern is is
The teachers or the
administrators getting in
trouble.
What they can what they
considered serious harm and
somebody else.
Representative, I, I appreciate
that. My wife is a 3rd grade
teacher.
She's seen this kind of behavior
in her classroom as well as in
in her school or generally.
I think the intent here is
actually to provide teachers
with more tools, not fewer.
And so because before we had
fewer definitions of what that
was. We've heard from the
working group and other folks as
well.
That teachers were actually more
afraid to put their hands on
kids because they thought they
would be accused of restraining
them when there were no
definitions of what was OK or
what wasn't OK.
So the, so the clearer
definitions around time out.
Some of the
Uh, it's the how you save a kid
from running away from the
school and making sure they
don't get run over, that sort of
thing, um, we're hoping the
schools actually have more
tools, not fewer.
And then I would just say about
the definitions in general.
I think that's a conversation we
also had in the working group.
You want to be careful not to
overdefine what something is
because then you definitely
limit what people can do,
because then
Um, and they say, well, that's,
you know,
So you want to leave some
flexibility for some, for some,
uh,
Interpretation, and I think it,
it also emphasizes the need for
the training.
Um, because I think teachers,
the more tools they have, the
better they're going to be able
to.
Respond, and I do want to just
clarify that in the case of
restraint, you, you you someone
who is trained should be the one
doing the restraining.
But the bill does, does have an
an exception essentially.
Or in the case of an emergency,
and if you only have to your
point representative Moya, one
person or two people who are
trained in your school.
Um, I, I was a high school
teacher as well. I broke up
fights.
Right
And I, and this allows you to do
that.
I was a trained, but we were
able to put our hands on kids,
break people up.
Not hold them on their stomach
or anything like that, but make
sure that they were separated so
that they didn't hurt themselves
or others.
And the bill continues to allow
folks to do that, but actually
provide some clarity about when
you can do that, even if you're
not trained.
All right, Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, um, I
know there's been a lot of um
discussion here in particularly,
I guess getting into, you know,
the more extreme cases and
seeing what those um
I think, well, first off, I
wanna say I think this bill does
define some steps and it does
better define and so overall I
think it does help a teacher
with the toolbox, as was
mentioned, um, you know, to help
define with, with the day to
day, like what you can do, but
you're comfortable with because
that's um
That's just often the case with
all the teachers in my life.
Like, what can you do in this
situation? But now getting to
the extreme cases, um, like on
page 10, and this is more just
as a clarification, um, it talks
about like if a school summons
law enforcement instead of using
a physical restraint. Is that
more left up to the school
safety plan as to determine, um,
when to call law enforcement
specifically for those more
extreme cases.
And is that a suggestion in the
more extreme cases.
Yes, it will be.
Up to the school and up to the
student plan. Um, thank you Mr.
Chair, um, I guess along with
that, um, I know there was the
emergency cause and I was trying
to find it. I read through the
emergency, so I was trying to
find it again when I was going
through here, um, like in the
cases of say like a self defense
situation or something like, you
know, something of that nature,
um.
Police or law enforcement may
not arrive on time. Um, does
that clause, um, you know,
exempt a teacher where I can see
this being the intent was not to
be restrictive to be a toolbox,
um, but I can see this as being
a follow through should an
extreme situation arise and this
being what a teacher may be
allowed to do. And so in those
extreme circumstances where
there is like an immediate
reaction needed an immediate
harm to self is in case of self
defense.
Um, should that emergency clause
protect the teacher, protect
those should.
You know, this not go according
to plan and law enforcement not
be able to arrive.
Um, immediately.
Thank you. Thank you. Yes,
that's.
OK.
Thank you. That's all I have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Represents Velasquez.
Um
So, um, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um.
First of all, um, and
presenters, uh, thank you for
all the work that you put into
this bill.
Um
And deputy secretary and all the
people in the audience.
have worked really hard.
On this issue for a number of
years.
Um
I, I too know some teachers and
EAs who have been told.
By their administrators are not
to do anything if a child.
I um
Acting out and um.
And
And I think
This kind of bill.
Helps guide the schools.
terms of what they can do.
Um, because that is not the
correct thing to do, not do
anything, um, as a teacher, I
taught uh general led. I taught
bilingual ed. I taught special
education.
And I will never forget one of
my students who I got in the
resource room, which is just
like an hour a day.
Who had been
Um
Hurting other children just like
you all are describing.
And who had been running out the
classroom window.
And um
And because of the things that I
had learned.
And my master's in special
education and my interest in
special education.
I, um, I recognized that
Those behaviors had to do with
the way that he was
communicating his needs.
And so I found a way to
communicate with him.
So that he could tell us.
When he was on the verge of
doing something because
oftentimes, kids do not have the
language, they don't think in
words, they think in actions.
And sometimes it's because they
don't know how to act out.
So I had kids with disabilities
who um.
Who learned
How to ask for the things they
needed and who learned not to
run away.
When they were scared.
And um,
And I'll never forget those
children. I also was blessed
when I was a professor at San
Jose State to work with interns
who had the more severe.
Students that you're talking
about and because of their
training special ed.
We saw a complete turnarounds in
kids with autism. It's with many
different types of disabilities.
And what I like about this this
bill.
Is that so much here is
explained.
And provided, and I know there
are pieces missing.
I know that more can be done.
Um, but this is a great start in
terms of the types of things
that we need to know in our
schools so that fewer kids are
hurt, so that more teachers are
successful with the students. I
recognize that that is the
intent.
Um
So most recently,
When I was working with the
plaintiff, the student with
disability in the Martinez
lawsuit and and the the the
students and the families.
Um, and some of the
organizations in Albuquerque.
And I did not work on, on.
On this bill
But, um, but I, I did work with
other groups who had some
serious issues about restraints
because their children with
autism had been hurt.
And um
I
Recognized some of the.
Comments
Um
When we had people in the
audience speaking.
Um, and I'm, I'm especially
interested in finding out if
it's too late to add some
amendments for things that
might.
Strengthen this bill, um, such
as some of the things that um.
Attorney Nesbit had um
mentioned.
Um
And I guess that is a question I
have for you, Mr. Chair, and for
the presenters, um, because this
is a delicate bill.
This is a bill that people will
interpret just as you have heard
this morning.
As, um,
Well, I, I, I, I can't, you
heard the comments and I'm not
sure how to rephrase them.
But I can see, I can understand
the concerns.
Um
And I, and I'm wondering if
there's something that could be
added to this bill to
To help
Um
In in the
Um
In the pieces that are needed.
Very badly.
need
So I guess that's my question.
talk
later.
We actually have a meeting today
for
You know, I mean.
for improvement, I guess, uh,
after.
with.
And move forward to the next
committee, we can talk and see
how can we strengthen it.
I guess, representative, is
there anything in particular?
P
Uh, I guess the question would
be for the bill sponsors because
we have the bill before us the
other two bills we have
specific.
Funding recommendations to work
out.
has been
For like you said, clarifies.
lot of issues which are going to
be my comment.
And if the sponsors willing to
stand by the bill.
On it
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Yes, we'll
stand.
Thank you.
And
Um, no, but if you need some
specific things I, I, I can help
with that.
I don't know if we need to have
it stated now or
Yeah
Um
So it sounds like the bill
sponsors standing by the bill.
So it looks like we'll vote.
OK.
8
don't have it, but we can hold
on.
Right
Um
So, I just wanted to say, and I
think represents Flores
Vellacius who was mirroring a
lot of the comments that I was
gonna have about this.
Bill.
as was mentioned, I in my high
school teacher. I deal with
these issues each and every day,
so I appreciate the clarity of
the work.
That people have put together
over these 2 years and the
guidelines and the training for
um de-escalation techniques and
an alternative method.
Um
Because when I started teaching.
Still, I've had a great mentor
and former representative Pat
Relova.
who's the author of the.
students for Success Act.
The escalation techniques and
Um,
Alternative methods that
reaching our students so that we
don't get to the point where
these are necessary because as
it stated in all of our
information, um,
sorts of methods, um, seclusion,
isolation of our students is, is
incredibly harmful, um, and not
the direction we should be going
as a state or nationally.
Um
Be able to foster relationships
with our students, have our
students be comfortable.
us as educators to come with us
and then.
I appreciate in the bill having
the.
In extreme measures such as what
people have brought up fights or
tables, chairs being thrown at
teachers or feeling
Danger
Onto my person, I think it's
it's the benefit of this bill,
and I certainly appreciate, like
I said, the tumor.
2 years of work that's gone into
the inclusive.
Of the advocates in here, um.
What they have to say and where
we could really strengthen the
Laws because without it, um,
don't have it and we don't have
that sort of guidance as a
state, um.
Um
To, to really
and she will allow us as
teachers as I see it to be able
to practice.
The issues that were brought up,
how can I get at my practice?
Like this stuff
I
to as much as possible, solve
the issues before they become a
problem, and if they do, um,
have some leeway as educators to
make that distinction along
with.
Training
To know how we're acting, why
we're acting in.
way
in the best interests of all of
our students, not just
particular groups, but all of
them.
Students as well as us and
educators being able to act in
such a way that we
are
Comfortable that we're doing the
I think because we're making
informed decisions is all what
I.
going on
Spill.
So
that
Except the motion what's the
will of the committee.
reach for a microphone.
right.
Right
to a vice chair represent a lot
with the new pass motion, a
second by Floresascius, Madam
Secretary, call a roll.
Has motion for House Bill 2160.
Yes.
Yes
Yes.
No.
Yes.
Respectfully, no.
Yes
But it was close.
Yes
Alright, so you have a do pass
by vote of 6 to 4.
Thank you, Representative.
All right, folks, so we'll see
you all on Wednesday. Good work
today.
