Representative Madrid.
All.
Welcome you know.
Two about career.
Thank you sister.
The state.
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Trujillo.
Good morning I'm here.
Which is here.
Yes Representative metrics here.
Here.
Here.
We do have a quorum all right
good morning everybody it's good
to see you all we're going to
start at house bill one fifty
nine.
We'll try to get the members
that are not part of our
committee
To present their bills first
since we're all here for the
duration anyway I'll be here for
my bill for the duration so pull
Representative Lujan you.
Full.
All right good morning
Representative.
Representative I'm waiting for
Representative a.
Linda Serrato xi'an a she is
not.
You are do we have any experts
that we need to pull in yes we
have a leader.
And.
I think that I can take your
last name sorry Mr chair.
We are yeah all right so.
Allow her in.
It's not.
All right.
So I'll keep an eye out for
Representative Serrato but
Representative Lujan if you
would house bill one fifty nine.
Muted.
I'm sorry I'm having a little
bit
Complications of my computer
make sure.
All right.
Thank you Mr chair so basically
what this.
You is making appropriation for
college and career readiness
programs around the state.
And the procreation is for five
hundred thousand dollars and it
comes from the general fund of
course to the the public
education department for
expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty three and it would
provide short and long term
college and career readiness
programming at public high
schools around the state to
request for proposals which one
or more providers.
And that's that's.
Very briefly and I'd like to
have our expert witness a leader
to have a few words you.
Word on the subject matter Mr
chair please welcome.
Thank you Representative Lujan
and thank you to the committee
for hearing me today my name is
Ali and work I am executive
director of a nonprofit
organization called college and
career plaza.
We are locally based here in
Santa Fe New Mexico and so I
have a brief statement that I
have prepared for you all and
then will there be question and
answer afterward Representative
Lujan or it's just a statement
so so if you would go through
the chair please but there will
be question and answer once we
take testimony from the audience
and if for any of the members do
you have questions please thank
you Representative Romero.
Okay so
a little bit about college and
career plaza we one of our core
values is that we believe that
all high school students in New
Mexico need and deserve
equitable access to the
culturally and linguistically
relevant college and career
guidance services college and
career I find.
A little bit about our work so
you know we are we are currently
working in strong partnership
under an MO you with the Santa
Fe public schools from dedicated
library based resource centers
at Santa Fe high school in
capital high school during the
school day and evenings our
model is geared toward north
through twelfth graders not just
seniors and is focused primarily
on providing the one one one to
one individualized support and
mentoring work required for any
student to make the best
possible decision for their
future transition into
adulthood.
so our services and there are a
couple of other organizations
similar to ours that I think can
really benefit from this bill
our services include career
development and exploration
internships and work based
learning support as well as
bridge supports for students
entering tax school and for your
college on the best possible
flooding
we are also fully integrated
into advisory programs at
capital high school in Santa Fe
high school.
And we do evening and work
lunchtime workshops as well such
as family fascinates career
exploration panels and other
campus wide events.
I'm I do not believe that Santa
Fe public schools is a special
situation I I believe that there
are many school districts across
the state that could benefit
from the college and career
plaza model
for example I am currently
completing a college and career
readiness needs assessments of
high schools in Santa Fe and in
seeing that about ninety percent
of the schools I've interviewed
thus far have had high interest
in opening a CCP center on our
campus in addition there are
some schools outside of northern
New Mexico including bill in
high schools were also
expressing strong interest in
bringing our full model into
their school
and I also just wanted to make a
note about the appropriation to
PED and that I do believe that
this collagen correct career
readiness programs appropriation
bill would operate as a high
impact implementation tool for
PED under its new strategic plan
specifically respected their
strategies strategic priority
list on page five of the plan
and I have a copy of that I can
share with you all if you need
it title profiles and pathways
and so I think that this
appropriation would not only
benefit service providers like
ourselves and ultimately the
students but also I think it
could help PED with their
strategic plan implementation.
Right thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
Representative Serrato is and
the attendees I have asked her
to be a participant but I don't
know if she's been able to
accept yet.
Or let's see trying to promote
her as a panelist.
We'll see what happens but in
the meantime Representative if
that's your test money we can go
to the audience and before we go
to committee questions when
Representative Serrato joins us
she can make make her statement
as well.
So we'll go to the attendees is
there support for house bill one
fifty nine.
You would please indicate by
raising your hand.
Given a moment right so you'll
have up to two minutes please be
brief.
All right so Diane good morning
Diane you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning can you hear me.
We can your two minutes is great
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Diane
Garcia you know I am a board
member for the college and
career plaza I am also a retired
educator
For almost thirty years in my
career I worked from higher
education through also K. twelve
education and a large portion of
my focus was always in the arena
of career and college
preparation and development for
students in schools so when I
retired I chose to put my
efforts into a board and hence
we are now named college and
career plaza.
R. what I am seeing all your nor
are executive director who just
previously previously spoke
outlined our entire program
these types of services have
been needed for years there have
been through the course of the
funding streams going up and
down in the past and up to now
have been efforts to create
things like because career
centers in college centers I
think the primary need for these
centers is that we can be of
support to existing high school
counselors who are extremely.
Overburdened with their
demands in school settings that
is one of the main things we're
finding and so hence the the
desire on mint on the part of
many schools to be part of.
Our programs.
Model
is is it's a big need and I'm
here to support this bill thank
you so much to Representative
Lujan
and to representatives that out
though for sponsoring this bill.
Thank thank you.
Will you may.
We may welcome you're with us
you have a two minutes thank you
Mr chairman morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
am really more to use the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee New Mexico scored
Association continually supports
any legislation that funds are
establishes career technical
pathways of that provide
financial assistance or job
opportunities and or or in term
programs for high school
students pathways such as the
one of this bill sure students
are provided with opportunities
to engage an explosion necessary
to address potential educational
disparities and and allow them
to become successful productive
individuals Mr chairman members
of the committee The New Mexico
Association scored Association
applauds the intent of this bill
and we ask for your favorable
consideration thank you for
allowing us to voice our
opinions.
Great thank you so I'm getting
word on our webcast that it says
were on a different house bill
but it should read that we're on
house bill one fifty nine.
So we'll try to get that
corrected or on house bill one
fifty nine
Catalina please good morning.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee so I am a
program coordinator for college
and career pas up but I'm also a
graduate here of capital high
school and working back in
capital high school after being
here in Santa Fe I think my
experience comes from being a
student that's gone through
Santa Fe public schools and
experiencing how I'm helping
students today I think there's a
huge gap between what are over
worked teachers and counselors
can provide and how we as a
program can help bridge that gap
oftentimes being undocumented I
had a really hard time finding
help and I feel that that's
actually one of my strong suits
here with my students I can only
see even more growth and more
help that we can help bridge
with our students containing
college and career opportunities
and it's always a really great
sort of moment when our students
can say thank you you've helped
me reach a new call that I
didn't see myself doing so I do
ask that you all consider
additional favorably and thank
you for letting me by my
opinion.
Thank you.
All right Ernie.
Welcome any of up to two minutes
welcome.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I am a member of the
board of directors for college
and career plaza and the I want
to say something about care it's
because our model is very
effective in terms of helping
students plan for their futures
but it also works with parents
often parents don't know how to
talk to their children about the
future and about how they can
extend their education you're in
college or through post
secondary education professional
programs and we help parents.
Look at funding possibilities
for theirs their children and
and help them be able to
understand the planning process
and do a better job of working
with their kids so that they can
have a good dialogue box about
about the future so that's the a
point that I want to make that
may be overlooked in some models
but certainly is not in ours
parents are important they're
critical in the state.
Process and we include them at
every possible stage so thank
you very much for the
opportunity to speak with you
this morning and we hope that
you will support this bill right
thank you and so
we'll go to opposition is there
any opposition to house bill one
sixty nine.
Thank you very your hand on the
into the sign.
All right not seeing any will
come back to committee before I
go to my list we have
Representative Serrato good
morning Representative issue
which to make a brief opening
statement please.
Thank you Mr chairman might all
be is to the
committee are I please have
Ingle Google and act it will be
which is why I'm gonna keep my
video off if it's been a little
unstable Representative Lujan
walks through program similar to
college and career plaza
although I appreciated their
body anymore this and many of
them are we're seeing with the
school districts as as mentioned
by Aaliyah to you know we're
with them right now see there's
money that they can attain to
that as well the one last thing
I want to mention is that you
know this but we do not
happening in in the budget
however I did so want to bring
this bill forward for discussion
I appreciate the conversation we
had my previous bills on this
and I spoke with Johnson about
funding is also so
just the hearing and under.
Just stick it into your okay
Representative is right on the
ball thank you Mr chairman I was
done thank you Mr chair okay
great thank you thank you you
are you are starting to fade out
there
I think we got your last
statements about
getting our consideration on its
side.
It is so come to committee for
some analysts the Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My question is about the
internships do you have
agreements with the industry the
that allows these kids to work
as interns the is it just as the
specific go places that they go
for internships the pick up part
of the insurance for them or do
you have special agreements that
allows them to work in these
industries at a certain age just
the curious about the internship
for a portion of it which which
I think is great the more we can
push that.
Thank you Mr chair in the.
Mr Chairman.
Representative hello.
Representative Serrato you're
you're cutting in and out so
Representative Lujan is going to
take that I think.
I'm just going to defer to our
our expert witness today Mr
chair.
German star.
Thank you for your question
Representative Chatfield so
right now Senator Representative
with me.
Thank you Representative much
cut right now college and career
plaza is offering for
internships to students that are
within the public Senator public
school so we have three seniors
and one junior working with us
and we are providing insurance
coverage for that I think you
know as we look toward expanding
into additional school districts
we would bring that internship
program with us as a as a
nonprofit internship so there
having experience doing that.
As far as internships out within
the community we are currently
providing a touch point our
primary point of contact for
internships that are being
offered to students and then it
we are helping students get
engaged in those internship so
it may be an internship with you
know Landel foundation or
another nonprofit organization
we are that primary contact
currently but we do not have the
capacity to build additional
internships within the community
at I would very much like to
bring on a career specialist
career development specialist
and funding like this can help
can help do that where they can
drill really drill down into
building those business
partnerships out in the
community and get those inner
and also provided by a round the
legal the legal components and
aspects of it because doing it
ourselves and so that's my
thought.
Thank you make your.
Thank you Representative Dow
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and that
anytime you can give opportunity
strengthen our our students
career technology pathways is
awesome I'm having a problem
understanding this is funding
for a particular purpose in a
particular school.
Is.
I'm sorry Representative can you
he said that you cut out just a
little bit on me.
Mr chair is this funding for a
particular purpose at a
particular school.
Representative no this is a for
statewide program.
We just it's it's here in Santa
Fe Mr chair that has a program
it's already in in in practice
in our schools and they're
giving us the information on
that program and how it's been
leading reflective of what the
need is for the state.
Thank you and so how many
additional school districts
could be served with half
million dollars.
I would I would do particularly
as well.
Thank you Mr chairman
With with our model so speaking
from our model.
How it would work is that we
would work with with the schools
to create and use and access
some funding then that would
allow us to access and funding
to pay for the staffing
resources as well as bring this
funding and to to leverage so we
would leverage some of this
funding to help fill the gaps
within the schools but as far as
five hundred thousand dollars
goes in one year if it if it is
a one year agreement
I think that you know we would
need really need to look into
sustainable any of that before I
can get a full analysis as to
how many schools we can move
into with that with that funding
if you were to read her every
single year I imagine we could
add about ten additional schools
and that would be high schools
working working with their
districts.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so if you're
saying it was recurring at ten
schools a year then the cost per
school to implement the program
is around fifty thousand.
Mr chair that would that would
make mathematically
correct I'm sorry thank you
thank you.
Representative yes.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and what's the
fifty thousand dollars for.
Thank you thank you Mr chair on
thank you Representative and I
will again defer to
this.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Lujan
It would be for staffing
resources so it would be for a
single program coordinator or
site coordinator who would be
brought in we would then find
the all of the health insurance
the essentially plug and chug
model the training you know put
the put the effort into hiring
and that can the community
connection support that we
provide to that individual so
they would be completely
supported by are organised our
organization internally and that
would cover a bit most of the
cost of a a coordinator that
would work during the school
year.
Okay all right so I I'm just I'm
asking questions because I'm not
familiar with the program and
its and also we do have a career
technology education fund and
has two million dollars in it
that's an appropriated and spent
and so this is this is new
dollars to per note from
ridiculous program that has been
effective in one area and you
want to scale it up statewide
and you're asking for the half
million dollars because from
your perspective or maybe
feedback from the districts this
isn't something that falls under
community schools are under the
current pathways you could have
a career technologies what what
is the gap that's being met here
that isn't currently funded
by two districts accomplished
just what prohibits a school
district doing this now.
Mr chair.
I don't believe there I think
think there's flexibility within
school districts to do programs
like this so I don't think
there's there are restrictions
and you know it one of the
things about the program the
shares that you know they're
able to do both they they're
able to help multiple districts
than V. input from multiple
districts if if you're able to
have the funding in place.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Baca
please.
Thank you Mr chairman
I also questions now I I do
support.
For technical education I thank
you most of my junior money
towards that because back in my
district but I I I really and I
think the question that the to
Representative Dow and I have
done that which you may be
getting that is how is this
different than me because I know
like in H. B. two I think
there's appropriation of of
somewhere maybe around ten
million dollars so I need to
know is how.
Is this different is just the
the different target are we
talking about like a a certified
nursing program we talk about
certificate programs that would
students leave high school they
have a certificate because I I
went to the website I try to see
what kind of internship so what
kind of error you're targeting
and you know if this is to
provide stopping.
Then I don't really see how this
is going to impact is what we
want we want our kids to be
prepared we want our kids to be
engaged by providing
opportunities for them to high
interest areas.
So I'm really trying to existed
before when I look at this in a
sector technical education I was
I'm all for it but I'm just
going to say no okay so what's
different what's what's
different about this.
So I would give you a good
address that allow us to another
point thank you Mr chair and
representative Baca I think
you're touching a really really
really important topics as as
we're looking to you know create
those pathways it is
careerpathways I and I think
that's that's what what I'm
hearing you you trust here and I
would I would differ also to
only a to address the question
as best you can Mr chair.
Please Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So we are different.
This model is different because
we provide one on one support to
students and so and that starts
in their with their freshman
year with career development and
exploration
and so this is you know although
we have group you know we have
groups come up we do workshops
and events we do advisory
presentations the core of our
work is to augments the
counselors overburdened and to
be able to find that one on one
guidance and also from a
culturally and linguistically
relevant place so that we can
meet the students and their
families where they are and help
them explore themselves there's
also a mentorship component to
to that piece of our work of the
other thing we have that we
bring and in our model is a
resource based so we are library
center based so we have a center
we we manage and all a bunch of
Business visual resources
scholarship lists all of that so
there is a you know a peer to
peer component where students
bring each other bring their
friends in to come and talk with
one of one of our one of our
program coordinators so that is
where where things are different
is that this is really
individualized and that the
purpose is to augments
the cat you know what counselors
are able to do and we're and our
referral network is based on a
lot of council referrals
currently.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you Representative Lujan and
the.
I guess the.
Really so what we're paying here
with this is forced to basically
have another counts for schools
to provide support for these
programs and and I'll tell you
that you know when we're talking
about money we're talking
understand that the need for for
providing guidance but I was
really kind of hoping is that
these would be more towards
working in a program and I was
actually would encourage you
know the code the collaboration
and communication with higher
education by the NM or otherwise
UNM of seeing them that they are
working towards certificate
programs because our kids I
think that's what our kids with
so this doesn't do that it's
more just provide counseling and
support for the students is that
correct.
Mr chair.
Representative I think it does
those sort of things to I think
it's all at part of an
integrated system of finding the
needs thank you Senate and
writing that counseling service
but also.
That's what this is all part of
it again I'm going to defer to
the model on the program that
all it is is talking about.
Is Mr chair.
Great thank you Mr chair.
So this it is so one of the one
of the things so if you're
familiar with communities in
schools and their model I'm we
are very similar in that
underlying concept and that we
are community based and so we
are able to and I am able to and
our board of directors of the
to communicate with to work with
the broader community that we
serve within within Santa Fe so
far and so we are able to bring
it resources from the community
that really does apply it with
and and this is just one small
example with could doing a
career exploration panel for
example we have a a career
connections program where we
have individuals who have
volunteered to support students
and mentor students around a
particular profession or even
just have a specific
conversation with that student
around a particular profession
and then they can come in and do
a full at fault fully
facilitated career panel which
is as it is a really fantastic
thing to be able to provide to
the students to help them
explore and see the
opportunities within it with in
Santa Fe if they want to come
back and live and work in Santa
Fe that is fantastic as well or
come back to the state of New
Mexico and here here's what our
state looks like your people
working in our state and and
this is what you can do here as
well so we bring that community
based component that I don't
think an additional school
counselor would be able to
bring.
Mr chair if I may.
Yes Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Baca for the
question I think all your
handled most of that very well
one thing I wanted to mention is
that are and as we've spoken
before I believe in the past our
our community colleges do you
feel the act direct to employer
certification programs in many
ways and they've been taking on
that responsibility incredibly
well and so as we was mentioning
to be able to provide those
connections for students whether
they're looking at a
certification and internship the
college process for many of the
students having an additional
counselor who is not responsible
for behavioral health and mental
health and you know next career
health you know next steps
health this that this person
this this this program or any
program even beyond college and
career plaza that may be able to
offer that can give kids the the
ability to understand the
variety of options that exist
here in New Mexico or that may
take them away bring them back
home thank you.
The gentleman thank you
Representative Lujan yet again I
appreciate I appreciate what
you're being done I just.
I think for me I just need to
see kind of more of the the
actual plan the premarket also
is very good I'll tell you it's
sounds good us you know but when
we're just talking about Hey
we're it's like we're we're
building this as we're as it's
already being done and I I you
know when we allocate funds for
this special there's already
existing funds in the new budget
and there's some some to have
been used for last budget.
I just I'm I'm having a little
trouble but I do think you I do
support for occur technical
education I thank you for my
questions thank you Mr thank you
Representative Representative
Lara please.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
everyone good morning
Representative thank you for
bringing this bill forward a
couple of questions
is there
where is the accountability
piece on those who who our data
report is going to be collecting
the data you all is are going to
be your a report back to us L.
E. S. C. or the legislature in
general regarding whether this
program is is working on a.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Lara is a really
good question and I again I
will.
I will defer to.
And to respond or if
Representative Serrato.
Coming in a bit clearer now she
she wanted to.
State anything thank you Mr
thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative and
thank you Representative Lara
since this would be going
through eighteen through the
higher ed I'm sorry to pit PD
that would be the process
reporting however I think you
make an excellent point at this
point we've not including
included a reporting element to
this and I would be open to
adding that in that in a later
amendment.
Representative Lara.
On I apologize Mr Chairman going
on and on and and my mic is off.
Okay so that's thank you for
that Representative Mr chair
unit it's it's important that we
have accountability piece in
there where you see state money
to to our for these for these
programs I'm not disparaging a
program whatsoever but what I do
want to know if there's any
accountability built into it in
the reporting back to L. U. C.
or the legislature in general
because I it's it's important
that we know that your are
Making an investment and we're
getting our return on that
investment so another.
I would like to ask is is the
the appropriation.
Mr chair representative he is is
is is the appropriation in the
budget it's an H. B. two.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative question it is
not and we're looking to
continue to explore this beyond
the session at this point the.
Okay thank you thank you
Representative Mr cherry I was
just wondering if if if if this
on the need to was me perhaps
you're million appropriated to
this or is it included in the in
the in any asked in any part of
within the PED budget.
Thank you.
Again it is not at this point
again yes I'm so sorry Mr chair
representative thank you for the
question it is not at this point
included in those we have been
in conversations with PED and
John Senator as you all referred
me last time it was just an
incredible resource and seeing
if it does fit in with with
within the scope currently so
those are our on going
conversations at this point
thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative out thank you Mr
chair you know these are you
know I I I don't I don't mean to
disparage the work of the bill I
think it's a good idea are the
more options of more resources
that we have for students is
always good but I'm just a
concerned about especially the
the accountability piece are
eight you would perhaps consider
that thank you Mr chair thank
you representatives.
Thank you Representative care
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing the
bill so my understanding is that
if this were to be passed the
PED would put out a request for
proposal that could be taken up
by any group who was carrying
out these activities of the
group here to date could apply
to other groups could apply it
schools could apply with
programs my correct in
understanding that.
Yes Mr chair Representative
director commit code yes that
would have to be the process.
Okay so Mr chair representative
and
this is one group that could do
it PED in their request for
proposal.
could include that
accountability piece which is
currently in the bill is that
correct.
Mr chair Representative I would
I would.
Thank you to say yes but without
PED right here with us today
that I am not at liberty to say
unless Representative Serrato
knows something more.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
Representative thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative I
yes that is they they would be
able to do that and we could
encourage that the rule making
process as well.
Thank you Mr chair this maybe a
question that jury Simon can
answer is there any process
currently in place to access the
two point three million dollars
in the career technical
education Fund is there process
currently where groups can apply
to use money that aren't
specifically school districts or
charter schools.
Mr chairman and Representative
Garrett to my knowledge and I
was just looking it up so in
general the career technical
education from that in statute
is generally for awards to
school districts and charter
school for you to PED's request
for that eighty five percent of
the funding went directly to
that school districts and
charter schools I would point
out that because there's a
statutory your statutory
requirements for that program
any funding specifically to that
Fund would have to follow the
requirements of that statute and
PDF administers that then and
make sure that those
requirements are followed again
those funds are generally for
school districts and charter
schools need specifically to
offer those career technical
education programs.
Thank you very much for that
answer
I think that is the end of my
questions for now just does that
point that any group not just a
group we're hearing from today.
Could respond to a proposal that
PED would be required to prepare
in this bill and that could be
one or more providers so I think
I'm understand that correctly
that's my questions thank you.
I thank you Representative Dow
did you have been on that point
I want to see you I do want to
thank you so I know that we have
been increasing the funding for
community schools year over year
and community schools this
sounds like you schools and when
when the presenter Mr Chairman
representative mentioned
community schools that requires
at least one formal partnership
with the Canadian based
organization and so I'm
wondering if without this
funding it at that you could
approach school districts and
say here's what we do in the at
least anyone applying for
community schools so I guess my
struggle is that we are trying
to adequately fund P. E. D. and
we're trying to do it above the
line and we have an increasing
our appropriations steadily year
over year and so this is a
separate appropriation I'm
trying to understand.
How this isn't already funded
either through title one or if
your career technology pathways
or through community in schools
or through twenty first century
learning or through any other
mechanism with funding that's
out there already I'm trying to
understand where the gap is that
what did we miss that makes it
not possible for districts to do
this without more money.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for the question
no I I think that's the valuable
point on you know from our
perspective and again in
conversations with PED as well
and with you know even in the
process of drafting this
legislation what has come up in
and then throughout the
conversation it says well what's
come up again and again is that
you know in particular
it's again it's not just career
in college deposit there others
that I have come across about
increasing essentially
Multiple district counselors are
able to support this so at this
point you know how how collagen
propose it has for example sixty
six succeeded so far is to
individual contracts with
individual schools however you
know.
The specific funding that will
enable them to do this would be
would allow them to expand or
any program for that matter you
know more rapidly to be able to
touch more of our do we think
rural schools that may not have
the access or the ability to to
have this kind of one on one one
other thing I do want to mention
though is that you know what's
valuable at this conversation to
me is when there may be
additional ways that we can work
within the funding that already
exists to broaden it to include
a counseling element as opposed
to you know just directly you
know for individual counseling
individual schools.
So thank you
Representative since it seems
like you're going on a line of
questioning so I have another
other members on the list and
then we'll go back to you.
But again this is an
appropriation bill so if we can
keep our answers in our
questions very focused because
we have several other bills to
get through today so
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chair and I
apologize to the members of her
being a little bit party
thanking and I think I
understand and thank you
Representative Garrett for the
line of questions because they
were along the same line that I
had so I just want to.
I know it's an appropriations
bill.
And we all understand already
the appropriations process
however it cation Committee for
reasons Mr chair and I think
it's important to address
it from the perspective of what
it.
Representative Sanchez have
indicated it intended to deal
with the focus on this would be
more of a one to one is what I'm
understanding
from the perspective of
Understanding this further in
terms of the appropriation
Mr chair and representative I I
understood it from the line of
questions that this would be
meant to supplement
what is currently on what may or
may not be
in the PED funding stream.
And to ensure that we're taking
are following what I think Mr
Chairman is what we should be
doing and that is looking at new
approaches in order to you
innovative community centered
community quarter are approaches
that we know work so when we
work on a one to one basis when
we work in the church in the
students environments within
their homes or wherever they may
be when we work to ascertain
from the student directly what
their envisioning for the the
the student and the families
with their envisioning for their
own career path
and how they're going to get to
that career path that that's
definitely
a new approach and your approach
it should have been the approach
we used all along and that way
we wouldn't be where we are
right now having to supplement
supplements supplements so in
answering the question in
viewing it from that standpoint
I view it as an account is Madam
and then from the accountability
standpoint Mr chair every R. F.
P. and if it doesn't have it if
it's negligent in in in not
having that our accountability
pieces you have to work in
because these are public money
these are funds that could very
well be leveraged with other
public monies could very well be
leverage with federal funds
could very well be.
Average in any manner but when
the public monies accountability
check marks and checklist always
in the R. F. peas you can't buy
we can't you can bypass those
things and so I just wanted to
to let the Sanchez noted I that
I do understand
to the fullest extent what your
intent is I do understand that
our community centered
approaches Mr chair our work
best especially when you're
elevating the student and
leading the student on a one to
one and in their environment
articulate what they've invision
for their future so I understand
what the next step is however we
need to probably in my in my
estimation the very strong in
being consistent with what we
view as what we want to create
an institutional changes that we
that work so we know that the
systems in the protests that are
being used in articulated in
this bill we know that the what
work and so I just can't support
a strong supporter of the stock
thank you Mr chair.
Here Representative click.
Representative Andrea.
You may be muted.
Your next.
My questions were answered I'm
sorry at the I took my hand and
Mr okay okay great I I took it
down for you a couple times
because I right everybody's name
on my list so no worries thank
you representative
Representative figure of please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Sanchez for
bringing this bill it seems like
we're trying to get at the
problem of our shortage of
college and career counseling
for students and the fact that I
counseling system right now
isn't.
Right funding to handle this tax
and I absolutely support that my
questions about accountability
we're already asked and they are
clearly an issue that needs to
be dealt with the issue work
forward and and improve this
bill my second question then
would be yes and that is knowing
that the appropriation asked for
here is sufficient to cover the
state it's going to cover
that number proposed here was
maybe ten schools and that of
course depends on the program
depends on the R. F. P. but it's
going to cover some schools then
my question is how do you
target.
Your time is where the need is
greatest and how do you build
that into the bill that would be
my question how can you ensure
that these funds go to the
schools and students that
currently needed.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative is an
excellent question.
Think that that that it that is
why we're having these
discussions here today but I
would I would differ also again
to if Representative strategy
still here and.
If you are still here as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and I agree
that's a wonderful question on
so I think that would have to be
part of the proposals that would
come forward and we and to your
point I believe we would need to
give more additional instruction
in the bill you know to for
those parties however it is
meant LCS briefly as many of us
know you know there are so many
very small school districts
across you know the state that
may have one maybe two high
schools in them I just want to
make a point that even if it
covers just one school that
could be a very large you know
land area for New Mexico as well
all you do and gentleman at all
you you have anything to add
briefly I'd part it's you as
well.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm my my thinking would be I I
would be happy to work with PED
on a on a very broad needs
assessments of all high schools
in the state of New Mexico I
know that
PED has you know they are
working on a strategic plan and
the individual that helped us
with the needs assessments
through Landel foundation would
be really well positions to to
do to do that work so I think
cut you know from my perspective
college and career plaza would
be willing to participate in and
and doing and needs assessment
of of all of high schools in in
the state we would be fine we
would need some of you know
funding to do that and and
support from I'm guessing PED to
do that and maybe some other
nonprofit partners that you know
are focused on research and
education but I think that that
is something that we we could
do.
My approach thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsors thank you miss more
yeah I think the bill would
benefit from some more
instructions for PED on.
What your intent is and where
you want these funds to go.
Thank you those are all my
questions.
Thank you I don't have anybody
else on my list but I did want
to clarify a couple things
that members were getting at
so I brought in Mr Senator from
PED to try to
Talk through some of these
issues if I may.
Mr center welcome
So we're looking at short term
college career readiness
programming can you can it tell
us briefly that kind of like I
guess there are two things
what's what the department has
done and how this may supplement
those efforts and then the
accountability piece I think was
another question
if you wouldn't mind addressing
those Mr center.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thanks for the
question so I'll speak first to
the to our strategic plans to
mention a couple of times and
and folks are right madam our
our focus on college and career
readiness specifically around
career technical education and
work based learning those are
some initiatives that we've been
working both through the career
technical education fund that
that Mr Simon mentioned earlier
in funding career technical
education programs around the
state but also working on work
based learning and the kinds of
internships that folks have
mentioned so those are those are
also very important a lot of the
a lot of the kinds of things
that have been mentioned today
are also being handled at a
local level obviously with high
school counseling and career
counseling that kind of work I
do want to speak really briefly
to what Representative Dow was
mentioning earlier there are
there are some other places
where districts to make choices
about how to fund a specific
purpose and I'll just say one
more thing about
One of the initiatives of the
district is I'm sorry District
that the department is
undertaking around a graduate
profiles and we've done a pilot
with a number of districts
around the state to develop
graduate profiles on a local
level.
So that school districts can
make decisions about the kind of
programming and supports and
resources that students need to
essentially to to to be
successful on the path that they
choose for themselves I am and
again that's we you've heard us
talk about for a couple of years
now or or maybe longer the idea
that college and career are
equal co equal pathways and that
one is not better than another
and so some of this is about
local decision making and how
they choose to leverage their
funding to support students in
the way that they see fit in
their communities.
Great thank you I'm I mean so I
will say one thing about the
accountability piece too is that
I mean Representative Roybal
Caballero brought it up without
any sort of R. F. P. that gets
tracked and accounted for but
also most of us Sir in the
interim on legislative education
study committee the college
careerpathways has certainly
been a big part of that so if
there were any concerns about
what an appropriation may go to
certainly we have that ability
at
within the inner to to really
delve into these issues so I
don't I don't think there's
necessarily anything that
necessarily needs to be spelled
out being that this is going out
to
updating process through the
public education department in
order to to get these contracts
is not fully appropriated to one
organization but that there are
are multiple that can apply
Be granted these funds for the
service as a supplement so I
think that's I think that's
important for the committee to
note also our power in order to
do that as the legislative body
to request and and keep keep any
sort of organization or any sort
of funding or any sort of
projects that the the the
department is working on
accountable as well.
Mr chair if I could Ms.
Expectantly for that second part
of your question and I'll just
add that as far as
accountability goes for college
and career readiness programs
but just I think the overall
success of schools in New Mexico
has to do with graduation rates
college going rates called
retention rates and some of that
is is housing PED so that is in
partnership with H. ET and I
think the kinds of programs that
you all have been talking about
today would probably be measured
using those those kinds of
metrics.
I certainly appreciate that I'm.
So.
Committee don't have any more
questions that anybody else have
anything else to.
And it's time.
But I'll entertain a motion.
Mr chair.
Representative I think as
Representative Trujillo is a yes
senator hill you know I've been
doing this a lot of thought it's
gonna go to appropriations.
We get tabled.
So I I think with all due
respect to the Sanchez.
That we
give them more time during the
interim to work on it and that
way they can come back with a
lot more fitting information
because I hate to see it kids in
appropriations I mean you guys
where murders over there so
work on it and come on back in
the interim it yeah we work in
Indian arm come on back and then
they get to it it can work a lot
better thank you Mr chair so.
That's what I say hearing a
suggestion to roll this
indefinitely to work on it I
think
If we can find a way to fit this
into the strategic plan that Mr
Senator had mentioned
I think that would be a a route
to go if that's amenable to the
sponsor
but I certainly appreciate a
discussion this morning I think
as a robust discussion about
accountability measures about
what's happening in terms of
college and career readiness for
students and and certainly I
think hearing from the members
that I need for for something
very pointed in very strategic
that we need to be offering to
our students along with the
appropriate funding to go along
and and and find for school
districts to do that
but with that Representative
for.
On Representative Serrato
do you have any parting remarks
for us.
Just like to think that thank
you chairman thank you committee
thank you for the really you
said request conversation today
with the need to there and we
know that you.
How we work through everything
there are a lot of details and
information that we can include
as we work through the
intermediate and.
These partnerships thank you so
much and appreciate time great
thank you representative
Representative.
Thank you at in complete
agreement I appreciate this
committee thank you Mr chairman.
Great thank you all.
And thank you miss North for
being the expert today and being
with us.
Thank you.
Right.
So what I was going to do
we'll over one fifty nine
I think I see Representative
Sarinana in the audience for the
attendees because the rest of
our bills have to do with
members and committee since
we're gonna be here for the
duration Representative Trujillo
you're gonna be here I'll
certainly be here for the
duration of the meeting but
we'll go to Representative
Sarinana in house bill one
ninety three
Representative Sarinana if you
could on the attendees side can
you please raise your hand.
and then I think Mr sentence
going to continue on with us.
C. okay everybody else left on
their own because I was too slow
all right.
It seems like we have everybody
in here now for house bill one
ninety three
good morning representative
Sarinana please when you're
ready.
Thank you Mr chairman my
computer's a little slow today
so hopefully it'll work thank
you Mr chairman members of the
Education Committee I'm here to
present house bill one ninety
three and like you said Mr
chairman Johnson that will be
the expert witness
Mr chairman house bill one
ninety three amends the school
personnel act to add consistency
to the criminal history record
check procedure by required PED
and the department of public
safety to conduct a criminal
history check record check on
all applicants for licensure
volunteers and contract
employees it's it amends a
portion of it house bill one
twenty from last year PED is
also authorized to conduct
criminal background checks on
current licensees if the
department determines that is
necessary to protect students
safety this is all about
students safety one ninety three
specifies that all individuals
applying for licensure or
certificate from PED to undergo
a state level and national level
criminal history check record
check now requires applicants to
pay for that
in one eighty three propose is
confidentially confidentiality
requirements of blocks PDP
excluding a qualified person
from licensure on the sole basis
of having an arrest or convicted
or being convicted of a crime
unless it is a qualifying
criminal conviction under the
uniform licensing act this bill
will go into effect July first
industry chairman I'd like to
defer to Mister etcetera and
then to my co sponsors if they'd
like to make additional comments
thank you please.
Mr chair representative Sarinana
thank you again
this is a pretty simple bill it
does it does just a few things
it does not change the way that
we conduct background checks it
doesn't change the way of the
people that we are required to
to do background checks on it is
merely amending the statute to
comply with FBI requirements
without the amendment the
department would be unable to
continue to conduct background
checks on licensure so one of
the things that the FBI asked us
to do our our said that we were
sort of lacking is that our
statute lacks specificity about
the kinds of licenses
that would be subject to
background checks and so this
ammendment really add some of
that specificity again it
doesn't change
any of the record the current
requirements it just it is
complying with those FBI
requirements so that we can
continue to conduct background
checks and keep kids safe.
Right thank you.
Others wishing to committee
shall we go to the audience
okay.
Mr chair just quit their.
Yes this
Mr chairman and committee
members this is just an
extension as previews previously
stated the FBI requests it's
related to house bill one twenty
eight that we passed in the
sixty day session school
personnel background and
training and just tightens it up
that was a bill nicknamed of
past the trash to prevent school
employees from getting passed on
from one district to another so
this tightens it up in
structures at thank you.
Right thank you.
Other that wish to comments that
were co sponsors on this
briefly.
No.
We go to the audience than and
Senate representative Sarinana.
Yes thank you Mr chairman.
All right so good to the
attendees side those in support
of house bill one ninety three.
Please indicate by raising your
hand goes in support house bill
one ninety three okay looks like
we have somebody hello we'll go
to Meredith we'll go to those
participating virtually first
okay.
On the line and went away.
Never mind we'll go to expected
in.
Meredith please up to two
minutes but prefer is better.
More
chairman members of the
committee are not able.
Are your but also on behalf of a
garden New Mexico and the one
broader market calendar very
important part alright our own
faith and firemen but I realize
think anything but I appreciate
four point and.
Well that the committee always
more important.
Work.
Thank you for.
Thank you right thank you.
Others in the attendees.
All right so we'll go to our
committee room.
Member maybe in the committee
room please efforts two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman I'm
Dennis Roch I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico school
superintendents association we
stand in support of the concept
of a house bill one ninety three
but we we do have a couple of
additional operational reflects
the to raise one of them is that
that certainly we want to have a
background check to make sure
school employees our state but
there's actually two background
checks that occur when somebody
comes to a school for employment
one is for licensure and that
goes to PED and this F. B. I.
requirement is exactly the right
step but there's also a pre
employment background check that
schools get and it appears from
the the change of this statute
of this proposed here that
superintendent would be cut out
of the mix from receiving a
background check for new
employees coming to our schools
we're a little concerned about
that we want to make sure that
the statute doesn't cut us out
we need to be able to see that
locally and then the second
piece is there some question
about whose responsibility for
the responsible for the feet in
the payment of the fee for the
background check current
statutes does that applicants
who are offered employment the
school pays for it volunteers
and contractors there any be
asked to pay for the background
check the line about paying for
it for applicants often limit
has been struck in this bill and
so it leaves silent the question
of who paid for the background
check for someone being offered
employment by a school we really
think that the statue should be
clear and knocks on on that
topic so that there's no
question who's responsible for
she the opportunity it offers
some technical corrections as we
go.
Thank you.
All right so many others in
support.
Good opposition Sir any
opposition to house bill one
ninety three.
All right.
So will come to committee
committee members questions are
presented a please.
Mr chair I recommend do passed
right so we have to do passed
motion.
Thirty second.
All right.
All right so.
Anything question.
All right we have a New Mexico
okay.
Representative.
I'm sorry Mr chair I I didn't
raise my hand in time into K.
if you or your a got off my
questions.
You if you would all talk at the
the motion for now and then
we'll come back to it
Representative Dow where site
question is does this make it
more aligned with the process
that CYFD background check
bureau uses.
And I can explain what that is I
am very familiar with that one
as well as a PED background
check and if DH background check
you need to CYFD is that the
only thing that the employer you
receive back from CYFD is a
letter that says eligible for
higher in eligible for higher
you have no idea what's in the
record or why they are
ineligible and when they
determine eligibility you
receive no you pay sixty four
dollars to the C. I. T.
background check your or least
that's what it was two years ago
and you receive nothing back
except a letter with a to Mrs.
Eligible for higher or in
eligible for higher.
Thank you Mr chair that we're
doing.
Mr speaker Representative if if
you if you like I'll defer to
and John Mr St place Mr chair
representative does that's a
pretty good question I'm I'm
going to follow up with my
licensure folks as far as I know
we don't
we are not involved in the in
the hiring process or hiring
piece of of background checks we
conduct background checks
strictly for licensure purposes.
Two candidates for a teaching
job.
Deal with with local with local
districts on the employment
piece.
Mr Chairman representative then
what is this what is the change
that that's making this
protecting students and
communities what is the change
it or is this.
What's the purpose of the
amendment the change Mr Chairman
Representative Dow again
teaching teaching I'm sorry.
Individuals who are applying for
a teaching license or some other
license issued by PED have to
undergo a background check for
the purposes of licensure so
this amendment maintains our
ability to conduct those
background checks for the
purpose of licensure.
Once licensed a teacher by for a
job in a in a local school
district still has to undergo a
background check in order to be
up employed in that district
we're not part of that process.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Chatfield.
You get inspired.
Thank you Mr chair I'm not get
next slide it inspired on
getting more confused because it
was pretty clearly yes or may
when we started but now I'm
seeing that Representative
Russia's has some clarifications
that may need to be worked on
with this bill as does rubric
down the I really respect both
of their expertise in the
education department so I'm
wondering if we need to take a
day and see if we can fix a
couple of things that are going
on here.
Representative and Mr CENIC
could you address some of the
issues that were brought up by
my Mr Roch.
Yes Mr chair and representative
Chatfield
I I appreciate the question and
I and some looking to the bill
one more time supercenter rushes
right it does strike the
language that require a public
school to pay for that
background check so I have to
follow up to see if there's any
anything else on language I'm
I'm reading to the bill right
now
to make sure again I.
Yeah I'm gonna have to follow up
on the question I'm sorry.
So Mister chair I'm also a
little more concerned about what
the superintendent gets to see
I've I've been on the school
board long time a I had one.
Person that we hired that took
their own life and I can't
imagine that the he was a good
influence on the on the kids
that the.
Said under him during that time
so it's important to me that the
superintendents get to see
background hopeful of these
higher ease.
Mr Chairman I mean and
Representative I agree we just
gonna look further Mr Senate did
you have more we can talk about
or we do we just need to look
into this because I was looking
at the bill and I didn't see.
See what is I didn't see the
strike but yet Mr chair
representative representative of
Chattfield so some of the
amendments that do that
Representative Roch I'm sorry
for Representative Roch
superintendent rush brought up
is are are you some of this is
technical clean up so that the
language is consistent across
across the bill and so most of
this is not substantive to the
to the main change of this this
has to do again with that
employee portion and
Representative chapel just to to
reassure you superintendents
still get information about
those employees it's just that
the department is not directly
involved again in that
employment in an employment
piece we're happy to make some
some technical amendments to the
bill
if we need to in order to move
it forwards to ensure they get
that there's clarity around was
responsible for paying for those
background checks again those
are not not important but
secondary to the to the the main
thrust of the bill which is to
again ensure the department's
ability to conduct those
background checks for licensure.
Mr chairman I'd like to clean it
up and then vote for.
Thank you representative
Representative back up the.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
would disagree with my
colleagues and doctors and I do
appreciate Mr Senate from PED's
saying that because I'm the HR
guy I I see hundreds and
hundreds of background checks
over the years and so the
question is you know we're here
to protect our students of the
fact is that the superintendents
need the access to what impact
is part of the background check
not just if we have a clear
background anything to keep kids
safe and that's why I really
think this that I want to clean
deposit which we clean up I you
I will give it my full support I
just want to look over somebody
can kind of speak in here is we
know what happens when there's
language that is subject to
interpretation the loopholes
they're gonna try to exploit
that so I thank you Mr chairman
for bringing this bill I think
it's a great idea to protect our
kids I do agree with up in the
requirements of the FBI
background but I think that we
need to send a clean bill for.
Right now and I I certainly
appreciate the comments on.
About a clean bill and certainly
there is some question about the
payments so I I I have another
concern for this investors Santa
is that can you talk about the
F. B. I. compliance and when we
should or should not be
compliant with the FBI on these
background checks.
Mr chair thank you for the
question so.
This is this is an ongoing issue
the the FBI has granted us a
waiver for an extension aren't
in our ability as mentioned in
the FIR we ought we ask for a
waiver last summer we actually
didn't get official word from
the FBI but they have not just
allowed us if continue to work
with us on background checks and
so it's pretty crucial that we
that we pass this bill this
session in order to be able to
comply with those FBI
requirements we wouldn't wanna
risk not being able to conduct
those background checks again
and and we appreciate
superintendent rushes are
questions we're willing to work
with
with folks to make sure that
there's clarity around that
payment issue because that's
that's the question that I think
superintendent Ross had would be
responsible for the payment at
the local level
but we do want to you have given
the given the amount of time
left want to make sure that the
bill itself gets through in
order to again for us to be able
to to maintain our ability to
conduct background checks and so
that's the piece that concerns
me and that we're stuck I think
in a between a rock and a hard
place because I hear my members
definitely wanting to to clean
it up in that span the work that
we've done in committee however
there is also the time a period
this is its first committee
which there will be at least one
other in the house one other in
the Senate floor if this is to
make it through and it's my
concern that we may not get this
through yes yes bill does not
pass so with with I I'm I'm
seeing several hands go up
And and so all kind of go
through the list over
Representative Trujillo please.
Yes Mr chair based.
I move it to pass.
So we've had to do pass I've
just been holding off on it what
we can yes this issue but we do
have one on the table I just
haven't accepted it yet will go
through comments that I
appreciate it Representative I
did see your hands go up go down
is a go down on purpose on
purpose.
Well I guess I just Mister
Mister chair I just to have us
one question I assume this goes
to Judiciary after yes this is
this committee is that correct.
Of no Representative it goes to
our government committee okay
well I I to believe that we need
to clean this up but in the
interest of time I think we
could move this forward and then
they can at the amendment and
that in the interim and in
between the two committees and
Isn't that government just in
the interest of time I think
it's really important that this
gets or and we all know that we
want this that that I think that
the
the sponsor of the bill a is a
in agreement with this is
invalid so I think we had a
voted down and then just just
get it on its way great thank
you Representative Baca please.
Mr Chairman what I would
actually like to proposes that
Superintendent Rauch maybe
someone from PED maybe possibly
Glenn Warniment kind of work on
this and we addresses at our
next meeting for two passed so
if they can work out the
tactical changes that need to be
done here in the intro in that
we address this bill for our
next house meeting which could
be Friday I just requested we
put this bill on Friday's agenda
you know we want to discuss the
issues typically bill and then
we we we deposit on Friday the
best will the committee okay
thank you Representative talk a
representative Representative
Garrett okay Representative
representative Sarinana thank
you thank you Mr chairman I am
just concerned on the time like
thanks been said we will make
the amendments we can work with
Representative from
representative of Russia
that and and and get this done
for the next committee but the
time and
there tends to be a lot of a.
Time not always well used as we
move these bills forward so we
need to really look at the time
time line
thank you Mr chairman I totally
understand the representative
care please.
Yes art Mr chair I agree with
Representative Herrera I totally
understand representative Bachus
point of view also if it weren't
for the time I would state visit
on Friday but we know that with
the team of superintendent Roch
Mr saying that representative
Sarinana we know that what has
been discussed will get done and
then it can quickly go to the
government committee I'm just it
has to go through the Senate
still has to go to the floor it
has to go to Senate committees
and that's the time crunch for
something that we have to do in
order to ensure this takes place
thank you great thank you
Representative Chatfield.
Eight so Mister chairman I know
we usually don't do this but in
the interest of time I think
maybe move it out and clean it
up on the way to the next
committee.
Certainly I I I respect you
being amenable to that and I
respect you know we do we
typically do that in committee
and I like to have good clean
bills come out of this committee
but this is one of those issues
that we're stuck between a rock
and a hard place because I think
we can all understand the
urgency of getting this bill out
in the need for it
by.
Yeah I mean I do like to have
clean bills come out of this
committee so I will accept the
do passed motion I will say
though that we I think it's a
members of the Education
Committee should keep a close
eye on what those amendments are
in government since this is one
of those special issues in order
to
track those amendments to make
sure that they are substantial
and that their well in not just
well intentioned but the effects
of them will be what is desired
because I do have concern like
Musically Representative rush
but that Mr Roch brought up
about who's paying for those
fees I think that's a that's a
crucial piece to this well then
something that that we should be
looking after and something
certainly I
will commit to the committee
that that I'll be watching very
closely and if need be
seeing what we as the Education
Committee could do as far as
pulling the bill back if need be
but I'd really like to see those
those amendments before we go
for Representative Sarinana did
you of COVID yes thank you Mr
chairman
a superintendent rush just text
me and said he'll be working
with them adept as secretary
Warniment deputy secretary
Mormon and we will send you the
the amendment as soon as we get
it to all of you just to so you
have it and not feel bad about
it all right.
Yeah no definite no definitely
and and I can always requested a
bill be pulled back into this
committee if need be
Representative but no I
appreciate everybody being
really amenable on on on this
it's a it's a crucial matter to
get over and I appreciate the
the committee being amenable to
that so with that we had a do
passed motion in the second
madam secretary if you call the
roll on a do pass on house bill
one ninety three.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Well yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative had a.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative maturing.
Representative Madrid.
Representative.
Welcome.
Representative.
Representative districts here.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Vice chair Gary yes.
Yes.
Zero.
All right by a unanimous vote
you have to have a passage of
house bill one ninety three so
we appreciate it thank you thank
you committee for being so
amenable.
Right.
So madam vice chair if you want
if you would please take over
gonna try together myself.
Okay thank you Mr chair our next
bill will be house bill one
eighty four and that is school
micro credential projects Mr
Chairman do you have anybody
that you want to move I don't
I'll be doing it solo madam
chair okay thank you please
start when you're ready.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and thank you committee so
today in presenting house bill
one eighty four so this is an
idea that has been floated
around several states have
implemented it
And the V. A. R. micro
credentialing so I think during
the interim this is of
particular interest of mine was
was asking any of the education
educators that came before the
legislative education study
committee what we could do to.
Keep them in the profession and
keep them
engaged in that profession that
is outside of just increasing
their pay are increasing their
pay and and.
Largely what we heard the answer
to that question was something
to continually strive for in the
profession
to continually refine their
practice to improve their
practice for themselves but also
for their students and I think
that translates nicely to the
classroom so house bill one
eighty four sets up a pilot
project for now in obviously
time is obviously an issue as we
heard on the.
But I think it's an important
conversation to be having about
how we can start getting our
teachers.
Compensated and continually
striving in that profession in
ways to to further themselves
and keep them continually
engaged not to say that they
aren't but continually engaged
and compensated for the work
that they're doing so the pilot
project would have the public
education department kind of
take the proposed.
Appropriation of one million
jobs million one million dollars
for very targeted professional
development that would be
something that the public
education department would come
up with what those targeted
professional develops would be
in order for students or
educators rather to gain my
credentialing in various fields
There would be some cross
collaboration with the
department of higher education
about what sorts of classes may
be required in order to do that
so we're really trying to
address
A few things with this bill but
primarily having.
Teachers be able to continually
work and and gain credentials
and hopefully Hey attached to
those credentials so that we
don't see the the issues that
we're having now in terms of all
use level two teachers for
example and you level two after
four years making comparably or
the same in a lot of cases as a
teacher an educator who has
twenty years experience that has
been stuck at level two I think
this would be a neat way to to
address those sorts of issues
with in the tiered system as
well but with that madam chair
all stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair with that
we're going to go to our
communities
I'm I'm going to ask
if you are in support of house
bill one eighty four please
raise your and and remember that
you have two minutes but so keep
that in mind.
And we will go to those in favor
I'm going to start online with
Kelly Pierce.
Chile of two thank you thank you
very much good morning Mr
chairman madam vice chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kelly appears I am an
enthusiastic educator and senior
policy fellow with teach plus
New Mexico I applaud house bill
one eighty four because I
embrace professional learning
opportunities that allow
teachers to grow on their own
terms I embrace professional
opportunities that are bite
sized research based
personalized and flexible I
embrace professionalizing
opportunities that promote
immediate changes in classroom
instructional practices I also
put my hands together for the
New Mexico public education
department thank you for
launching the court cultivating
a classroom of respect a fresh
look at classroom management
micro credentialing pilot course
this winter as I perused the
content in campus recently I was
impressed with the depth of
information and motivating
activities as well as the fact
my coach reached out to me
within twenty four hours of
seeing me in the modules I'm
already dreaming of a multitude
of topics for the two year
school micro credential project
including culturally and
linguistically responsive
teaching and learning social
emotional learning deeper dives
into classroom management and so
much more as we look to the
future what excites me most you
ask Miss emerged into my car
credentialing on the New Mexico
education landscape could create
an alternative path for those
advancing on their licensure
levels the dossier system should
not be the one and only way to
demonstrate educator
effectiveness thank you for
passing house bill one eighty
four and opening the door to a
brighter Education world filled
with meaningful professional
learning.
Thank you Kelly our next speaker
will be Dr Ellen burn sting.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Ellen burns Steen
I'm president of the Albuquerque
teachers federation.
A few states and districts are
investigating micro
credentialing is a way to
promote teacher professional
development and give teachers
the chance to demonstrate their
growing capacity in their field
if we worked on this I believe
we would be cutting edge among
other states micro credentials
offer strategy for teachers to
expand and validate their
learning to receive recognition
as they achieve milestones and
as they really hone their skills
based on what they are
interested in as well as what
they're school district school
and the state really needs we
can target state and district
micro credentialing in areas
like community schools
culturally responsive pedagogy
formative assessments English
language learners
considerations for students with
disabilities in inclusive
settings
I think this is a great way to
build on our three to your
system and flesh out a more
diverse career ladder I think it
can be applied to all educators
not just teachers that we could
expand it to counselors nurses
social workers and therapists
all who are very excited to
learn and grow in their
profession so I'd like to thank
Mr chair for sponsoring this
bill it's a very exciting move
forward for public education.
To bring stand our next speaker
will be a new product.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chair madam vice
chair and members of the
committee my name is Amy pada I
am a former kindergarten teacher
from the Los crucis public
schools and the twenty twenty
one teach plus fellow of the
year I now serve as the teacher
network coordinator for teach
plus New Mexico.
Teach plus has studied and
advocated for improve systems
related to ongoing teacher
training during the past several
years when surveyed by teach
plus New Mexico in the spring of
twenty twenty sixty two percent
of our teacher respondents
indicated that they were not
satisfied with professional
learning they have been
receiving more recently I let a
teacher panel with educators
from around the state exploring
what supports educators need
right now our teachers stated
that current professional
development efforts are simply
not meeting their needs they
want access to training that has
proven beneficial to their
students and that need their
meet their professional needs
teachers like students need
access to differentiated support
micro credentialing is such a
system that can provide that a
statewide system would allow
teachers to choose the topics
they need support and growth in.
And hopefully would include an
evaluation of the program to
support continuous improvement
we can current that Michael
could Angeline programs
highlight is a great way to
begin this process and to ensure
quality implementation before
full rollout thank you Mr chair
for sponsoring this bill and
thank you to the members of the
committee.
Thank you Amy our next speaker
is Dr heather Bassett.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
heather Bassett I'm Albuquerque
public schools we stand in
strong support of house bill one
eighty four micro credential
programs are administered at
state levels across the country
for purposes such as continuing
licensure or targeted
professional development so we
believe a pilot in New Mexico
powered by our higher and
agencies is something we would
strongly support thank you.
Thank you
I'm our final speaker online is
really may Ortiz and then we'll
go to room three oh nine take it
away Lee may thank you madam
chair and members of the
Education Committee I'm really
more T. so Representative the
New Mexico school board
association as their legislative
liaison and for all the reasons
madam chair members of the
committee that were outlined by
misprint state I will repeat
them The New Mexico school board
association supports this bill
of we have a long standing
policy to support the
development and implementation
of funding for professional
development for our teachers and
we certainly applaud the intent
of this bill that will help our
teachers move forward in that
direction I thank you for
consider aeration and we
appreciate your time.
Thank you and now we'll go to
our person in room three oh nine
please identify yourself and
your two minutes.
Good morning madam chair Dennis
Roch speaking on behalf of the
superintendents association
we're pleased to support house
bill one eighty four a lot of
those were previous speakers of
art Act talk about this
differentiated nature of the
professional development
targeted both the teacher
passions but also to some areas
of immediate in part through
classroom walkthroughs and
evaluations of really
highlighted your strengths and
also addressed in decisions here
is and thank you folks the tools
just to step up and and really
improve outcomes for students
and staff statewide we stand and
support thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you superintendent are
there any other speakers in room
three oh nine wish to make a
comment.
Okay thank you I'm is there
anybody in opposition to house
bill one eighty four.
K. C. no in opposition will go
to our analysts.
Hello this to any of our members
on our committee wish to say
anything.
Representative Lara and then
Representative Trujillo thank
you madam chair thank you all Mr
chair for reading this word I
think this is an excellent
opportunity for teachers.
And what I really appreciate
that you did Representative on
page one line twelve words as
providing report reporting
requirements thank you for that.
Thank you I fully support this
bill at the this is a great
opportunity for teachers.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo.
I would like to also stand in
support of this bill this is
great I wish we had had that
when I was teaching I
It may even more me back I don't
know if it's a great opportunity
for teachers to do the work that
they need to do and have the
support systems in place and the
credentialing to do it thank you
Mr chair for bringing it.
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsor I could potentially is
not necessarily a new idea for
teachers but bringing this pilot
project establishing a pilot
project here so that we can
explore it further is a great
step for New Mexico my request
if you will is that.
As the pilot project is
developed that we don't
necessarily reinvent the wheel
that we look at my credentialing
learning modules that already
exist in content areas you all
know I teach high school I teach
Spanish language at the national
organization for world language
teachers.
Has used microgrid actually has
established programs that are
really excellent.
Flexible on demand
differentiated that have a one
on one coach and that are
sustained over time so the best
part to me of micro
credentialing is that they can
provide professional development
that a teacher can implement and
then reflect and get feedback
and employment so we can't
really change teaching practice
and I hope that we look for that
kind of learning module and
macroprudential link and that we
take advantage and build in this
pilot project not necessarily
new modules that are higher
education institutions have to
create from scratch.
But incorporate what's already
out there.
And make it accessible to New
Mexico teachers.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa our next panelists
Representative Roybal Caballero.
You have the floor.
I just if it was appropriate I
wanted to make a motion.
You can make a motion we still
have a few more comments okay I
will it.
It's an excellent bill I want to
make a motion to pass motion
okay thank you will hold that
Representative Chatfield.
So madam chair with the time to
appropriate a second that
motion.
Okay we have a movie second I
just want to make one comment
myself.
Mr chair thank you I'm working
at a middle school during the
COVID we had so many tremendous
teachers who have spent their
time developing the ability to
do hybrid or
Virtual learning who had really
improved their technical skills
so that's an area people talk
about addressing many of the
social aspects of teaching but
it would be great to see those
teachers credited with their
tremendous investment some
people become Google certified
they've just been masters of
things so thank you for bringing
this forward do you have any
comments before the vote
thank you thank you madam chair
very perceptive yes before you
accept that motion I I certainly
appreciate the comments of of.
My colleagues here in in the
house Education Committee and
saying really the importance of
of adding Michael credentialing
within the tiered system I think
it's a good way to compliment
that tiered system
and also get our educators to
continually strive and refine
their profession in that we know
always translates to the
classroom in your treatment of
our students and I think this
this goes a long way for one of
the attendees had mentioned
professionalizing I'm in are
continually professionalizing
the the the job of being an
educator and I think that's
that's super critical it's just
I think in the state it's gonna
take a pretty big effort which
is why this is a pilot program
for now but it's going to take a
pretty concerted fiscal effort
in order to achieve what we're
looking at doing whether I need
Representative Figueroa brought
up if it's just
Things that were brought from
scratch from the university
level that will take a lot of
resources for combining both
that would be awesome but either
way we cut it we have to find a
way to
implement those those in concert
with the colleges and
universities have implement
those but then also have to
compensate our educators for
that we know what a list it's
been just on the education side
to get raises for everybody
within the educational system
all so I think this is a is an
important conversation to to
have been and continue to have
but thank you madam chair and
thank you committee.
Thank you Mr chair we have a
motion from Representative
Roybal Caballero second by
Representative Chatfield is
there anybody who objects to a
do pass on this bill.
Okay I see no objection Mr chair
you have to do house for house
bill one eighty four thank you.
All right.
Thank you committee I appreciate
it
Thank you madam chair I'm so we
will move on house memorial
thirty three if I'm not
mistaken.
Where where emerge number all
right.
Cool it is it's also meant for
staff and but he's a Formula One
racer.
Thank.
I know that stuff.
Okay.
Good morning Mr chair the vice
chair members of the committee.
I'm happy to bring to you house
memorial thirty three which is
the gifted education program
recommendation the memorial you
know that I've been bringing
gifted of bills and and
get gifted built profile and.
We never seem to be successful
this year I decided to bring in
a memorial that simply ask for
some
Work from the PED to help us.
Find equity to our diverse
socioeconomic groups in the
schools and that everybody has
access to gifted education what
I want to make sure that that
This memorial has PED following
through and making sure that
that's done
I want to make sure that we're
providing evidence based
practices to the school and I
also want to make sure that
everyone is make is doing the
universal screening when a child
is referred to get the best.
Nice seeing that idea does not
always cover gifted costs.
In terms of the referrals but I
wanted to do is make sure that
that these the PED would
provide.
Little bit more attention to
ensuring that school districts
we're following the right
process sees and with that
there's no appropriation Mr
chair and I stand for questions
and I don't have expert
witnesses outside of all of you
who are gifted in my mind do you
like that.
I appreciate that.
Representative I'm so we will go
to our attendees list since
their support for House memorial
thirty three year.
So you have up to two minutes.
Chris.
Chris Evans two minutes welcome.
Hi my name is Chris revise and I
am a instructional coaching up
and coming schools I am the
current past president of the
New Mexico association for the
gifted
I had the pleasure of speaking
in support of house bill one
thirty last year and
Representative Dow raise some
interesting questions which had
to do with the physical nature
of the bill this memorial helps
us start that conversation so if
you look at the FIR report one
of the things that it mentions
is that Africans often do not
have evidence to say that
underserved gifted students.
Have lower achievement to that I
would like to offer Pringle
nineteen seventy painter
nineteen seventy six with more
nineteen eighty first nineteen
ninety three first two thousand
and a plethora of other research
that says that if we under
server given to communities they
under perform.
This memorial calls on the PED
to make sure that we are
spending our money appropriately
if you look at sections B. C. M.
D. thank all ask whether or not
what we are doing is affected
for these reasons we think that
this memorial is absolutely
imperative to ensuring the
quality of gifted education
across the state and will give
the legislature and the L. E. S.
C. more information to make
better informed decisions about
gifted education the future for
these reasons I humbly ask for
your support for this memorial.
I thank you all right Jeffrey
running Jeffery of up to two
minutes welcome.
The morning Mr chair members the
committee thank you
Representative Trujillo for
bring this memorial I work in
Santa Fe public schools as a
gifted education coordinator and
specialist and I am twenty
twenty PED authored and gifted
education except for port that
found that identification
representation program design
and delivery and curriculum and
instruction are all areas that
needed to be focus on for
improvement that we had strong
practices across our state but
they were inconsistent used in
some places not used in others.
H. B. one thirty would have
mandated many of the services
that were recommended in that
report and as the previous
commenter said the fiscal impact
statement for that report again
of a wide range of possible cost
this memorial would ask the PED
to estimate the cost benefits of
improvements to gifted education
and focus of PED's attention on
that so that equity and
effectiveness can be brought to
our state and then we just you
can study that in the coming
year thank you.
Right thank you
and good morning and you have a
two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative my name is doctor
and gray I'm the second author
of the produce study that is
decided in this memorial I'm a
former Navajo Nation K. A.
gifted education teacher and
currently the educational
assessment specialist at New
Mexico tech our study showed
that New Mexico is fourteenth in
the nation for providing access
to gifted education with eighty
six percent of students
attending a school with gifted
Education but we're forty third
in the nation for equity of
access between title one schools
and non title one schools.
Eighty eight percent of New
Mexico students attend title one
schools and students in the
schools are identified for
gifted education at forty one
percent the rate of students in
non title one schools
that five percent identification
rate in title one schools and a
twelve percent identification
right and non title one schools
additionally New Mexico schools
perpetuate the historic under
representation of money our ties
populations in gifted education
with representation indices
where one would be an exact
ratio of us point seven one four
Hispanic students point five
nine for American Indian
students and point seven one for
African American students.
I highly encourage that you
support this memorial requesting
the public education department
to study and report to the
legislation legislative
education study committee it's
recommendations for gifted
education and services thank you
right thank you doctor.
Doctors said Leo it looks like
PJ said the good morning.
In two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
house Education Committee and
Representative Christine
Trujillo my name is Dr pages to
deal and I am an associate
professor at Mexico highlands
university I'm currently the
department chairman special
education gifted Department and
and one of the few professors
who offer the mandatory twelve
hours to get the course work for
educators to receive their
gifted endorsement this is a
requirement to teacher gifted
children here in New Mexico it
was the first said that our
nation in our nation we as a
state positively surpass
educating gifted students
primarily because gifted
education is underneath the
special education umbrella
however although give it
educators are on the same page
in terms of utilizing the
structural strategies curriculum
methods and facilitating give
distance Mexico there are still
problems that exist.
Basically there's no oversight
from an individual as gifted
education experience and has
ever received the gifted
endorsement requirements from
our state therefore
inconsistencies exist because
there's no oversight when you go
to the NM PED website and click
on the office of programs you'll
see a tab for special education
when you click on that there is
no mention of directed education
the only information that you
can locate is the gifted
technical assistance manual
which is watered down document
as an educator for thirty three
years I have experience limited
leadership primarily for gifted
education at the state level
which has been inconsistent and
sometimes non existence there
was one year when gifted was
moved to humanity.
Nationally recognized gifted
educator I'm willing to offer my
expertise and service to the
state of the state and and I'm
PED to ensure that all of our
given to students in New Mexico
are receiving a free and
appropriate education therefore
I support house memorial thirty
three.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Education Committee for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you.
Right some tree good morning
sentry of up to two minutes.
Sentry you may need to and then.
I found that good morning chair
and members of the committee
my name is Sandra ko chien
tossed Pueblo and culture and
the vice chair of the native
American democratic caucus of
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of house memorial
three
also as the mother of a gifted
on the
Have participated in many
meetings in collaboration with
and and PED and the spread
bureau and our local
gifted advisory committees
that are basically nonexistent
it takes a really strong willed
parents to get the services that
a gifted child needs especially
if the
our students of color and so I
think that
this house memorial would help
After it greatly so thank you
for your consideration and to
ask for your support in this
memorial have a great day thank
you.
All right so is there I'll go to
the audience again as their
opposition for House memorial
thirty three.
No opposition all right so we
will come to committee
Representative Madrid please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
And definite support to this
memorial and I think
Representative Trujillo for
doing this I I I brought it up
with my first year and then set
and talked to Joey Barton said
he joked you need to make a line
itemized for gifted program and
that and unfortunately it is
blended into other areas that
are considered the same category
of not trying to segregate
anybody but it is a need that we
need to rectify and put a we put
the districts with the
responsibility of serving our
gifted kids equally I think
we're missing the boat in our
state wonder why there are to
them end up going out of state I
think you're never given the
chance to to excel to the levels
that they've you know they need
that funding equally as we put
it for the.
Up in the stable it's a it's a
merit wind itemize that I really
request and hope that we can get
somewhere with that and thank
you Representative Trujillo for
bringing it up again this isn't
something that should let us as
a legislative body to be
neglected so what are we to meet
the challenge members of the
committee and and and supports
us for sure because it does need
teeth in into this and and the
funding is going to be something
to discover being discussed in
the in the room this is a great
time this memorial start this
process so once again thank you.
Senator you for bringing this
back up.
Thank you Mr great thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr
actually I'm I I I'm pretty
familiar with this area
education.
As being a teacher the given to
myself and overseeing the gifted
Services registered for number
of years I guess my my questions
are more about.
What are the what are the what
are the intended outcomes of
this committee I mean what I'm
gonna present as it as was
already recognized in our
direction for we do have a if
the technical education I know
what is a loss that was was
updated.
How does that play into this
committee or the study of and
what what is the desired goal
from this house memorial that's
going to affect so you did
education across the state.
Mr chair.
First place yes thank you
Representative Baca for
For that question the issue for
us.
There is universal
inconsistency with the our
application the effective
programs throughout the state
all of the public schools and
many charter schools and the
goal was to make sure that we
have thank you stated your your
you were the person who
implemented the program in your
school district and and that's
great but not every school
focuses in on that and the needs
of the students or interacts
with a lot of the parents who
really feel that their kids need
to be tested
or screened to ensure they have
access to those services and
what I'm trying to do is make
sure that that the PED.
It it's infinite wisdom will.
We'll make sure that everyone
is.
School districts are actually
following the process these
that exist to make sure that
kids get screen there's
universal access and that
Students can get identified that
are non.
That are actually students of
color as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Trujillo there
there's two there's two issues
that we have already as part of
the evaluation identification as
to I know that the dog also
since or others they are able to
consider factors when making
determinations of eligibility
for.
So we already have those kind of
measures in place and again like
with everything else is up to
the MBTA of the team the IEP
team or the disparate team to
make the determination of this
the other big issue that I found
is that okay swayed by with
gifts and gifted where is the
funding to actually implement
the program because that's one
of the challenges that districts
face is that we identify these
kids.
But when it comes on to actually
have money to support the
programs that would budget up
students.
There's not that and I think
that districts struggle to that
it's kind of one of those yeah
we identify him but unlike other
populations under IDA or some
other there are groups there's
not the funding that goes along
with them to help support
programs at the school and
district level so that's that's
another big concern that I think
is having I do appreciate the
greater the bill for bringing
awareness to gifted education
but if you know I think that
it's gonna take more than just a
word as to the act to address
some of the problems that we
have is going to need to fund
the fall through with stops
federal funding if we're going
to properly service for this
group of students.
All in all of our other students
that we are are trying to help
with our education bills thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Mr Chairman please the and I
think we can that can help
answer some of it but you know
that he Representative Baca
raised the exact point that
Representative Madrid did there
are there are the money should
be there to to be able to
support those gifted students it
doesn't exist under the current
federal funding am I correct do
we.
So.
Mr chair and representative
Trujillo I have to consult I do
a to be sure but my recollection
is that federal I. D. E. A.
funds are not eligible for
education however state funds
through the SCG including gifted
students at in special education
so it's a there's a little bit
different thing how the state
funds gifted education how the
how the feds do it.
Thank you Mr chairman that's my
point.
We're bringing this bill the
point is to try to obviously.
Encouraging more funding in that
line I.
Pardon me in that line item but
also to make sure that the
because nobody you raise that
awareness.
Through the cracks and we need
to make sure that the gifted
kids and their parents.
Need to being addressed and I
don't think that they are now
based on the comments that you
received from the folks who
supported it
this is my this is been a
manual.
Request of my to try to support
those gifted programs and the.
Percent Representative Bacchus.
Concerns
there's no money and what we're
trying to do is get the study to
reveal to this scene.
That the because there's no
money the support transparent
kids are falling through the
cracks Mr chair.
Great thank you.
Thank you Representative Baca
Representative care please.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to thank Representative Trujillo
for doing this and including
equity because there's such a
focus on linear methods of
testing how will you read and
write English how are you doing
math many of our kids we have
these incredible creative
capacity for stem ensuring the
overlooked that's it thank you
very much and I do
AS a motion made yet.
but the Representative wants to
make a comment it disqualifies
you from connection that's okay.
All right so do we have a motion
Mr chairman of I move right to
pounce on house memorial three
three.
Right thank you Representative
Baca a second.
Right thank you Representative
Garrett didn't disqualify you
from second.
madam secretary called the roll
on a do pass on house memorial
three three point.
Representative Baca yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Rehm.
Representative rain.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
He's there.
He's talking.
What what.
We can come back to him yeah
I'll be coming back to
everybody.
Representative rebel commander.
Yes.
Yes Representative yes Sir.
Representative Sweetser.
Trujillo.
Yes.
Go across the hall and remind
Representative Madrid.
He he here is that okay
Representative Madrid C. X..
Okay
Chair vice chair Garant.
Aren't you can I'm here to
celebrate.
Meister Garant your music.
Okay maybe.
Your hand okay thank you.
Chairman yes.
Eight zero you have the
department.
You have in the past has
memorial thirty three thank you
Representative thank you very
much members of the committee
thank you Mr chair.
All right so thank you members
were waiting on some bills from
the Senate so we'll we'll see
what happens as far as Friday
but you can expect that we state
thirty but we'll see what bills
that we have please pay
attention to finance on the
floor and the golden rod but
with that thank you all so much.
Have a nice rest of your day
we'll see on the floor eleven
thank you committee.
