Representative Figueroa.
Representative Herrera.
Your.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Sweetser present.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Baca.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative.
Mr.
Vice chair Garrett.
Chairman.
Here.
We.
All right thank you very much
good morning everybody is so
we're gonna start off with house
bill six R. F. I. ours for the
bills have.
Been trickling in this morning
since seven thirty SO are
awesome Committee staff has been
putting them in the share files
as they do come in
so please bear with us on that
but the FIR is hadn't been.
But they're coming in and have
been coming in this morning okay
so they'll be uploaded into the
share file all right so without
further ado we have house bill
sixty so we have our returning
champion from Monday
Representative Lente please
welcome back thank you Mr
chairman good morning good
morning members of the committee
appreciate the.
Is it again house bill sixty
made American languages
certificate salary Parities what
I'm presenting you this morning
along with me I have to expert
witnesses which are already in
the in the panelists list the
first is a former deputy
secretary for teaching and
learning from the New Mexico PED
part of PED and currently the
superintendent for our
Bernalillo public school
district that month on you as
well as Dr Christine Sims she's
from Aqaba Pueblo she's a
professor in the department of
language and literacy she's also
the director for the American
Indian language policy research
and teacher training center
they're at the university as
well and I will call upon them
as as we see fit but the without
further ado I want to just
explain a little bit more about
the native languages native
languages have been in long
declined for several decades at
this point at the height of the
boarding school era.
Eighteen seventy seven to
nineteen twenty five the United
States allocated
adjusted for inflation about two
point eight billion dollars to
try to Medicaid
The nation's boarding school
infrastructure of the
educational system was designed
at that point to stimulate
indigenous people into the white
culture and really at its core
to destroy native American
languages and part of that that
the error was my grandparents
which I remember vividly and to
hear their stories about them
being taken from their home
chair chopped so mouthwash that
was so if they spoke their
native tongue was was truly the
sad story to hear there's an
estimated at this point hundred
and fifteen indigenous language
is left in the United States
today.
Thirty four of those are
considered in danger of being
extinguished and seventy nine
are more fear to be extinguished
within our lifetime you know
interventions are are eight
they've been federal grants made
through.
Laws like the native American
languages act and the ester
Martinez act but really since
two thousand five the the
federal government has only
appropriated about a hundred and
eighty million dollars for
indigenous an indigenous
language revitalization that is
nationwide.
New Mexico coming a little bit
closer to home has twenty three
pueblo nations and tribes within
our boundaries Mexico has made
eight native American languages
spoken that is to you within I.
T. well within at T. W. A. with
empty keris so what Zuni Navajo
and Mescalero Apache as well as
the agree patchy languages are
pueblos nations and tribes are
yet still not immune from this
potential eradication of the
native American language as was
proposed through the simulation
process of the United States
currently New Mexico there are
some school districts that offer
numeric language classes
unfortunately made American
language teachers often get paid
much less than their
counterparts in other teachers
within their school systems even
ones that to teach a second
language like Spanish or French
or German or whatever it might
be.
This lack of legitimizing
indigenous languages that
predate New Mexico itself is the
reason for house bill sixty
house bill sixty is the seeks to
address teacher shortages
through salary increases this
bill aims to attract more native
American language teachers and
prevent a widening of the native
American language eight at the
civically in this case House
Bill.
Sixty will then section twenty
two dash ten eight dash thirteen
of the Mexico statutes which is
the native American language
culture.
statute.
What it does is sets minimum
annual salaries for native
American language and cert cert
holders equal to that of a level
two license teacher.
It also clarifies that tribes
will the nations will be able to
determine the criteria for
certifying native language and
culture teachers and not the
PED.
With one point two five million
dollars from native language
teacher salaries.
And if you see that there has
been a recommendation and H. B.
two you'll see that within that
is well.
However we do find that that is
probably willfully low
considering the amount of data
that we are receiving daily that
this is an undercount and that
that that dollar begin used to
go up I do have with me as I
mentioned before Mr month I know
that we with the secretary who
was a superintendent the burly
public school system and truly
the reason why I I thought that
was so important to have him
with me today is because the
Bernalillo public school system
is certainly a leader in this
realm they adopted new measures
to ensure equity pay for their
native American language
teachers.
along with elevating indigenous
studies classes to AP honors
courses as well so if I could
allow Mr Montana superintendent
on diet to give little snapshot
about what is efforts have been
thus far and if there are any
questions regarding the five
twenty certificate process we do
have doctor Christine stands
with us as well to expand on
that but Mr chairman with with
with your permission I would
like to ask Mr chairman you have
to talk a little bit about his
program their print in public
schools.
Morning Mr on Daniel place
welcome back again okay thank
you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative Lente thank you
very much for inviting me so I I
came back to Bernalillo
beginning in August of twenty
twenty twenty one and one of the
first things that I wanted to do
as part of our part of elevating
our native American of of a
native language programs is
making sure that our our actual
native language teachers were
compensated at us a similar
salary to what level one
teachers are based upon based
upon all of the criteria that we
have for for teachers in our in
our school and and so I started
working with our team to figure
out how we could make this
budgetary.
Of budgetary proposal happen
worked with Representative let
their all he's a he's a I think
he's a proud all alone us of up
really high school so he was he
was of a pivotal in working and
also Regis Pecos was born in
helping us work through this
process along with with my with
my school board in in doing this
our goal was we in depending on
which pueblo that we are working
with we have a different hello
you for each one of them so so
each one of them have different
criteria different of different
of.
Ways that they want us to serve
the language programs and so we
ordered that M. O. U. in that
way but what we wanted to do
universally is make sure that
the language teachers that were
employees of the district
compensated and an order of
equitably to their to their
staff what this did was.
This effect came about.
Of seventeen to twenty three
thousand dollar raise to every
single.
language teacher in our part
that we were employing at public
schools but what it also did is
it allowed us to and emphasized
the importance of the language
programs in our schools in some
cases some of the pueblos ask us
to require the language of
program up for all of their
students but in some cases they
they ask us to just offer it in
prioritize it with our schedule
and so bye bye elevating the
salaries of the teachers we've
elevated the actual implication
of the length of the language
program from the perspective of
public schools Research seven of
pueblos Cochiti Santo Domingo
something a bit of Santa Ana San
Diego zero and and him as Pueblo
we only offer for language
programs university of public
schools we're still looking to
offer more language programs for
the for the three tribes that we
don't that we don't offer but
this is been the starting point
for for how we've got to this
point I often talk to our to our
for staff that you should have
to you should have to abandon
your language and culture in
order to receive our public
education and so this is one of
the one of the ways that we're
trying to accomplish that.
Thank you Secretary month on
your sprint and superintendent
one time at this point Mr
chairman of like I mentioned if
there any questions regarding
the five twenty six to
certification we have doctor
Sims but at this point in time
we will stand for questions.
Great thank you superintendent
thank you Dr sands and thank you
representative Lente that so go
to the attendees list before we
begin
everybody's flooding stuff
please wait till I give
instructions like good students
please.
All right so we'll start off
with opposition is their
opposition to house bill sixty.
Martin are you in opposition
concert will bring you in.
For more funding.
All right so we have Martin in
opposition Martin are you in
opposition good morning.
Yes I am in opposition right
place to two minutes welcome
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I am more money
director finances any public
schools I imposed a spill sixty
not because I do not agree with
its intent rather due to
unintended consequences that I
see in the way the bill was
written so the public school
district has a very vibrant
language to any language program
we have thirty three employees
who currently hold a five twenty
language license however fifteen
percent of those do not teach
the language in the language is
all fifty forty four percent
only teacher for fifty five
minutes at the elementary level
twenty four percent teacher for
one hour fifty minutes at the
elementary level only fifteen
percent or five of those
teachers actually teach at the
mid or high school level the
entire day.
Of.
The bill does not make any
direct any distinction between
the are among the times the
people teach this class in order
to entice by twenty license
holders to teach a full day of
some of the like which we
created a separate salary
schedule for the middle and high
school teachers and their
average salary currently is
thirty nine thousand five
hundred forty dollars this bill
would eliminate the need for
that schedule but it would also
eliminate the enticement for
those people to teach full date
of all day if they could really
but if they could receive a
level two salary schedule for
teaching as little as fifty five
minutes today.
As written the current bill
would require that any staff
member holding a state issued
language license to be paid on
the level two salary schedule
there is no requirement in New
Mexico statute twenty two ten
eight thirteen that an employee
that a person be employed by a
school district and teaching a
heritage language in a classroom
in order to get that cert cert I
can foresee bus drivers cooks
custodians applying for the
license and receiving one and
then by the way the bill is
written they would just ten
seconds Sir I think the bill
would be required would request
pay that finally we have a very
vibrant grow your own teacher
program if a teacher if I do a
could be paid a level two salary
why would they continue on and
getting it to continue want to
get a bachelor's degree and a
teaching certificate I thank you
thank you Martin we appreciate
it.
Thank you all right so we're
still on opposition.
Yes Sir good morning.
You are with us so if you you
you have up to two minutes to
state your opposition to house
bill six.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee can you hear me
we can you're going in
opposition I am not in a
position I don't know why my
name popped up on this
in support of the bill all all
right so I believe that
everybody in opposition so those
in support if you would join yes
Sir please go ahead and raise
your hand but state of up to two
minutes but everybody please do
not be repetitive of those that
come before you which of up to
two minutes welcome.
SO please thank you Sir good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee and the
representative Lente my name is
As Lewis I'm the executive
director of Austin college and
career readiness center here is
Zuni pueblo also member of the
Senate Dr.
I disagree with the previous
committee because he's only
looking at it from a budgetary
perspective which is what most
of the districts to I really
applaud what Mr months audio is
been doing in permanent
Bernalillo because changes very
hard within districts and what
we're doing at us we college is
there any is working with our
pueblo of Zuni tribal council
they have delegated us to do
work with the school district
to.
Retrain the curriculum developed
the standards and the strength
in the sovereignty of our
language culture and ancestral
knowledge through this process
and so we're working with
superintendents Stickney in the
city public school district to
really and her staff to really
strengthen.
The opportunities for five
twenty certified.
The instructors the bill will
certainly raise the level of
parity and it's something that
districts can do if they.
Leverage the resources
appropriately like Bernalillo
that and and really.
They're promoting of a level of
Instructional knowledge through
supporting the EA's as they are
and not really focusing on the
language development needs and
the preservation of our fifteen
seconds Sir.
Great thank you Hanes excuse me
for mispronouncing your name.
So J. D..
Good morning JD about two
minutes welcome.
Warning Mr chairman members of
the committee hope you all are
safe and warm this is JD
Bullington registered lobbyist
for the public McKenna speaking
on their behalf we just want to
reiterate our support for this
package of bills that
representative Lente is bringing
forward we support house bill
sixty and again we want to thank
the sponsor for working so
tirelessly on this effort thank
you great thank you.
All right chairman Mitchell
welcome back this Wednesday of
up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the house Education Committee
my name is mark Mitchell on the
chairman for the public to suki
and former governor correction.
Former governor for the public
to see key and chairman for the
all public council governors on
behalf of the all global council
governors representing twenty
pueblo nations of New Mexico and
Texas our express are
overwhelming support for house
bill sixty the pueblos have
practice and maintain their
precious language of teh what do
well show up keris and Zuni
since time immemorial.
As Yazzie Martinez Spain fully
affirmed the public's concern of
longstanding public education.
Intruder languages second second
class in response to the suit
global leadership and committee
members have have helped
Representative Lane T. craft
this bill this bill would
elevate five twenty language and
cultural teachers to provide
culturally and linguistically
aleve instructions by insuring
the native language teachers
receive equitable and just
salary.
With your support of HB sixty
you are further recognize the
tribal sovereignty you and for
tribal nations to identify
through their own protocols who
is an expert in language
instructions.
With that we look forward to
your support of HB sixty with it
for appropriation amount of one
point two five million for
salary increase aligned with
PED's budget just introduce by
Representative Lente thank you
right thank you.
What's the deal good morning
welcome you have a two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa Dion attorney with the
New Mexico Center online poverty
we thank the sponsor for
bringing this legislation.
All teachers the respect that
comes with an adequate salary
were in full support of this
bill because it ensures
equitable pay for the expertise
that indigenous language
teachers bring to the classroom.
It also begins to acknowledge
their commitment to the
education of native students
that's grounded in a deep
respect in honor of their unique
languages and culture for these
reasons and as a matter of
equity for your teachers I would
just like which a culture we
support house bill sixty and
urged the committee to pass it
thank you great thank you Mr.
Governor.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes good morning honorable
chair representative governor
Christopher Moquino of public
dissent of the funds so as
indicated in previous hearings
we have students within for
districts within all those four
districts we have
Programs for our table language
instructors but we are in full
support of HB sixty our like all
teachers to this point and many
educators are that are not in
the administration top level
these teachers are significantly
underpaid and we they are a
valuable resource especially
within the language instruction
We also believe that HB sixty
would also allow and defined
gives sovereign.
Recognition to the tribes in the
pueblos to define you know what
the criteria is for the specific
instructors so with that
honorable chair representatives
wishing you a good morning stay
safe on the roads and we are in
full support thank you right
thank you governor.
Jeremy welcome back you have up
to two minutes welcome.
Thank you chair members of the
committee German Yankee
directivity learning
representing governments have
area of Santa Clara pueblo of
not to repeat
I guess so my colleagues and and
tribal leaders along with this
this would also alleviate some
of the findings of the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit which
highlighted the lack of
culturally relevant
instructional materials a
programming for students
particularly native American
students so with that Santa
Clara pueblo fully supports this
bill and looks forward to the
parity for native English
teachers thank you chair all
right thank you chairman.
Good morning welcome good
morning thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm a basically for
their debate a first grade
teacher at New Mexico
international school the current
teach plus policy fellow and
twenty twenty one New Mexico
teacher of the year I thank you
representative Lente for
introducing this bill I voiced
full support for house bill
sixty as a bilingual teacher of
a Mexican American student and
hundreds of students whose pride
in their culture and heritage I
hope to help foster I live the
responsibility and challenges
that come along with this type
of teaching even in Spanish
teachers can be hard to come by
and yet the work that we in dual
language Spanish and English
programs have to mitigate the
effects of past language lost is
nothing compared to what this
bill is working to mitigate one
of the books that has made the
biggest impact on my life in the
last year is the shoulders we
stand on and we just practices
words speak to the need for
bills like this and saying that
language is central and this
journey demands that we be fully
cognizant of the spirit of
language and our responsibility
is speakers of the language that
sustenance I believe that our
state's indigenous languages
should be honored elevate and
valued at the very least with
compensation similar to teachers
like me and my colleagues here
at the level two and three
licensure levels I also want to
express my deep appreciation for
the language in this bill that
places the agency and seventy
for a stab wishing
qualifications at the tribal
levels thank you for that I hope
that the committee will consider
further suggestions to enable
tribal schools to help this bill
fully support their needs
language instruction and
honoring the teachers to find it
thank you so much representative
Lente I urge the committee to
pass this bill thank you.
Thank you.
All right immense education you
would identify who you are
personally and to have up to two
minutes walk.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee all first thank
you Representative twenty for
introducing this bill my name is
Kevin Shendo the education
director for the publicans and
we stand in full support of this
bill the agency has to charter
schools a K. eight in the line
twelve and we have very close
working relationships with the
districts that serve our school
in valley Bernalillo APS Rio
Rancho and Santa Fe Indian
school and so we look forward to
working with them to expand our
language programs and it's
important to understand that.
The knowledge of language
learning and the sacredness is
held within our tribal
communities and that's something
that cannot be and in full for
we cannot be transferred to an
institution of higher education
so this bill really would
elevate our teachers in the
knowledge that they hold that is
secret to our people and
teaching in our language in
passing it on to future
generations so thank you again
very much in the poll in the
stands in full support.
Great thank you.
Through good morning need about
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is drew
Center and on behalf of the
public okay Wingate simply
ban is what I would stand in
strong support of this
legislation as well help to.
Bring equal weight to the
importance of teaching native
languages and our schools thank
you very much and have a good
day great thank you.
David Rogers good morning of up
to two minutes welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I want to
thank Representative and T. as
well for Karen this bill I'm the
executive director for dual
language education of New Mexico
and we stand in full support of
house bill sixty are late in our
native language instruction very
sensual to the revitalization
and preservation of our
indigenous languages as well as
the cultures in the way of life
of our tribal language
communities thank you.
Thank you.
All right Julia.
Really a good morning of a two
minutes welcome.
Yes.
With simply a retired professor
from eastern New Mexico
university in a member of the
coalition for the majority we
are in support of house bill
sixty and be we keep in the
importance of the maintaining
the language and culture of
native American students in
giving valuable resources as
these teachers are the support
and the equity that they the
server in performing their jobs
thank you.
Right thank you we'll.
I am only good morning Emily you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Emory
rolled out New Mexico voices for
children thank representative
Lente for continue in equities
for native American students
educators we support HD sixty
because it's important for
native Americans.
To have the opportunity to learn
and celebrate their languages
and culture and our public
schools we support paying
teachers a native language a
wage that reflects the high
value of the knowledge you
teachers hold and passed to
students as a native community
strive to preserve and
revitalize their languages and
this bill also supports efforts
to find a culturally and
linguistically responsive
curriculum in response to Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit for these and
the many other reasons you've
heard today New Mexico voices
for children stand in support of
this bill and we ask the
committee to recommend passage.
Thank you.
Good morning welcome.
Good morning chairman what the
hell by.
Morning committee members
chairman and house committee
members Washington then I'll
call may at the White I'm from
the purpose of the Act money.
Now I'm retired Albuquerque
public school administrator and
I'm also a member of the Act
well board of education because
our native language and culture
is vital to our tribal
communities our teachers to
teach the curriculum is equally
important therefore we need to
spend a minimum salary our
native language teachers that is
equal to other licensed teachers
in addition this bill would also
make sure that that try not PED
the term criteria for certified
native languages and culture
therefore I asked that the
committee passed eight the sixty
third minute by Representative
eight.
Ally thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning welcome you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Tina
Santa and the director of the
test public education department
I'm here on behalf of governor
manageable leadership and and
what we speak to you all we have
teachers teaching in a test
municipal school district be a
school under head start program
and our language teachers bring
wealth of expertise very unique
and specific knowledge that
can't be found anywhere else in
the world to life long process
of being involved in our way of
life to understand our language
and culture and integrate
holders more than indigenous
experts.
Which is a common practice
constitutes unequal treatment
and it's been very difficult to
recruit language teachers to
fill vacant positions that have
been open for over a year and to
keep teachers from leaving
because of the salary disparity.
Indigenous language teacher
should not be excluded from any
teacher salary increases we
already have a shortage of
language teachers and we can't
afford to lose anymore.
Our language goes hand in hand
with our culture and we can't
continue one without the other
so we're in full support of HB
sixty we asked the committee to
please well in favor of this
bill thank you right thank you.
Okay.
More P. Chavis good morning
welcome you have a two minutes.
You may need to and you.
Pete Chapman's okay.
My name is falling Travis what
you all are cares language and
culture teacher at Bernalillo
high school with the five twenty
certificate thank you for
allowing me to give testimony in
support of house bill sixty
eight consideration for
equitable compensation for our
social workers would yes.
Thank you to their knowledge
thanks for meaningful rigorous
pedagogical teaching for young
learners educational settings
speaking for myself ninety
percent of the classroom
Trujillo we use is has created
so
please give consideration.
Teaching high schools I started
in that position I have the same
or similar responsibilities as a
certified teacher.
So respectfully legislators and
members of the committee please
give consideration through our
lenses from many different
cultural language teachers who
are giving testimony and so
again I ask for your
consideration and thank you
Mister Landry for hosting and
supporting these bills and thank
you Mr on trial on behalf of
your efforts to bring.
The for a teacher teacher pay
and public schools thank you so
much have a wonderful day thank
you.
Our men welcome back many of up
to two minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman Romero and
members with the committee on a
bank account Representative
twenty four presented this bill
and like to say go out to hope
to our
honorable Dr Sims.
I'm I'm a former governor for
the pueblo of Zuni I currently
work at the center for native
American health at UNM I don't
want to echo what has been said
but would strongly support the
opening statements of Mr Lewis
along with what Mr month on you
have to say to understand that
language should not be based
only on a monetary value
language is important
particularly for pueblos tribes
and nations that's the basis of
who we are and should be
supported as we sustain our ways
of life through the very
intricate languages that we
speak being particularly Zuni
pueblo which is an isolated has
no correlation to any other
ethnic minority racial group in
the world so it becomes very
important for SUNY to support
the language revitalisation
programs that have been started
with Bernalillo and is currently
happening as explained by Mr
Lewis and Johnny so I ask for
your support on this bill and
thank you and you all have a
good day.
Great thank you.
All right.
Bernalillo good morning welcome
you have up to two minutes.
She goes on on the committee
chairman committee I strongly
support house bill sixty I am a
zoning language instructor
teacher educator with
Albuquerque public schools.
We are in the twenty first
century and this is deemed
necessary and warranted we do
have our rights within this
nation of nations because we're
at a crossroads where there is
not enough scientific research
down I'll culturally and
linguistically responsive
teaching and learning we must be
respectful of our twenty three
indigenous languages with in New
Mexico.
Because we we don't have the
support and the funding at that
state level we are looking for
other ways and that is very hard
to look for other funding within
the state without everybody
support so let's come together
and support house bill sixty
thank you representative Lente
for all the hard work that you
do representing our tribal
nations and all the twenty three
nations within New Mexico
Eloqua.
Thank you.
Rob.
Robert good morning welcome you
have up to two minutes good
morning Mr chairman of the
committee Robert up with us to
Representative lawsuit Pueblo he
can do it that's nation and
that'll prep the state is and
some of the other testimony we
are imposed for possible sixty
and me thank Representative let
and the hope members will
support this bill as well thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Connery good morning welcome you
have a two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning good morning members of
the committee my name is Khan
rich you know what I'm the rest
of this to the public's of
Ackerman counts and we stand in
full support of HB sixty
just a couple questions chairman
the first being that both the
New Mexico Indian Education Act
and the federal native American
languages act of nineteen ninety
requires the maintenance of
native American languages and
encourages and supports the use
of native languages as a medium
of instruction and secondly both
the LFC and the L. E. S. C.
everybody really pointed out
that bilingual and dual language
programs are linked to better
educational outcomes the reports
point out that there is evidence
that shows that children who
develop if American language
capabilities first enjoy
improved economic competencies
and outcomes compared to
children in English only
programs and so Mister chairman.
Leave language teachers in our
schools play a really critical
role in not only execute a state
and federal law on carrying out
the conclusions drawn and
provided reports but in addition
they are instrumental in
preserving indigenous languages
some of which have been adopted
by other speakers are being
severely threatened with loss
and so with that Mr chairman I
encourage the committee to fully
support each for sixty thank you
very much right thank you.
All right Kerry good morning of
a two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee Kerry
robin brindar registered
lobbyists for the Naka inspired
schools network not inspired
schools network is a network of
schools that operate with
leaders in indigenous
communities to create and for
fifteen schools that.
To have really good college
preparation while also focusing
on culture of language and
student identity we are very
supportive of this legislation
we very much thank
representative Lente for
bringing it to the forefront and
believe it is far overdue for us
to be treating and paying our
language teachers in in a
parallel weights you are
traditionally licensed teachers
in the state of New Mexico
often language is the
cornerstone of all of the
programming that happens in and
I just and schools and we
believe that this is one more
way that we can find that
vibrant educational experience
for students we do hope that in
the long run will be able to
have permanent funding for for I
think salaries for these
individual teachers in the state
so that all of our school
districts in our tribal
education departments can count
on that consistent funding from
the legislature in the long term
with that Mr chairman thank you
so much and hope you all stay
warm and safe this morning thank
you.
Peter good morning up two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Peter Garcia junior former
governor of okay we did tribal
council then.
And president of our board of
education so I'm representing
all care we give and we are in
full support of house bill
sixty and.
It is important since time
immemorial our language is the
basis of our culture.
Or we believe.
Or.
Shares our phones our dentures
is basically through the
language of the table at okay
we.
So it is important that some of
the teachers that teach in
public schools be treated
equally just like everyone else
we talk about everyone being.
Treated equally and that's all
going to get is asking and so
we're in full support and I
thank you for your consideration
for house bill sixty thank you
very much I thank you.
Carlotta.
Good morning Carla you have a
two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair
legislators and fellow advocates
of our language is I do
remember.
The Indian Education Act passing
in two thousand and three by
your comrades legislators in
full support of our native
languages at that time we
thought that.
They would be recognized
throughout our school districts
at the level of our.
Educational programs and other
areas but they have not been
sadly I heard the.
Mr Martin from Jenny public
school district.
Tell you how few hours are spent
on languages part of that is
because school districts are
not.
Focusing on this and so we must
do that S. Bernalillo public
school district I learned this
morning has been doing but soon
needs to be at the front of that
so please please honor our
teachers honors our elders who
work with our schools in
promoting and sustaining our
languages and the schools for
the benefit our of our children.
And our communities thank you
for supporting house bill sixty
thank you to Representative
Lente for your tireless work on
our behalf and I think all of
legislators who really think of
all of our children.
Adrian good morning enter any of
up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you so much
this is a prince on the one
director for the center of the
agenda for the education and
study of diverse populations I'm
happy to say that we stand
firmly in support of HB sixty it
really represents the obviously
equity in an effort to sincerely
value and investment right and
supporting and sustaining
indigenous languages in our
state thank you so much.
Thank you.
Tracy good morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members thank you
representative Lente my name is
Tracy that Ali and I'm here on
behalf of New Mexico native folk
I am a former public school
educator and I stated strong
support at the two sixty this is
a common sense bill that
equitably compensates native
language teachers in their fight
for the preservation of our
indigenous language we we
additional honors are native
language teachers critical
losses cultural leaders and
their investment in generations
of young indigenous leaders to
come we appreciate your support
proceed to a future where
equitable compensation for
native language teachers this
reality thank you.
Thank you.
Your own good morning gentleman
yield two minutes.
Good morning the only Senator A.
B. C. D. vice chairman and also
former governor of we'll be off
I'm not off the phone with the
there is some of our more.
For more clear out.
What the hospital to big double
the thank you I often but don't
shut it
out the method used to met with
the.
Would be a how much do been
affected with this issue it
would.
It would be done to them
there it went to a how much not
that would be if if you have to
look from there with just a
group of the document the New
Mexico met with the proposed
that it with the yeah my on this
day of the month to month bill
would be up to date with the
with that in fact we disapprove
also note this in your country
what do I do think dot yup
within on the he one of those
the show the.
Did not mention would
disapprove.
This is the reason why.
AP sieges dunkle support of HBs
the
coordination of APPG chairman
with all the support HB thank
you.
Thank you.
Keep in all a good morning
welcome in about two minutes.
So I can call on condition is
good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
Priscilla not only I am with the
Navajo Nation board of education
currently the president of the
board we are in full support of
H. bill sixty.
I would like to express and say
that these teachers are now will
hold our language excuse me are
language teachers have a
special.
A special education that you
cannot that cannot be taught in
colleges and universities and in
the areas of education and
language we are in full support
and I would like to thank
Representative Lente for
bringing our initiatives as
native people to Santa Fe and to
help us express the needs that
we have on in our nation's and
our tribes in our pueblos these
are vital
this is a vital part of who we
are as indigenous people so we
stand in full support go ahead
thank you.
One of our good morning you have
a two minutes welcome.
Yes good morning honorable.
Chair under several and
Representative their twenty for
sponsoring this bill one time
you'll call care and Trujillo as
well good morning on behalf of
the institute for American
Indian education we are in full
support of house bill sixty
because of all the different
pedagogical purposes that
country stems has outlined in
her work to date with you as
well as in her on scholarship
and second of all I have seen it
first hand at the publication of
yes I am from child yes.
And I've seen the the up
positive results are
If you will language program and
that your baby program and all
the programs we have that trust
hello and so I hope that all of
you have a good year your state
and that you continue to do the
work that you do act strongly
encourage you to pass house bill
sixty have a beautiful day.
Thank you.
Right Hey this is already had
their opportunity unity we're
a just a good morning to say
about two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jessica
our tree and I'm the vice
president of CHI St Joseph's
children thank you Mr thank you
for sponsoring this legislation
we are in support of house bill
sixty as a home visiting program
we understand the up most
importance of language
development starting at an early
age this is especially important
for the languages of our tribes
proposing nations adequate
funding and compensation for
education as linguistically and
culturally sustaining is
important for all New Mexicans.
Language comes from the land
invented languages a philosophy
of life and way of being in the
world and so we need to
compensate our educators who
have this secret knowledge thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning about two minutes
welcome.
Okay we can't hear you.
You are muted.
We're still having issues being
able to hear you.
I'm still not thank.
Given a moment state concert
that out.
Which you are.
Our last speaker is hazes
already had their opportunity.
All right.
If you wish to email us your
comments would be more than
happy to thank you.
Reckitt the last moment.
Are you.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the Education Committee I'm
here on behalf to transform
education New Mexico and a
consultant to the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty to
support house bill sixty which
will clarify the tribal
authority and sitting criteria
for PED's five twenty
certification native language
teachers house bill sixty will
greatly enhance culturally and
linguistically relevant
education and native American
student districts and the
students themselves New Mexico
began the reimbursement for
qualified instructors in two
thousand and two and this movie
to the level two tier status as
more than appropriate please
advance house bill sixty Mr
chairman and members the
committee pleasure talking with
you this morning.
Thank you.
All right Sir is there
opportunity.
Thank you everybody on the list
all right so we'll come back to
panel Representative Sweetser
first please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative chair Lente for
bringing this forward my only
question has to do with the
amount in the bill when I was
reading the FIR quickly this
morning it said that the
appropriations subcommittee
contained one point two five
million which is what your bill
was asking for but then I
thought I heard you state it
wasn't going to be about so I
was just searching for some
clarification there thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative Mr
Chairman representative Sweetser
my mention made earlier was
because that one point two five
million was based on numbers
that we utilize from the P. E.
D. in regards to how many are
certified five twenty certified
teachers there are in the state
currently however after of
looking at that more the school
districts in on our own it looks
like that number is really
closer to about a little over a
hundred teachers and so I think
this is a great start but I
think it's still what we will do
what we need to be if we intend
to make some great strides in
being able to pay our native
American language teachers are
equitably.
So thank you for that
Representative a Mr chair so are
you planning to amend the bill
to ask for more where are we and
that's that structure Mr
Chairman representative Sweetser
at this point time because one
point two five is in fact in H.
B. two and it's already on its
way to the floor what I think we
will try to do a at this and
will be to try to work on the
Senate side to try to increase
that budget some way somehow to
be able to.
On the day that the additional
influx of those teachers.
All right thank you thank you
for that thank you Mr chair.
You representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lente for
bringing this bill forward I'm
totally support this is really
vital but can you just kind of
give a little overview I know to
to get a five twenty Lysons
that's a tribal or pueblo
decision but can you talk a
little bit about what goes into
that and then I have one more
question.
Thank you Representative Garrett
Mr Chairman representative
Garrett if I could just drive
students to get a little
snapshot into that I would
really appreciate it Dr Sims.
Yes to.
Do hear me.
Okay great yes a good morning Mr
chair it members of the
committee to respond to your
question
a regarding the five twenty that
I twenty alternative certificate
was originally established of in
such a way that the tribes that
have members who are applying
for the certificate the tribes
are the ones who retain the
capacity and the responsibility
for verifying in the language
proficiency of these individuals
from that point on the submit
their recommendation for these
individuals applying for the
certificate to the PED
certification unit the PED
certification unit is the one
who issues the certificate there
are also the requirement for a
background check which all
individuals are required to to
submit to and then there is a
small feat that up probably a
processing fee that saw
collected by PED for those
certificate certificates I would
just add to that that process
was something that was worked
out between tribes and PED back
in two thousand and two and some
of us that are on this call were
some of the original advocates
and and help to develop that
certificate.
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Dr Sims.
And I would imagine and this is
sort of the.
Mr chair directed at Dr Sims
that that many of those five
twenty certificated teachers go
on to take courses just to in
PED just to improve their
ability would you say that that
is true.
Yes Representative Garrett many
of the language teachers that
are out there in the different
school districts coming from the
different tribes has actually
taken advantage of some of the
training opportunities that we
have been able to offer through
our American Indian language
center at UNM in the college of
education I would add to that we
are the only institution of
higher education in New Mexico
on that provides this type of
training of during our summer
all two week workshops
intensively working with native
language speakers not to teach
them their language because they
order bring that professional
skill with them but to acclimate
them to the environment of
formal school classrooms to also
prepare them in terms of of
working with second language
learners which just really
description of many of our
native children who are learning
these languages now is second
languages.
Thank you so much shorter
sentences Mr chairman of one
work question for representative
Lente and that is
I I understand why the level two
has
Funding categories are
categories been chosen because
we're really acknowledging the
value of the importance of our
native language teachers how
with that salary apply to people
for example who do teach just
fifty one course or two courses
a day would this be pro rated
how how that sorry we're going
to practical basis.
Mr Chairman representative given
thank you for that question and
I think you're exactly right we
talk but Corporation you know
Hey would be impact pro rated by
the hours worked and and all
those would be delineated by
agreements made between the
tribes to make sure that
everything is account of the
accounted for that there is no
reflection of anything.
The wrong being taken on with
with any of these teachers and
their practices.
Thank you very much
Representative Mr chair those
are my questions.
Thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Mr chair members the committee
it's so good to see you all
bright eyed and bushy tailed the
snowy day.
I am are rising in support of
this piece of legislation
because as we move forward you
know I've been all over here a
long time and I think it's an
anomaly not to support this
piece of legislation clearly I
think Representative Sweetser
said what next steps we if the
money is an H. B. two has to go
to the Senate and I hope
Representative Lente gets the
support that needs financially
over there but more importantly
as we see the rise and anti
culture
occur in the United States I
state that is normally not to
support language and culture
programs in the state of New
Mexico it's critical for kids
it's critical for us and I
believe that we need to move
this.
Legislation forward as we did
the last pieces of legislation
that.
Representative carried.
This is my every fiber of my
being to make sure that we stop
any kind of anti cultural
sentiment in the state and this
helps move it forward and the
people who find second language
language access are critical to
our schools Mr Chairman
representative Lente and I can't
thank you enough for bringing
this and I do support it.
I thank you Representative three
terabyte Colorado.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Thank you Representative and
So I I I just.
Couple of clarifying questions I
have.
As many of you know and you know
Representative I've been a
strong proponent of culturally
and linguistically relevant
education but even more so as a
human resource professional for
so many years I made it a point
in all of my work all right
compensated provide compensation
for anyone that spoke more than
one language I think it is
something that has been part of
my professional commitments
prior to my retirement and
continues to be one that I'm
highly dedicated kids because of
all the reasons that all of the
elements
Yes hi this morning attested to
it's just
I'm.
imaginable to me that we would
not take those factors into
consideration when we're in the
employment sector so
excuse me I want to make sure
though that we are creating
institutional change and that we
are in fact
ensuring that with the decisions
that we make some might
clarifying question for a couple
Representative Mr chair is that
how it has PED made a commitment
to include the additional funds
on a regular recurring basis in
their administrative budgets
from here on and one and did the
did the budget figures account
for the projected number of
anticipated our teachers that
are going to come through on
their pathway and find for some
sort of projected
Amount that will be needed to be
right are requests to I'm here
on and thank you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman Representative
Roybal Caballero thank you for
the questions and answer the
first one is we've been and
extensive discussions with the
PD Department specifically
secretary Steinhaus is been.
Very supportive and very open to
our discussions and the
reoccurring basis of this budget
isn't that reoccurring we all
recognize that we can't afford
to just pay them for when you
try to find every other year
there after just to try to get
this to continue on its course
and then regarding your second
question regarding the actual
budgetary amount again it goes
back to the point that when we
utilize the the figures that PED
didn't back provide us we find
now that the and it is still low
in regards to the number of
actual five twenty certified
teachers that are out there
currently and so we want to make
sure that if if we need to be
able to that that figure of you
know a million two million three
million at this point to to
accommodate for those teachers
that we have now found that are
that five twenty certified we
will need to do that in the
Senate but it is I think at this
point
helpful to know that we have the
one point two five million
dollars within house bill two
that is I hope we will be voted
on the floor tomorrow.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I think all of us
comment on all of us to ensure
that we that we that we follow
this pathway and then our
funding formulas take into
consideration all of the
projected growth because if you
look at everything that we're
improving all the systems that
we're improving in order to be
able to one our deal with with
equity inequity issues that have
occurred to generation and then
we also
factor in the financing us
laughing at that all of the
other obligations that we have
that we have not complied with
throughout the generations
there's going to be quite a bit
of adjustments to budgets and so
we need to have everyone
understands that this is just
not a one time and that was
fully committed to ensuring that
it in the
In the budgetary structures
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Great thank you Representative
Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you representative Lente
for being such a champion
on these efforts and I I I have
some questions some were
answered by make sure this is it
part of the this year's budget
the one point two five that I
see in the the house budget for
native language teachers is that
that line item is Mr Chairman
representative yes ma'am.
Thank you very much and on the
five twenty certification that I
understand that the tribe's
define who qualifies and what
the language proficiency as.
Mr Chairman representative yes
you did and that's for the Expos
explanation from doctor sins
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you representative Lente
and so the tribe's defined
language proficiency and plus
there's a background check
required and right now we have
about five hundred twenty
certifications I mean I'm sorry
about a hundred five year twenty
certifications.
Mr chairman and and
Representative doubt we have
about a little over a hundred I
am twenty certified teachers in
the state okay thank you and is
our Mr Chairman representative
of our only teachers eligible
for this who can apply for the
five twenty certification.
Mr Chairman representative I
will I will ask doctor says be
expand on that a little bit more
but as I understand it well this
is gonna drive since.
Thank you.
Please yes Representative.
Yes the five twenty certificate
is are open to any tribal
member in their tribal tribes
have to actually sign off on on
the recommendation of these
individuals so it could be
individuals with
extensive of fluency in the
language in the cultural on
knowledge all all of those are
you taken into account by each
respective tribe is then they
are the ones to determine well
the US suggested recommendation
for applying for the
certificate.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative Lente and I
think the idea of this is very
intriguing to me and I like it a
lot I'm I'm I guess I'm getting
more to the point of do you have
to be a teacher in a classroom
or have any sort of licensure in
order to receive the five
twenty.
Mr Chairman representative
doubt.
To to drive Sims and question
the answer would be built and
that simply because those folks
there would be in tribal
communities themselves bring of
the wealth of knowledge that
cannot be replicated here or
learn any other institution and
it is not taught in any universe
regards to how do you become a
teacher.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
thank you Representative I do I
do understand the intense but
from a I just really really
coming from a logistical point
we're asking PED to put in
statute a pay scale but the that
the decisions of who qualifies
that trouble level and I eight I
think it might have just been
the first person of the one
person is speaking in opposition
but it brought to my mind like
could they be investor could it
be a janitor could there be an
expansion of but folks applying
for the five twenty
certification at and is there a
cap is there at negotiations
with PED to come up with
something where.
Their work for a commitment that
they will be teaching a language
part time full time you whatever
that may be so I I would just
like to hear your thoughts on
that the movie and and Mr
Chairman representative now I
think this brings up a great
point regards a perspective when
you come from a community like
like a public tribe or nation
many times within a publication
like like mine for instance for
our leaders are twenty one day
they could be a janitor or a bus
driver and then the next day you
will be appointed to the
governor for our Pueblo and and
that being said it's not because
of it doesn't do means that
their practice or professions
that janitor of bus drivers it
simply means that they're
attainment of their cultural
knowledge there language
expertise and everything that
the bring from a cultural
perspective is appreciated so
much that we need these leaders
within our communities to help
us survive and thrive and
continue our ways of life and so
I I think those types of jobs
should be fine whether or not
they are certified or or should
be allowed to be able to teach
thank the program that Dr Sims
spoke regarding their their
summer institute helps them to
become perhaps classroom ready
but I think the wealth of
knowledge that they bring
regarding their language is
sufficient enough so that when I
tried certify someone as I
twenty certifiable.
Means that they have placed all
state interest in that
individual that they can carry
on that land and teach it
effectively to are you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative but there's not a
requirement that they be
teaching to receive them the
level to pay.
That's one try to get at.
Mr chairman and representative
now I I I think the the rig
regarding the level to paste it
is in fact working that will be
worked out with the tribe itself
and and regarding the the the
teaching aspect that I think
that's a fundamental notion of
how we see teaching.
In the PED aspect and and
teaching within the the tribal
aspect where maybe perhaps the
tribal aspect of teaching is
when a tribal elder will come to
to to my home we'll sit around
the kitchen table and we ate
dinner and we'll talk about
things through our native tongue
verses sitting in a classroom in
Bernalillo for instance him
telling or them telling me this
is how you speak our language.
You're you're now you're on
mute.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you at at
Mr Chairman we've talked about
this representative Lente on the
house floor you know not not in
debate but asked friends just
talking about like how much that
resonates with my heart because
you know I I'm I am I don't have
a tried in my district and
district thirty eight but what
you're saying is is very
relevant to my world view in
Deuteronomy six or talked about
training your children when they
come in when they go and when
they rise and they sleep in when
you're eating and when you're
working in an education occurs
everywhere at all times why I'm
an advocate of school choice at
and I believe that the biggest
benefit that we can do for
tribal lands is to give.
Real school choice and and your
bills to me we talk about this
are offering that option your
thank you things local that we
let us to provide education let
us decide what's meaningful to
our communities rather than a
top down approach and so to me I
the only areas I'm struggling
with is that we're asking for
PED to pass the statute that's
different than the way that we
treat teachers who teach other
languages throughout our state
and creating a pay scale just
for one language or just one one
at racer one for tribes and
pueblos where we have people
that are teaching other
languages it doesn't look like
they would get the same pay and
so to me equal with be keeping
the same pay scale but maybe at
adding the five twenty licensure
into the thank you dilation
system we're coming up with
something called collaboratively
does it need to be put into life
is injured is there a way for us
to do this
that create these opportunities.
Where they're not currently in
the licensure system.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that for that question
or the you you know I I don't
think there are any other
similar circumstances where
a second language like a Spanish
or German or French any other
language it is taught within a
high school of curriculum now
has any type of bearing in
regards to how it's taught or
learned or or or or even
accepted within our school
districts as those that are
within our indigenous
communities today and so I I
think I think perhaps the best.
Percent answer perhaps a
question like this might be
separate superintendent Mantan
in regards to that the logistics
of how he has successfully
brought this to the Berlin
public school system because he
recognizes the validity in this
type of system.
Thank you.
Sure Mr chair and representative
Representative Dow I think that.
I was hearing the question and
there are definitely we actually
do have certified instructors
who in the past have been
authorized but one of the tribes
to to teach in our school but no
longer authorized by the tried
to teacher school because
they've they've asked for
somebody else to do that those
are the those are the
individuals because I think this
is answering the first question
Representative those are the
individuals that are states that
are actually compensated as in
our system of the burly public
schools as I twenty certified
teachers in our in our
compensated currently S. as a
level one teacher so I do
actually have staff individuals
that that work is yeah As
special education EA's also
carry the five twenty
certification but because their
tribe has not authorized for
this current year to be
instructors they're not
instructors in the classroom and
I think that the I I think I was
hearing your question about
whether they're actually
instructors and classroom so
that is that is one aspect of it
the other the other aspect of it
is we actually have something
kind of similar we we have
career technical education
teachers to come into our system
they have no education
background and and they
demonstrate three years of of
experience in the field that
they have and the and
potentially a certification and
they're they're authorized to
teach in the public schools with
actually.
Just that experience there's
really no understanding of
whether the can't or or or or
able to teach and they have
access to the same tier system
as any other teacher that comes
with the four year degree or or
what have you of the server the
the five twenty certifications
actually don't come with that
same Avenue in the current
system and so that I I wouldn't
put the the career technical
education teachers exactly the
same but they're similar in that
they don't actually have four
year degrees in many cases and
they are given access to both
the level one and level two
teaching license so I think from
a practical standpoint that's
that's the way it works then
from from the the fact that we.
The way it works and we we have
an interview with every single
tried that we serve and they
will when they authorize
somebody to get a certification
based send me a letter in which
I signed off on their licensure
application that I'm authorized
to to go through with the with
the copy of the of the letter
from the tried and then this
then the the public education
department will issue the the
license to that teacher I also
know that when when we hire that
that person that we're able to
put them into the salary
schedule that we now have so
that's kind of the practical
aspect of it and in just to be
clear.
With coaching with Santa Domingo
was actually be and with Santana
we have a very unique general
use but those components of it
are similar so I I think that
that you would see that probably
across the state.
So it Mr chairman and
representative if I could just
give a follow up question to the
superintendent is there a
pathway in which I mean I'm not
sure of an example of where
someone teaching careerpathways
would be a level two teacher
without a degree you're saying.
And they're a way to make that
pathway for with PED system.
For for folks who speak a native
language or or would would
qualify for actually because I
guess like my hang up is
teaching in the classroom
driving of us janitorial
services this yes I mean to all
come to at a higher pay scale
based on the five twenty that's
not in the evaluation system or
are not a way to measure it at
the PED system.
Mr chair Representative Dow
currently the pathway for the A.
C. T. teacher that doesn't have
a four year degree they have to
go through what what is called
the professional development of
plan that is that is supervised
by the principal and signed off
by the district basically and
once they complete competencies
are relevant to to their plan
they can elevate from level one
to level two so there is there
is that pathway for them to get
to level two without a four year
degree and and Mr Chairman
representative Lente is this
something that you consider and
chose not to do and if you chose
not to do it why similar
pathway.
That's for Representative years.
To create something terrible you
know something compatible.
Representative Mr chairman and
up to be a question.
Well he explained the pathway
for someone during career
technologies to to receive level
to pay going through a
demonstration process that's a
little bit different than the C.
twenty that the five twenty but
it's within the PED system and
at is it has lacked location
across the school district and
wondering if you consider that
and why why you went a different
way.
Mr Chairman representative now
we did not consider that and in
this case we we would X. we
would expect that it would be
provided to the tried to extend
that that the licensure or
whatever expertise is necessary
to include for those features
and then at the same time
recognizing that like Bernalillo
have been great leaders
accepting those and being
partners with those tribes to
make sure that this happens and
that we can recognize second
languages in this case native
American languages as as a
relevant.
Yeah well I and I certainly Mr
Chairman representative don't
disagree with that I guess what
I'm having a hard time wrapping
my head around because as an
advocate of school choice and as
an advocate of the local
decision making authority I I my
heart just jumps when you come
you testify you talk about what
your local communities want what
they need and and I I think that
I love that idea and and I I
feel like we're moving toward
that direction in sixty six
million of new dollars impact
aid five point five for the
Indian Education funds and
million in new money as this
year for the Indian education
fund five point one million and
multi lingual and indigenous
initiatives money thirteen
million for the tribal ELT P.
I'm and that's not it and and
that the tribal schools or
anything serving tribal children
are excluded for any of the
other initiatives the new pay
scales the seven percent range
nice making a pie for them all
and so I guess what I'm just
struggling with just to see
where we're not where the local
decision making authority isn't
there to do a different to to
pay for these folks with with
the every funds that come and
restrictive once a the district
do you believe there's adequate
funding to do that now for these
hundred folks.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
I don't believe that that there
is funding for for these folks
currently I think of
Representative of super Denman
Tinio and the bill in the school
district and the board took took
great strides in making sure
that the priorities would change
up to ensure that they would be
able to recognize individuals
and and and validate them their
expertise that they bring to
their school district.
Your Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I'm I'm just
trying to wrap my head around
this and I I'm really undecided
on the spoke but thank you so
much.
Thank you Representative Bonner
Representative Baca please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representative Lente two brings
together my questions are real
simple
so of the hundred five twenty
licenses do we have any idea of
how many B. B. level one two or
three currently because I do
understand about that though
tried to stop us is a level of
licenses so I guess my question
is with this bill here is it
would be no longer the option to
issue a level one of five twenty
licensed that's my first
question should we have any idea
about numbers of that because I
know with the eight hundred
licensed vocational licenses
that would they can get a one
two or three so.
Do we have any numbers as far as
how many currently hold a level
one or all language teachers now
five twenty teachers a level two
currently.
Representative of Mr Chairman
representative Baca
perhaps I can look to doctor
stands to see if she has a
number on this if not the number
that we received initially from
the public education department
of we're we're we're the ones
that were we're lower than what
we expected in our area now
realizing so at this point it's
it's it's it's difficult because
I think at this point PED R. BT
doesn't have a clear grasp on
how many teachers are by twenty
sort of by but if anything does
drive since have a a better
estimation on this number.
I don't have a better estimation
of the number I would imagine
that the since the certificates
are issued by the PED
certification division or unit
of that they would have of of a
record of actual certificates
that have been issued
I would say that those
certificates are but when they
are issued they're at there are
a P. do you originally only made
to the categories of of those
certificates meaning that when
their first issue that could be
considered a you know with level
one if you will although the
that particular language was not
used the at the time but those
are are those are for people
applying for the certificate for
the first time and that was
supposed to ensure I think three
years in which they will hold
that certificate and then there
the PED did make allowances
there for renewing that license
after three years in again the
same process of the tribe
certify in the language
proficiency and I think that has
to be really clearly understood
here because it's not the tribe
certify in the certificates of
stripes certifying the language
proficiency of the individual
that individual comply for
another's the extended amount of
years I believe it was maybe for
another six years I can't
remember exactly but then that
would have been maybe what what
people refer to as level two but
those were the only two
distinctions that PED
originally.
Read with the with the tribe's
so that the the these
individuals who continue to
teach in the classrooms longer
than three years.
I hope that helps thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representative Lente and
actually this for about months
on you and I does being in the
world of HR for many years like
I have in deal with licenses
that that's kind of.
What I was just asking questions
so this would make it that the
only option for licensure for
the at five twenty teachers
because would be a level two or
three a tribe or a sovereign
nation would not be able to
issue a level one so that just
takes that step out there so not
everybody coming to the five
twenty will automatically be a
level two or three and they
tribe does not have the option
to issue a level one license.
Is that my understanding of
this.
Mr Chairman representative about
that.
You are correct.
Thank you Mr chair Mister left
at my last question is simple
because I do just want to say
earlier can we talk about this
we talked about The
appropriation right so for many
of our schools as our full time
and again I do believe in equal
pay I do believe that we need to
to to do this but for some
schools and some districts
because of the demand or the
request of it there may be only
one of two sections were a full
time teaching load of maybe five
six or more sections and so in
that case does this mean that
the would be paid for the
sections that they're teaching
or they be paid the the level
two license or that level to pay
or equal pay.
Regardless of the number of
sections that they teach.
Thank you Mr yes Mr Chairman
representative Representative
Baca I I think it goes back to
the appropriation of of the
number of sections that there
actually are teaching but you
know I I guess at the end of the
day it's all dependent on the
agreements that are made between
the tribes in the school
districts.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative let us the letter
that is my all the questions.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry I just
have one more question because
we keep saying teaching I just
want clarification this level
two and level pay Mr Chairman
representative will be
regardless of duty.
Is that also correct.
Mr chairman ladies and and
Representative Dow at the end of
the day any language native
American language teacher is a
teacher regardless of if they're
in the classroom if if if if
they're if they're eating lunch
with the individuals are talking
about food and what was is
called in their native tongue I
I think we we can't do mean that
the the environment regards to
the T. did teaching as a
definition.
Thank you Mr chairman so someone
who has landscape duties and is
on the track to build or is
working on the football field or
you know it may not be directly
working with children would
still qualify.
Bus maintenance and vehicle
maintenance division.
Representative Dow I I think
that is that is in.
What we're looking for now is
for an individual to be teaching
children not not just working in
on landscape beauty
independently or driving a bus
without without without any
children the bus what what I
think we're looking at is that
is this how teaching is is
taking place and the environment
that is taking place in.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The representative for the
question committee.
Right so I I had I had to
express
some thoughts about this you
know
in the legislature we've we've
talked a lot about who may or
may not qualify as educators as
teachers and what it would go
into when I first came to the
legislature eight years ago it
was always the debate between
pedagogy and
and experience in the work force
and and the tension there and so
we we continue that discussion
as it as it relates to
alternative flights chairs for
example for those that are in
particular fields
and have worked or retired in
particular fields for a long
time and I've seen just and in
personal experience for for the
legislators and educator a lot
of colleagues that have come in
with a wealth of experience
some having worked in the labs
for a number of years that come
in this teachers and that have
really struggled in the
classroom when when dealt with
the realities of our students
and I think that with
legislation like this we're
we're certainly walking a bit of
a fine line because we are.
You can see not just a level one
but level two those that may or
may not have experience within
the classroom on to teach our
children and that gives me some
pause as to this legislation I
think representative Lente you
make a good point about native
communities native language in
native culture
being distinct in terms of of
not only its history on in the
United States but also it's
current need now so that's kind
of where my tension in in
supporting this legislation is
because I think it does open the
door to a lot of other
discussions about licensure
doctor who can or should be able
to become an educator in our
fields and that's where I've had
some battles with with various
groups and people in and I came
from a nontraditional background
to become an educator I didn't
go through the college of add as
a first step but it was through
doing graduate coursework that I
found that I actually liked the
teaching aspect as opposed to
the research side and decided to
go into education and went
through the alternatives
licensure pathway and I think
there is a way that we can do
both
in order to to really help
those that need it in becoming
an educator get to that level of
working with our students so I
think the the program that
doctor stands mentioned kind of
at the beginning of the
testimony and working with these
recipients of the certificates
is a great way to go and it's
something that that I would I
would certainly hope that we
could encourage and expand upon
I think the bill that we heard
on Monday as far as expanding
some of these programs with the
in our universities would be.
Right
place to go in and I hope that
we we definitely start seeing
that because I think there's
something to be said about both
sides of the cultural linguistic
side and the knowledge and power
there in but also the the data
driven techniques in order to
reach our students and teach
them to understand and to apply
these various skills is also
something that that is that is
vitally important I think in
order to reach and more
effectively reach our students
so I do have some reservations
in the rat in the route that we
are going in this and it gives
me some pause but on the other
hand I think you all make a good
point in terms of tribal
communities The New and the
culture empower their within and
I think it's a it's an important
step to recognizing that as
state and working with tribes at
that level so those are my
comments in in it I think it
does that some as members are
pointing out.
Eight we are walking a bit of a
fine line with this but I
certainly in support of your
efforts here are representative
Lente and
with that without any further
questions I would entertain a
motion.
Over the past fund House.
Great so we have a due pass
motion by Representative Roybal
Caballero a second by
Representative Garrett so madam
secretary please call the roll
wanted to pass mission.
Representative Baca yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
No and I'd like to explain my
answer.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Herrerra.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Yes my answer.
You.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Yes.
We.
Ninety one.
All right so you have a do
passed by a vote of nine to one
we have Representative staff.
Representative Dow to explain
about.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative and I I
think we're making really great
progress in the programs that
exist can be built upon expanded
I just have concern when we're
going to have an unclear
definition of tier or that they
must be teaching a language or
what what the actual duties are
in order to qualify as tier two
or tier three not against the
intent but I need more
clarification thank you great
thank you Representative Dow so
thank you representative Lente
thank you doctor sends thank you
superintendent Makhanya for
being with us and providing your
testimony thank you thank you Mr
chair the committee.
Thank you.
All right.
So we will move on to house bill
one fifteen I think it's
Representative Lujan and so
Representative Lujan I saw you
on the attendees list would you
mind please going ahead and
raising your hands Clinton.
House bill one fifteen.
You over to our side.
All right.
Lujan good morning good morning
do you have an expert you wish
for us to bring over thank you I
have a few people here I have
Judy Metis drive is so we will
take to experts.
I appreciate that thank you know
we had and
Ed Sheeran sessions.
Sure professor of physics at
that New Mexico tech.
Okay if you all would please
raise your hand so we had chair
and sessions and who was the
other for this you do Dr Judy
remiges.
Right Judy intermediates if you
would raise your hand.
We have Melinda silver who has
their injuries.
Yes you if those.
Duties not here did you the
whether or not Linda is here and
also the superintendent Larry
Chavis just because of the
weather and everything that's
going on today Mr chair all
right we'll have Melinda silver
join here.
All right.
She is being brought over.
All right.
We have an sessions the silver.
When you are ready house bill
one fifteen Representative.
Thank you Mr chair
So briefly Mr chair to save time
today and I'm glad to see
everybody here are members
attending during this comment
period in math and reading
scores have declined across the
state as we go and that is why
I'm cosponsoring and this bill
with others to initiate an eight
year project to improve teacher
and student stand performance
this practice pilot project
partners between New Mexico
universities experienced
committee or not organizations
and for public school systems to
improve stem performance the
fund will create and monitor
projects to ensure success both
during school in college and
after graduation services
launched longitudinal study I
believe that this complements
and strengthens the current and
future stem initiatives Erin or
tracks a track and
Motivate stem teachers so this
is this is not helpful prompts
to its and I think that it's
we're ready for this we know
that.
We don't want to
This is really the facts what's
going on in our school system
and and I'm going to quote from
the alley estate and twenty
nineteen profession proficiency
levels across the state we're
extremely low consistent with
previous years demonstrating the
majority of students in New
Mexico are not proficient in
math or science.
In great grades three to twelve
thirty five percent of students
were proficient in science and
twenty percent to map.
It twenty nineteen national
assessment of educational
progress at a national
assessment of a sample of US
students mandated by Congress
showed similar low proficiency
rates in New Mexico with New
Mexico second to last for fourth
and eighth graders in math we
know this we've been to the this
information and have been
addressing this thank you this
program this pilot program that
this would create Mr chair
members that this this brings
the data and scientific basis of
information to understand what
those gaps are to understand
better how we can prepare our
future for our stem careers or
seven jobs here in New Mexico we
know we have Landel at seven
zero eight we had Intel that's
going to be expanding and we
need to be preparing our future
and we also need to be keep
creating the support systems
and mentorship for teachers and
through this program it does it
does all those things
and right now I'd like to go to
a Judy ram it is and and and
this is Melinda stated have a
few words Mr chair.
Please remember we wishes to
start.
Mr Chairman.
Rent from thank you Mr chairman
Representative Lujan and
committee members thank you so
much for taking the time to to
hear about this bill I'm
actually here wearing three hats
one is at a as a board member
for the Sapporo consolidated
school district another is as I
am a professor of physics at New
Mexico tech I'm also the
director of outreach here and so
I really worked to create
opportunities for New Mexico K.
twelve education students to
eventually reach at least
college readiness and my hat is
actually as a product of and
believer in New Mexico education
I grew up in Santa Fe I received
free lunches as a as a student I
am a first generation college
student who attended New Mexico
tech and I can say I am evidence
of of what that New Mexico
education to bring I was well
prepared to go to graduate
school I have an international
research career and I have
collaborated with some of the
top people in the world in my
research field.
I am here today because I really
believe in creating
opportunities for students to be
able to discover their interests
and to have the support that
they need to cultivate that and
lead into careers that can
eventually get back to their
community and house bill one
fifteen really provides that
opportunity in a in a very
cohesive way that that connects
K. through twelve education and
higher education its purpose is
to create a pilot project to
support students and stem
teachers and also to address the
foundational education and
provide for their support for K.
through twelve K. to fourth
grade reading and math so it
really takes is all the way
through to the end of a high it
to the end of a college
education if that's if that's
where a student chooses to go
so it provides wraparound
services stem opportunities for
for students many of which
already exist it enhances
education for stem teachers and
opportunities for stem teachers
to have authentic research
experiences so that they can
become really inspired and
understand that the the value of
of research in stem and they
take that back to their students
their students can really be
inspired because that teachers
experiences authentic and that
in turn feeds the enthusiasm in
the in and the interests and
administration of the students
to continue to pursue stem one
of the exciting things about
this particular bill is it
provides a way to to really have
public education and higher
education collaborate so for
example.
Students may participate in stem
and stem activities and they do
we know whether or not that
participation in these
activities increase improves
their math placement score
should they choose to go to into
higher education we know it New
Mexico tech through through
understanding retention in New
Mexico tech that is a student
places higher in their math
placement exams they're more
likely to complete their degree
in four to six years and so that
actually is an important
benchmark for looking at
students coming in now what
would be really amazing is to
match that to whether or not
students to participate in stem
our our find are earning those
higher math placement scores and
so this bill provides an
opportunity for us to to
collaborate and coordinate the
efforts that already exist and
to be able to provide resources
to measure and and collected
data and demonstrate what this
looks like over eighty eight
years.
I'm in addition it is it helps
to find some more foundational
knowledge for after school
programs and and I think I know
I know Judy was gonna speak Judy
hi red hearts is going to speak
to this earlier and and
And when the silver will be
present we'll be discussing this
in more detail but but the K.
through fourth grade math and
reading is a really important
aspect for building that
foundational knowledge I have a
reading program here in New
Mexico tech where I higher
college students to help third
graders and I can tell you that
according to PED data the school
that we're focusing on the year
that we started the the reading
proficiency at their grade level
was at seven percentage and and
I'm gonna say that again seven
percent we weren't even in the
double digits and after one year
of of having college students
working for two hours twice a
week after school really working
with the students that number
jumped to thirty seven percent
in addition to that there was
there was the students come to
New Mexico tech and they they
look at a few laps and they have
New Mexico tech experience and
that was one students who was a
third grader who aspire to be a
cashier at dollar general
because that's what she knew
after this experience and she
she was at the augmented reality
sandbox in the bureau of geology
she wanted to be a geologist and
I would bet that that wasn't
even part of her vocabulary
prior to this experience so
these can really provide
inspirational opportunities for
our kids even as early as as to
to fourth grade it also provides
an opportunity many of my New
Mexico tech mentors have decided
to go into education because of
their experience and and helping
and feeling what it feels like
to really.
Help us students so it also
these kinds of activities and
support for this will allow us
to measure and see the impact
that it has as opposed to the
anecdotal evidence but right now
it's it's a really exciting
opportunity to take programs
that are shovel ready so many of
where we're leveraging existing
partnerships in existing
programs provide the resources
to be able to coordinate these
in a very functional way to
leverage and increase their
impact but also to be able to to
measure the impact and to be
able to show for sure this that
that this works with the
intention that even though we're
starting with four four school
districts I personally would
love to see this expanded
statewide and you know we can
even leverage Mason New Mexico
networks that does reach
statewide including fifty per
you four thousand students fifty
eight percent of which are in
rural districts in New Mexico.
And so Mister chairman and
Representative Lujan I I would
like to with your with your
approval pass this along to my
colleague money discover.
Please briefly
speaker Romero at seven hundred
and Representative chairman
Romero I'm actually not the
expert witnesses Judy Romero's
to ensure the Reinhardt's who is
the educator and needs to be on
this call I'm just was here as
a.
back up for her but she's here.
issue would raise your hand I'm
gonna put you back on the
attendees side thank you thank
you.
So Judy Ryan hurts if you could
raise your hand on the attendees
side please.
Me too.
Balanced.
Okay have already all right.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr and hearts.
You may be muted.
We're not there.
Or something.
All right we go there we go if
you could please be brief.
Okay I will do my very best
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for allowing us to
talk about House Bill one one
five
plus them plus I am a former
elementary and secondary science
or stem teacher and professor of
teacher education prepared
hundreds of teachers and many of
them in Sam as well as
principles so my career has
spanned many many years and I
continue to volunteer and the
Santa Fe public schools I'm also
a member of the coalition for
public education for many years
and one of the projects that
they have is called math Amigos
of which I am the director of
literacy in this nonprofit
organization as well as a co
lead of adopt a school at the
end you know I Tero our
community school in Santa Fe
public schools and I think our
superintendents with us and I
just want to add that I am a
graduate of the UNM I got my
doctor there many years ago when
there was lots of open space on
campus I'd like to begin by just
saying that I know that you're
all very supportive education
you're passionate about it I too
am passionate about education as
well as well a stem education
and I've seen wonderful things
happen in this area in my years
of teaching I have had students
who said I don't like math I
don't like science my dad was
better at it or my uncle was
better at it but I'm not very
good at it so they turned around
after experiencing many of the
things that we're going to be
trying to implement in this
particular bill is a community
driven project in its pilot
stage are it has collective
impact now what do I mean by
that again I've been in the
public schools as a teacher and
then in higher ed most of the
time that was asylum situation.
What we're trying to do now is
to bring together those two
entities so we have a case
sixteen perspective and that's
very important the other thing
that it does it brings learning
on the part of teachers and
students together as well this
is important because I could
talk about is the three legs of
the stool we need students
reading teachers and of course
we need care givers and parents
to be involved in the education
of our children by having that
take place simultaneously that's
really very powerful and of
course it helps the teachers
move through the three levels of
there are teaching licensure so
that's that's very important now
that change for program I'm
which uses of Houston in the el
Paso area and schools there and
we have shown will many many
increases to both Science
reading and mass and so what is
very special about it is that we
take a literacy or language
approach we sat here and
listened to the previous bill
and then heard the importance of
language and so what we're
trying to do with a mask and
we've done it successfully in
our coaching programs for the
and for teachers to help them
understand the role of language
in learning that children have
to be able to explain what
they've learned and be able to
extend that learning and the
only way they can do it is
through the four domains of
communication they have to be
able to listen to speak to read
and to ride into bringing those
two curriculum areas together
that Boston remain separate
language arts and stem we would
like to bring them together and
we hope to see many many are
impactful changes are taking
place and we have seen that as
well it can begin with the book
it to me again because of
provide to conduct.
For mac gives us characters who
gives us a lot it gives us a
geographic location coyotes all
around us about Randy but in the
southwest it talks about the
animals that are here the
children are so you know excited
about so it built on the
initiatives that you have all
supported in the past and we
think that this stem plus can
highlight all of the things plus
bring other things together like
literacy and reading and math so
are we hope that built capacity
and I thank you all for not
forgetting that teachers and
students are at the heart of our
work so thank you chairman
Romero hope that was sure enough
and members of the committee.
Right thank you so much
Representative Lujan is that
your testimony.
Yes Mr chair thank you great
thank you so much all right so
we'll go to the attendees list
those in support of house bill
one fifteen would you please
indicate there is in your hands.
You wish to speak.
The moment.
Right.
So you'll have up to two minutes
but as I always say is remedy is
the soul of wit so J. St please.
In two minutes.
Jason you we can't hear you.
Chairman can you hear me now we
can hear you now in your two
minutes is going all right
chairman members of the
committee just that's been as a
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico technology council we
support the legislation and
believe it promotes a skilled
workforce that meets the demand
of growth and solidifies our
ability to compete thank you.
Thank you all right so the two
Francisco.
Welcome you have up to two
minutes well thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Francisco without to
the director of stem at Luna
community college and we stand
in full support of this bill we
here at Luna have instituted a
K. through twelve programs stem
programs that we provide a high
blood valuable pipeline for our
college and not only that this
bill would provide us with an
opportunity to garner valuable
data that we use in other
programs such as National
Science Foundation programs and
grants and U. S. department of
education programs and grants we
find that that it's hard to
Attract students into stem what
we can do slide eight going and
starting at early age of
formative age for P. pre K.
through fourth that we increase
our students in our college
programs that are dual credit
programs this is a plus plus and
we stand in full support thank
you Mr chairman members the
committee.
Right thank you.
All right so to Willie Mae good
morning million may of two and.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the Education
Committee it's a pleasure for me
to be here this morning I am
billing more cheese the Legisla-
years on for the next school
board association and NMAA BA
supports funding and legislation
to establish damn and career and
technical pathways for students
that include financial systems
job opportunities and internship
programs house bill one fifteen
creates a project that will
provide model programs for our
students and our teachers in
science technology engineering
and math has been mentioned from
kindergarten through fourth
grade in our public schools we
NMAA be a support to the intent
of this legislation and Mr
chairman members of the
committee we ask Senator
favorable consideration thank
you for this time right thank
you.
Well in that.
Thank you chairman Romero and
members of the committee on
Melinda still there I am a
member of the coalition for
public education in Santa Fe and
I have children who went through
the Senate based school system
it would have been wonderful to
have a program like this when
they were going to school at I
love the fact that it unites the
higher education with K. twelve
we don't see that very often and
it's something that I think is
needed more off more often this
program will provide a framework
for children who have the
curiosity as youngsters but then
lose that as they go through
school because they don't see
the connection and this will be
a really great thing to promote
I think and also just somebody
who looks at systems I believe
it'll be reckless replicable
scalable and effective something
that we can spread throughout
the state thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you.
Lena good morning about two
minutes welcome.
Good morning chairman and the
committee members my name is the
Neckermann founder and director
Austin Santa Fe in New Mexico
nonprofit that develops provides
an advocate for stem education
we are mentorship organization
will project based programs
aiming to increase they were
city and equity in stem
education we mainly focus on
middle school and high school
students in northern New Mexico
I stand in support of an H. B.
and one fifteen especially with
the multi year funding as this
would potentially help us
measure the impact of our
programs.
if this bill passes I do urge
PED and partners that plan be
put in place so northern New
Mexico students do not miss on
this opportunity thank you.
Thank you.
All right Larry good morning
wearing of a two minutes
welcome.
Morning.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you
Representative Lujan for
bringing this bill forward Larry
Chavis Santa Fe public schools
superintendent of this program
could provide our students with
new and innovative opportunities
to move the needle on becoming
proficient as you've heard a
little earlier this bill
identify methods within equity
lands and help identify higher
ed partners which is much needed
this Madam pilot program will
provide the support educators
need to provide high quality
instructions in this area we
stand the full support of house
bill one fifteen and urged the
committee to vote to pass thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you.
All right yeah we is.
At least two minutes welcome.
Thank you chairman Romero
members of committee for your
service I have
volunteered with the Santa Fe
public schools and seen the.
Are crying.
The shame of the deficit of of
opportunity that our kids have
had and this bill will now and
has been crafted by educators
which are sometimes is unusual
so I would urge you to look
carefully at it and consider it
and what urgent do pass thank
you.
Right thank you.
Carlos.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman Carlos
Romero associate vice president
for research at New Mexico tech
we stand in favor of this
legislation as the one
university New Mexico does not
have a college of education
we're very focused program a
master's of science for
teachers.
We see this program as a
important tool in the toolbox of
improving stem education in New
Mexico.
We appreciate your support thank
you.
Right thank you.
So we'll go to opposition is
there any opposition to house
bill one fifty.
All right not seeing any will
come to committee so committee
members questions.
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you so much Mr chair thank
you to Representative Lujan the
presenters I have a couple of
practical questions that I found
confusing in the bill says it's
an eight year study it's not
clear to me who's being study is
it the kindergarten to fourth
graders is it high school
students that are involved could
you clarify that for me please.
Yes Mister chair and
Representative Garrett and I
will get that over to.
Sharon or duty whoever wants to
answer that.
We're I'd like to jump in I'm
Judy thank you Mr chair and
Representative Garrett we're
looking at measures
quantitative and qualitative
measured at with each of the
groups that you have mentioned
so even with that teachers were
looking at of their classroom
instruction and what they're
doing the implementing of the
strategies are from.
You know worst PED sessions
along with our coaching sessions
as well as the young people we
did not specify standardized
tests so the districts you know
do you have measures for K.
through four so we will be using
that as well but we're using if
you a variety of measures for
all the groups high school and
tracking them so that's why that
a year studies there we're
trying to see if they you know
move through the system and then
go in for a certificate for
technical education and
expanding their experiences for
with a degree would like to be
able to see if any of the
foundational experiences have
impacted their success as they
move forward into a career.
So Mr chair and Judy or
Representative if if we're
tracking the K. through four
core coverage that we're special
especially targeting I wouldn't
be at eight year study that
would be twelve to sixteen years
so that's what I'm confused
about understanding.
Okay.
Turn it over to my colleague
share of Chairman do you want to
mention how that might take
place because we did that the
evidence study session please
and if you would be sure to go
through the chair.
Chairman Romero Representative
look on a Representative Garrett
thank you for the question so so
that's a very good at logistics
question Representative Garrett
and and it would kind of for in
in the beginning it would take
place and and kind of two
cohorts so we would be tracking
the K. through fourth grade and
looking to see the impact of
their participation and their
academic achievements as they
move up into high school and in
the same at the same time we can
start with page basically middle
and high school students that
are participating in stem
programs and watching as they
tracks of particularly high
school students anecdotally I
can speak that that I know site
some of the New Mexico tech
students came to New Mexico tech
because they participated in
science let yet but we're not
taking care that measure but we
can certainly then have the
ability to say okay what's the
extracurricular stem activities
our students participating in
high school and what impact does
that have as they moved to stem
college and career opportunities
so that would itself be in a
year so wouldn't be the same
cohort from K. through fourth
grade all the way to help
college but kind of to in
parallel sect segments so that
we can make that measurement and
hopefully justify continue of
the program from a longer state
study.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that answer I I guess was
unclear as I don't actually see
it in the bill I'm hearing some
fantastic information and I all
my friends who've been in the
masters of science and tech I'm
really you know testified how
that PED is help them I just
don't see everything in the bill
that's being talked about my
last question is who actually
tracks the information who is
actually doing the study.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative so it.
I'm gonna differ also but from
my understanding of the bill and
everything and I know that this
is that as it is a private pilot
program we're going to be
developing so that those
measures and some of those
that improve those information
and measureable pieces working
with collaborating with PED
and other and another
institutions but I'll give
Mr chair let sharing sessions
also respond to that.
Thank you chairman Merrill and
and Representative Lujan
so so yes the the we will be
developing these metrics is in
the pilot capacity we have a lot
of ideas certainly and we're
going to be collaborating with
with the PED and also the higher
ed education
the higher ed education program
so the three the three
universities but we're also
going to be working as as Dr
Reinhardt said very closely with
their community partnerships and
helping to develop those
measurements and to be able to
contract out some of that that
important information because
because we need to build that
capacity for taking those
measurements and reporting on
them so so it's it's something
that is part of the pilot
procedure.
So Mister chair and I guess Dr
Sharon so hi New Mexico tech
will be the lead
Developer of the studies in the
tracking this is my correct in
understanding that.
I'm sorry Mr chair yes
Representative.
My apologies chairman Romero
Representative Lujan
Representative Garrett but we
are prepared to should
definitely leave that that
organization in collaboration
with PED it's something that I
think is very important
certainly from the New Mexico
tech perspective and recruiting
students but in my heart and a
much much broader sense of of
really providing opportunities
for New Mexico students
statewide.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you presenters I think it's
terrific I just think there's a
it's there's a lack of clarity
that's my only comment thank you
Mr chair of that's it from me.
Thank you Mr.
Present Lara.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative on for bringing
this before I'd like the idea I
liked it but I have some
clarifying questions please.
Representative a Mr chair this
is a pilot program correct.
Yes Mr chair.
So if it's a pilot program why
are we requesting recurring
funding FY are we creating a
fund.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Lara that with
the fund would do is.
Is establish the need for the
the money's in that the economy
for for the project to be
integrated into working with
actually do work with PED and
and funding are those
Those that would be working and
and and contracted to do the
work Mr chair.
Thank you for that
Representative Mr chair so if
I'm if I'm doing the the the
numbers and are in my head so
we're asking for five million
dollars or five million dollars
appropriation recurring
appropriation for eight years
that's that's forty million
dollars Mr chair Representative
is not as I am I correct about.
Mr chair Representative Lara yet
we're looking maybe even less
than that but to start this but
this project and get this moving
it and looking at the longevity
of what we're we're trying to
measure here and clicking the
data and working with all the
institutes and the work that
states need to do all that yes
it would be a recurring amount
of of funding Mr chair.
Thank you thank you for
Representative I just a I I'm
I'm not too sure about the
recurring funding for a pilot
program but to I I agree that
this is a very much needed
program I think I is fully
support of stem cell initiatives
and I think this is going to
raise.
Provided a very important role
in this gonna find a lot of
relevant information regarding
stand the only the only the only
hang up that I have is is the it
is the funding in you know I
would hate for us to to put
something for that is a good
idea that has good insurance but
we're we are unable to to
provide so that that's my
concern with that but other than
that you have my full support on
this.
Mr chair thank you
Representative water for that
unit we always are looking at
that that revenue stream and how
we are going to use that really
effectively and we are we are in
you know time we do have some
extra revenue and we're looking
to really fill in the gaps we're
looking at statistics that we
have right now with our map and
and and our proficiency in our
schools and and but we need to
do right now to to fill in those
gaps and to really bring home
the data and information and
that this is what this program
with you this is what this this
is what we all right I could
hardly believe we're missing and
the technology that we would
really development probation the
data and the cohesiveness of
bringing all of our partners
together and and really having a
full scale information piece is
really what our state needs to
really answer really nail down
what we need to do to improve
our scores thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative R. this bill I
absolutely agree how you are
doing and how you're
envisioning.
Transitioning what we know I
believe Mr chair and what we
know our will result from this
pilot project undertaken because
having that in the
you know years and years and
years of interim hearing and
hearing.
The where our students are going
and correlating it with our
economic development strategy
and correlating with apparent
our students for the future that
they're already yet this is the
future they are already in so I
absolutely appreciate you
investing in that.
From a positive point of view
and preparing.
For.
Amending and instituting the
necessary recurring funds that
will come as a result so that we
don't have to Mr Chairman
representative every year come
back but we are already making a
statement Mr chair with what our
decision as in terms of.
Insurance.
That we're preparing the
outcome.
To be implemented and
instituted.
And I think that this is a this
is how we should be doing are
you making our decisions are
because what has happened Mr
chair as we all know in the past
that our lack of preparedness
for our lack of envisioning or
our lack of committing recurring
funds.
Or the future which we're now in
has resulted and setting us back
Mr chair in terms of the
progress that our children could
be making our use could be
making and placing them Mr chair
and representative already in
position we know that the you
know just as an example we know
that space exploration space
travel space everything is here
and we're in the absolute core
center of that and how better
way for us to be instituting or
telling our students you know
what this is what you chose to
pursue you Mr chair of this is
what you chose to pursue we're
ready for it you'll have what is
necessary in the same with the
medical profession the same with
our our bio cap futures and the
same with
all of our science and
technology futures and so this
is the way I think Mr chair that
we should be preparing our
policy to be fully aligned with
our our budget and
if I and and our public budget
and public financing
responsibilities associated with
our policy
Representative responsibilities
as legislators and so I I don't
have any questions I share your
vision I share your experts our
vision I see how exactly how
this is going to go on
and how it's going to transition
and I appreciate very much Mr
Chairman representative you are
and your co sponsors I think
that as well and thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Any others with questions
comments.
Concerns.
All right I'm sorry I did have a
couple of questions on for you
Representative and and experts
Because I I share some of the
concerns about Representative
Garrett brought up about the
space specific and specifying
who might take the lead one
other issue is how would
teachers and students that we're
looking at this long term study
how how might teachers and and
and students be selected for
this pilot in order to track.
Thank you related questions and
Those are measures and those are
those are **** to pilot program.
Program it would be able to work
with the different institutions
of AGD and repeat deals
specifically why we chose PED to
be that the place where we would
have the the the many sent you
it's it would be developed as
far as I know and you know as
far as who's going to take the
lead on those things I as the
New Mexico yes has testified
also today's that they are
prepared for this they are you
know they are you beating and
doing some of this work and and
I would leave it to them to add
anything us share printer Judy
on that this questions thank you
Mr chair.
We may be able to address it
that's right hearts.
Yes Mr chair of we would
certainly work closely as you
heard from Mr Chavez the
superintendent we would be
working with any of the
superintendents we have these
two districts that we're trying
to see how the pilot program is
going to work I thank very much
the the support in terms of
seeing it as a longitudinal
study your things don't change
are you need at least three to
five years so are you you asked
about you know how would they
participate would start with
that conversation at the
district level obviously PED are
in the districts would know
perhaps where they would like
those programs to be and see how
willing the administrators and
the teachers are to embrace
these
are opportunities.
Thank you Mr chair.
Sessions did you just haven't.
Thank you Mr chair yeah I I can
say it so for example the
mentoring program that I was
talking about earlier one of the
ways that we select students is
is primarily B. by choosing
students that are not right
level proficiency in in reading
literacy so that's kind of our
first benchmark and then among
those which ones have have the
yeah we could be who has who has
the desire their parents have
the desire to be able to.
To
Benefit from this program and
then as far as measuring again
it hasn't been systematic
because we haven't had the
resources but I have full
cooperation with with the
support consolidated school
district and we can certainly
compare for example reading
literacy between the students to
participate in the purpose of
the students that don't and so
that's that's just one example
of something that's already
happening in real time in terms
of students that are
participating in stem we again
collaborate with the districts
so that that we have that a
database of how students are
performing and and standardized
tests for example and then it be
and being able to to divide up
the students who are
participating in stem programs
from those that are.
I hope that answers your
question thank you.
It certainly begins to clarify
the selection process on both
levels.
I mean I just have some was
similar concerns that we don't
have some of the specified
within the bill itself because
it does all sound really good on
and certainly we're all
supportive of it but if we're to
be putting things in statute we
want to make sure that we're
getting it getting it just right
because with that I share
similar concerns with what what
Representative Lara saying is
that we're pretty trying to put
recurring funding into a pilot
program and I mean like we seen
pilot program grams show up with
some results that were unsavory
and if we were to do that in
this case I'd be afraid that
we're diverting recurring
funding to something that may or
may not prove viable or that is
something that is continually
I'm shifting because I've only
seen pilot programs funded with
with one time money to sell it
and then the funds created so
there might be
various donors that offer guests
or whatever into a in order to
help keep the fun going if
that's the case I have a little
bit of hasn't hesitancy with
that I'm my other question is so
is that have you all worked with
the higher education department
and the public education
department that would be
in charge of working with you
all in terms of this pilot
program.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
like to get COVID just briefly
about what you just the the
other concern you just hadn't
been setting up this to the this
pilot program you know it's with
with great consideration great
That we are we are not doing to
slightly this isn't something
that is just and that is just
come up it's something that we
have been really focused on and
learning about and we know that
there are other partners and
other programs out there that
are already due to the work
there's just a lot a lack of of
gathering information gathering
the data and putting it all
together and like you said
working with HEDT working with
PED on working work what works
for a workforce solutions and
all in the state agencies and
really bringing for the
comprehensive information design
and that's what this that's what
this this pilot program does in
order to bring forward pilot
design we need to have their
input we need to have them on
the table we reviewed and and
making sure that this is going
to be I designed it is going to
thanks for measureable outcomes
and those that know me and my
work and right now my focus in
the past with education policy
is that I don't bring on these
bills and I don't take on these
these types of policies lightly
myself and I I have a commitment
to make sure that that the money
been placed responsibly and that
these are this is gonna be a
very responsible and responsive
design and that again that's why
of all state again strong checks
and balances go to some of the
work in the discussions we have
had with PED so yes we are
talking with these agencies Mr
chair and making sure that we
are bringing our partners
together because this is my very
strong opinion from you know
testimony and interim
discussion years and years of
discussions that's really what's
missing and if we don't bring
for you said that comprehensive
weight full scale way a
facilitative we bringing
information and data together
that we're missing the
opportunity we're missing the
mark and so yes we are working
with agencies Mr chair thank
you.
Right now I appreciate
Representative I hope you don't
take it as a as a personal
criticized at all Sir.
And I don't want to give the
impression that it that it is or
anything like that yeah I just
want to make sure that whatever
we're trying to put forward into
law is is not that it's not
being considered but just the
long term effects of what we may
or may not be doing
thank you with this legislation
but
when you when you say that that
talks with the public education
department higher education has
been something that's ongoing
on kind of what's been their
response and I know that we
have.
Representative from the public
education department I don't
know if we do for HEDT here that
I think in the pool and to talk
about on some of these issues as
well but what have those
conversations in like with
regard to additional.
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chair and yet PED is here and I
can't speak you know I had I not
put any words in to any of our
agencies amounts but if you do
if you like to come aboard I am
very happy to.
Knowledge and have them speak Mr
chair.
Sure we.
Stirs.
Bring him aboard.
Take a moment.
All right good morning Mr
center.
Good morning Mr chair.
I'm so I guess I guess the
question was with regard to to
house bill one fifteen
I mean it's it's charging the
the the public education
department to work with with
these universities to pilot this
program
What what would be the status of
your work with these groups and
do you all the department have
the capacity to do such such a
highway to to work with these
organizations.
Thank you Mr chairman and
presents honestly thinks that
Representative this species she
and and her
her colleagues here have risen
pretty interesting questions
about stem education and how
important that is for students
and we don't disagree that stem
education is important obviously
professional development for
teachers is also really
important in making sure that
teachers are prepared to do that
kind of education in their
classrooms the the department
currently does have a number of.
Stem initiatives are are
executive request includes three
million dollars for things like
professional development
specifically around middle
school math and algebra
and so we don't disagree overall
with the intent we've not works
directly with the sponsor or
her.
Police here about this
particular project and so if the
bill were to to progress we have
to talk a little bit more about
what that would look like as far
as.
Seeing the department to to work
together here and the scale at
which the the bill calls for
currently.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
Representative you have a did
you would you have a follow up I
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr etcetera but we
have it just a very to clarify
we have been in discussion with
secretary finance and you had
have had discussions and and
talking about this as we you
know we're trying to figure out
if there are other models in
other ways as of us working
together and you know like I
said earlier to an as we've
we've known and all that.
dollars and everything they're
coming to our state right now we
really want to be efficient and
effective with using
Using those appropriations right
so those are ongoing
conversations as well but
yes they will be ongoing
conversation special be passed
to move this forward that we
will be working directly and
more directly with that the PED
and and other agencies are.
Great.
No and I I I certainly
appreciate that and certainly I
mean one of the things I think
we look for is making sure that
the departments are whatever we
do pass here and is very closely
tracked with
the departments in order to get
the desired effect that we hoped
for all along the way and I see
that is particularly vital we're
talking about a pilot project in
order to kind of find a a
direction for us to go into the
future so I think that's what
it's very commendable and
certainly great about this plan
here is that we're able to start
really drilling down and provide
a roadmap for us to go as far as
stem education but we need buy
in from all sides in order to do
that especially when we're
talking about a pretty large
allocation of funding on so I
think we had some members with
some questions I'm certainly I
would ask you representative to
get together certainly with
The policy person from the
public education department I
know you've had discussions with
the secretary but certainly Mr
said I hear this is a wealth of
information about the the public
education department in order to
to further refine where this may
be an Representative Roybal
Caballero together and that.
Excuse me Mr chair idea because
I I did want to make a motion.
Okay so I won't be accepting a
motion on this bill I think
we're gonna roll it so that
those conversations could be
continued and then we'll bring
it back hopefully representative
of you can have that today and
bring the amendment so we could
schedule it first thing on
Friday.
Okay
Mr chair I just want to make
sure I I just wanted to make
sure that you
we were going to be able to
bring it back because.
Okay thank you very yes.
Definitely definitely and I
think representative for about
how you know you've been part of
this committee and we always
bring them back as soon as we're
able to to have those
discussions and sometimes they
may be fruitful maybe not and
then we put it to the committee
to alternately decide but I want
to make sure that that we get
something that that is very
comfortable and that the
department would be able to say
definitively they'd be able to
implement or not and then we as
a committee can decide so we can
certainly bring that back we had
all the testimony all that stuff
and then we can move on to
discussing whatever amendments
are issue there may be and then
bring it back for first for
final determination.
Thank you Mr chair really
appreciate the conversation and
all that information and and yes
the testimony today and and we
really appreciate your feedback
and we'll get to we'll get on
that thank you so much Sir
please and certainly you have me
at your disposal you have are
committee members you have our
committee staff and analysts to
utilize in order to do that in
the public education department
but just please we do have a
twenty four hour rule one
amendments which is like to
urge.
Get those amendments if if
anything it proves all bring
them back as soon as possible
and then we can schedule the
bill again and put it up like
Representative Roybal Caballero
said for about the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity Mr
chair of course thank you your
Senator Representative all right
thank you so please hold tight
we can bring this back on and
we'll just roll it over for now
all right so we'll go to
committee.
Will postpone that we will go to
house bill one forty two so we
have Representative Serrato.
Thank you Mr chairman my witness
is a superintendent Larry Chavez
are exuberant
Thank you get educator you're on
the ball has been following us.
And I can promote you right away
superintendent.
And see if Santa Fe schools was
closed today I was screaming.
Yes they were has as all my
updates got state.
Integrates new day will say
again great awesome it might
just mean and go past Memorial
Day.
The snow make up days I'm not
sure about that so much in
closely with Albuquerque public
schools welcome superintendent
Representative Serrato house
bill one forty two please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I'm I'm
presenting house bill one forty
two to provide protective
personal equipment for schools
this bill would appropriate one
point five million for one time
use for school districts across
the state to have available and
provide to public school
students to the end of the
school year with adequate PPE
personal protective equipment
said the three pike surgical
mask or can ninety fives this
bill was prompted after this
entities public schools had to
make the difficult decision to
reset to virtual learning as on
the con was still climbing
nobody wanted to do this kids
need to be in school for their
success and for you know working
families have some sort of
normalcy but when we were
talking we discussed how there
was a need for additional tests
which we've seen you know what
the response of the federal
government what also is clear
that a lot of our students are
relying on cost masks for
protection classroom since the
Otakon senator begun since
beginning just a January CDC
updated their mass
recommendations specifically
they said well fitted disposable
surgical masks and K. ninety
fives are more protective than
all and all that all topics and
you know the reason why a lot of
parents do this is just because
it's simple economics or
logistics when I was ordering my
own daughters and you know
properly fitting K. ninety fives
they were about a dollar fifty
each and the by to get them
shipped and there was a shortage
and I couldn't get them the
right size and we had to wait a
longer extended time than we
were hoping to in addition
vaccine right right Sir
vaccination rates are very are
much lower for our kids from
twelve to seventeen as of today
seventy point two percent of
kids have had at least one dose
of the vaccine and fifty nine
point six have completed their
primary series this to from the
five to twelve year old range
thirty five point eight haven't
had at least one dose and then
twenty four point six of
completed a series and of course
any parent with a child under
five knows that there is not one
currently available and while
the.
Maybe coming hate still any
emergency use authorization
which is means a limited number
of people will be utilizing them
for their kids just out of
concerns so this is all
happening with COVID you know
we've New Mexico last month's US
bank in in COVID admitted
pediatric patients which is
difficult when you most of our
State and other respiratory
concerns on the rise so I know
we're hopeful and I anticipate
that we are either on the
decline of the Omicron spike the
reality is we don't know what
the next very it is if there if
there will be you know we've
heard rumors of another one and
so to make sure that our kids
are protected no matter what
their economic circumstances
this bill ensures that that
schools have the appropriate
protective here and that we can
keep our schools open I wanted
to things briefly and then I'll
hand it over to my my witness
one is that this is was not
included HB to I am looking to
secure funding by working with
some senators on the on this
right now so that is an ongoing
process and into this does not
affect any policies already in
place regarding personal
protective equipment at all on
the simply insurers and school
districts and parents have
access to the appropriate
equipment and now if I can turn
it over to us superintendent
Chavez of the Santa Fe public
schools if he has any more
additional box thank you.
The superintendent.
Learning that chairman Romero
members of the committee
Representative Serrato thank you
for the opportunity to speak on
house bill one forty two it's a
very important house bill I
think to all educators parents
and families the safety of all
students the staff is always our
highest yes school leaders in
twenty twenty we as in Santa Fe
public schools started ordering
masks after searching vigilantly
for available PPE and just
Representative Serrato mentioned
it's not very easily found
around it with vendors
throughout the nation within the
state and within twenty twenty
alone we spent Santa Fe public
schools closed two hundred fifty
thousand dollars on masks
because we were in remote during
twenty twenty a most of twenty
twenty one we've maintained a
stockpile of can ninety five and
ninety five cents three ply
disposable masks however other
districts may not be as such
fortunate position and I do not
they are not on October first of
this school year we submitted a
plan for enhance COVID safety
practices to the the New Mexico
public education department and
in that plant we list that one
of our safe practices regardless
of reaching the three percent or
five percent threshold for
launching the plan is making
masks available making these
type of mask the mail available
districtwide all students
throughout our district in our
schools all staff in our schools
and departments have this option
available to them to help as you
mentioned the Representative
Serrato to help mitigate this
band we did recommend on the
twentieth of the of January that
all staff and students
transition to three ply
disposable masks or economic
ninety five masks once we made
that decision parents
immediately asked if the
district would be providing
these options as they couldn't
afford to buy them you know we
did and we still find both
masking options for all staff
and students and the transition
has been made very smoothly you
know important for parents this
was this bill is extremely
important they need that
support.
From the state they don't have
the resources some of them do
not have the resources of making
this transition of purchasing
these type of masks.
That students and families feel
safe when these masks are worn
properly and they're available
in our schools masking provides
everyone a safe US Census thanks
to within classrooms and
buildings I just recently as of
last week I had a substitute
teacher email me a report on our
own that all of for students had
a kick ninety five mask on and
she felt safe being in the
classroom that really does help
support the initiative by the
governor to get more substitutes
in in the classrooms also it
provides a safety net that
substitute to want to be able to
provide the opportunity to go in
the classroom with these masks
on our staff has been
appreciated of the district
making this transition and also
providing the necessary PPE
meant also I also met with area
superintendents from central New
Mexico in January they would
love to have made this
recommendation to their staff
and students and provide these
masks to everyone that they have
within their districts.
Currently they don't have them
available for wide disbursement
you know support is needed and
this bill I think does help
address the need for still
superintendents statewide and
also parents and students so
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Representative
Serrato for your time this
morning and bringing this
forward.
Thank you Mr chairman and that's
a presentation.
Right thank you so much
Representative thank you
superintendent so we'll go to
the attendees let's those in
opposition to house bill one
forty two please indicate by
raising your hand if you wish to
speak.
This for opposition.
All right so those in support of
house bill one forty two would
you please indicate by raising
your hand.
So go to early may.
Okay.
Sorry I just accidentally
promoted US panelists
temporarily but you have up to
two minutes welcome.
Really maybe if you were a new.
Good morning Mr chairman I'm
having trouble can hear me now
we can a great thank you so much
more Mr chairman members of
Education Committee I am million
more teens the lives of
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico state school board
association Mr chairman members
of the committee you probably
know the school board
association has over sixty five
legislative platform positions
for legislation that that are
association has voted on a
couple of them deal with student
and staff safety and another
deals with COVID nineteen
pandemic real relief New Mexico
scored Association supports
related legislative priority is
regarding COVID thank you for
students and district staff say
and
From pandemic and other related
outcomes this includes and up
it's not limited to direct a to
meet the PP the technology
support social emotional
supports food and other basic
needs Mr chairman the New Mexico
school board association
supports the intent of this bill
and we think the sponsor for
introducing it or we just a
committee to favourably consider
it thank you.
Thank you.
All right those words for
anybody else on the internet
side.
All right so we will come to the
committee.
Committee question
Representative Lara please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representative will bring this
before they could go the the
safety of our students and our
staff this is a home of most
importance but I do have a
question regarding the the the
funding ask
Can you please tell me or have
one of your experts tell me why
you can utilize the federal
funds that they proceed to
purchases.
Thank you thank you I'm sorry
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the bill for
the question I'm also briefly
and then I will let the
superintending into more details
about this one aspect of this I
just want to put in the context
to is that how quickly macron
spread and help how rapidly that
shifted the landscape yet again
with this pandemic and all at
the superintendent at two more
details about that as well.
Thank you Representative long
lot of Mr chairman members of
the committee the great question
you know some of some districts
have had to use the federal
relief funds for H. back
upgrades Senator Tate
sanitization stations facility
improvements
we were able to to utilize that
among many other purchases so I
think it's a combination of
improving H. fax systems I have
the filters you know portable
fans you name it I think
everything's going into
providing a safe learning
environment and this sometimes
gets overlooked as an important
measure to provide a safe
learning environment for staff
and students.
Thank you for that Mr chair
thank you Mr superintendent I
appreciate that answer but you
know each school district has
their own circumstances in our
own situation and some may be
better off than others and they
have still plenty of work out of
federal funds to to to cover
that another question that I
have Representative Mr chair is
is even is is the purchasing of
of personal protective equipment
for staff and for our our kids
or students is that is that a
lot of it would be an allowable
expense with using general fund
dollars if we have federal funds
already available for the.
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative Lana
I believe so in my conversations
with them LCS LFC that was not
identified as a concern that we
could not because it was in
service to the schools but I I
believe not because of that but
that they had not identified
that is a concern that we could
not use the funds for this
purpose.
Thank you for that
representatives I'm I'm just
concerned about the supplement
and supplanting the though those
federal funds and out do we have
maybe a Mr chair it's okay being
Mr center has an answer for that
if we can.
Have some clarification on the.
We all.
Mister sinister with us.
Mr chair you kicked me out yet
So Mister Mister chair
representative of what I just
wanna make sure I understand the
question whether or not we would
be able to use general fund
money on on PP considering that
that we receive federal funds is
that right that's correct Mr
sent I'm just worried about
supporting those those funds
okay thanks for thank you for
the question Representative to
be quite honest I don't know
that we've looked into it either
I don't believe there would be a
conflict because of federal
funds doesn't specifically
outline of what what sort of a
COVID affects you would be able
to use your federal funds on and
so I don't know that this would
be considered supporting I would
have to follow up though to make
sure that we get you a an
accurate answer.
Thank you Mr Janet thank you Mr
chairman because you know this
is I think this is something
that you know when if this kind
of this bill goes forward and it
gets implemented yeah I just
want to make sure that that the
school districts are clear on
what they can and cannot do with
these fun with these funds
because I would hate for for us
to go through the process with
these good intentions that we
want to help our staff and our
in our students and there's a
hold up with with PED on the
with them using the those funds
so that's what I'm concerned
about other than that I think
this is a great idea I I
appreciate this and all of the
support of your bill
Representative thank you thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you for.
Representative about having a
place.
Thank you Mr chair and
Thank you Representative I just
wanted to clarify
and I really appreciate you
bringing this forward because I
think that it is another one of
those forward thinking are
pieces of of legislation where
we're making sure that we're
prepared as we seeing we've seen
a number Mr chair variants
come and go and we're we're good
and we've been told by the CDC
and all of the experts that
this is a virus that has the
capacity to multiply itself in
many different ways until we
reach certain levels Mr chair of
Herkimer immunity and we're not
even close to those levels that
so I I would I would say
Absolutely necessary I wanted to
thank the Representative for for
her forward thinking approach
but my question is and I think
Mr sent on the and I don't know
Representative very common but
I the question came from the
of the previous question
Representative Lara.
Do we know and maybe
superintendent might get have a
handle also do we know do that
do the districts and those PED
now at this point.
What about funds are left in the
emergency appropriations that
went to
Provide funding to address
comment on that pandemic so I
know we had several sessions
with that that I'm saying I know
they went where they went but do
we now have some sort of a
handle on the balance of the
account balances on those funds.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative the
superintendent this is and I'm
happy to try to you all for this
for that answer.
So Mister chair representative
Camaro so I can get some
additional information we are
getting information from
districts across the state both
in terms of their budgets and
actual expenditures do want to
point out that the largest
portion of federal relief funds
the R. funds districts still
have a quite a bit of time to
spend that money and so we won't
know for a while exactly how
they spent those funds but I can
probably follow up with some
additional information about the
the the first two rounds and
superintendents this company
speak to Santa Fe in particular.
Yes thank you thank you Mr chair
Representative Colaio I'm just
wiggly and speaking on behalf of
Santa Fe public schools we do
have a ballots running ballots
we know what we spent on we know
we need to spend it on but as
you mentioned we have to be
flexible in in order to pave it
we weren't predicting that I'm a
comic take on a life of its own
will return from winter break so
it is important to an as some Mr
sent mentioned we do have to
submit a plan to PED three plan
on spending Esther three so a
lot of that that funding has
already been identified in
programming and this provides
that extra layer of support this
stated that the schools to
purchase masks specifically to
provide a safe learning
environment for both staff and
students and when we transition
to remote learning we did.
Make the the mask available to
all sites district wide during
that times when they returned it
was there for them and I think
if we just really do focus on
getting masks to our students at
and staffs if available then we
can make it through the second
semester with in person learning
which is our preferred method
and I'm sure the preferred
instructional method of many
districts so speaking ills
directly to your question yes
every district knows what they
spent on those the budget.
Thank you
Representative
that's it that's very helpful
and I have complete faith and
trust in our
districts local district Senate
Mr secretary PED and making sure
that we follow all of the
necessary reporting and that but
I think that this bill is
absolutely imperative in order
to be able to not be reacting
but to be our forward thinking
in our approach as and I will
say it Mr chair representative
that my hope for the day my
favorite quote of the day
Representative thanks to
superintendent is going to be
flexible it.
One way of saying thank you so
much my questions Mr Chairman
representative.
Great thank you Representative
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for being
this bringing this legislation
forward I'm I'm just really
confused about the funding
because.
I go back and forth with my
superintendents better tell you
and you know how much they've
drawn down how much of a balance
they have and and frankly we
want to spend the federal
dollars first I mean that's
really what we want to do and
you know people ask me for
capital outlay for things that
really were covered in our and
so I went back to the
superintendents and said I'll
take this step it's not covered
in art that you take you know
you take the test and and I
don't know if it's a problem of
not having especially for
smaller rural school districts
not having access really Mr
Senator at PED here more
training is involved don't
forget superintendent turnover
is high in New Mexico that's a
huge problem so just to even
know your budget and then be
able to handle that are but
budget on top of that is a huge
problem so so I'm just curious
the superintendent Mike what is
your ballots right now I'm just
curious for a school district
the size of Santa.
In our.
Thank you.
Mr chair representative I had.
R. let me get to it because I do
have that available for you so
it's it's interesting we're
talking about are both and we're
looking at the different answer
funding right for one two and
three as you mentioned some
districts are very fortunate
some are not and then you have
to take into consideration the
aging of building when you have
school buildings that are older
more money goes into upgrading
the H. fax system you know the
filters and so they don't have
the flexibility of buying masks
for example now we have the
fortunate opportunity are go
bonds and the mill levy to
really help us offset the cost
of upgrading it over the last
when we get to it.
We have been over the last three
years two hundred and forty
three thousand in twenty twenty
for masks and other expenses
we've have spent the total close
to seven hundred thousand
dollars of masks.
Signage.
We've also sanitization and H.
back you know so we have
roughly.
yes or three is not a yet to be
determined from Leicester we
have spent close to four point
four million on all these
expenses to include H. backs
sanitization and for us answer
three we were allocated twenty
million but again that was
twenty million over the next
three years to really addressed
many needs not just this one
that we're talking about and so
what we're looking at answer to
we we've almost spent our our
allocation.
For the twenty twenty.
And then so so you got twenty
million over that over a three
year period and today you've
spent much again I'm sorry yes
today from twenty twenty we
spent almost half a million
twenty twenty one we spent close
to twenty five million and then
currently in twenty twenty two
hundred fifty thousand for a
total of roughly six hundred and
seventy seven thousand when you
include everything to include H.
FAQ upgrades box fans filters
supportable filters we spent
close to four point four million
all these items so again we've
been fortunate to offset it with
mil levy I'm to really help
supplement some of the upgrades
that we need in all of our
buildings that we have twenty
eight school buildings as well
plus many district building so
it does cost a lot more to
operate many more facilities.
Okay thank you I have no more
questions will actually for John
how are
what you do is keep the
discussion through the chair I'm
sorry Mr chair.
Mr chair I'd like to direct a
question to John Santa.
Yes I'll PED works with our you
know eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
and helping them figure out how
to do the arts funding.
Mr chair R. Representative
Thanks for the question so
there's a couple of different
ways one is obviously has the
superintendent Travis that we
get
gather the plans and that was a
federal requirement that
districts training plans to us
about how they were going to
spend money we're also are
providing currently.
Webinars where superintendents
and school districts can access
our staff as well as some
support staff technical
assistance
where it's not just about PED
and how they spend money but
it's also about how they can use
federal funds to improve
instruction for students based
on lost learning time there's a
there's a variety of of
webinars that we're providing to
districts around the state
and then I did want to mention
just a couple of other things in
regard to some of your other
points and something that
Representative superintendents
this is mentioning it's
important to remember that
federal funds flowed out in the
yes the title one allocation and
so that the amount of money that
districts received is going to
very based on their title one
student population so that may
you know that means some
districts receive quite a big
chunk of money from the federal
government others not as much.
And I was just texting are a
federal folks in the department
to double check that this is
still true we are also currently
tracking expenditures from
school districts and we have not
begun doing that for the last
the last round of federal funds
but we are going through Esther
to at this point on I can find
that the committee was some
additional information about how
we're tracking those
expenditures and making those
public as well supports can
contract districts are spending
this those funds.
Thank you Mr Senator thank you
chair I have yes.
Thank you representative
Representative Baca please.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you Representative I'm so that's
what I do have a couple
questions of how this money is
going to flow through okay we're
time out one point five million
dollars are we talking about it
falling through the SCG funding
or we talking at client as a
part of a of like an award
letter based on a per pupil
expenditure or of a factor.
That's my first question and
then might cause my other
question about it is.
depending upon the district and
how they have actually
Maybe our outlook said the
submitted the plan to spend
their ESR funds some districts
may have
a at a considerable amount of
money that's put aside for these
us refunds if in that case to
these funds revert back to PED
or can they be used for other
types of of.
Devices like the thermometers or
facial scanners I I just need to
know as far as is this phone
through SCG is this is an award
letter for per pupil Stewart
proved.
Just to ratio and if the
district does not need to buy K.
ninety K. and ninety five mass
or other faithful covers can be
used for other areas or other
devices to help keep our schools
and our staff is safe.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for the
question so for your second
question it would revert back to
the general fund any unused
funds from this that did not go
directly towards PPE for the
schools
and then in terms of your first
question I believe that the
intent was for people but we did
not in in that is how that the
that we came to the amount of
one point five million but I I'm
happy to defer to Johnson and if
there's any other details that
we left that open.
Mr chair representative of Baca
ants as representatives of Santa
Claus said the bill is is pretty
broad at this point the
appropriation would flow to to
PED.
It doesn't it doesn't
specifically define or something
adequate personal protective
equipment and so I think there's
probably some some flexibility
there what that would but that
would mean but if the if the
bill went through the funding
was appropriated we definitely
work with sponsor to make sure
that it got a program.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Santa Fe and I guess this is
the main thing about it because
just like so much if you guys
have seen that nine W. five Z.
as you form you know that if
this falls out there there is
very complicated you know this
far as the funds to be directed
for this case and so I I guess I
just wanna make sure that I
understand is that each district
will get notified in a award
letter like we do for other
federal grant rather of amounts
that this is the amount that you
have
for this because I also I agree
with some of the colleagues the
comments of my colleagues here
about that it's we should be
using the that's our funds or
the federal funds that have been
designated for this.
First and so without all all
I'll conclude my questions.
Great thank you so much other
questions from committee.
Doesn't seem like it I had a
couple things that I I did want
to clarify I think certainly Mr
sent a pointed out the fact that
federal funds primarily flowing
through title one and we had a
pretty robust discussion during
the interim and the past
legislative session about
how much different school
districts we're going to get
based on their title one numbers
that schools that that was
potentially causing problems for
providing this funding like and
what I think your bill on house
bill one forty two is trying to
to address representative
because as as a superintendent
mentioned is that there is a
slew of needs in our school to
address
For lack of a better term health
and safety of our students and
particularly at the time of.
Of crisis and it really exposed
if one thing that it did expose
was
the the aging infrastructure
that we have within our schools
to not be able to have
such H. fax systems that would
be would be able to to filter
the air for students and.
I've made several box fans with
with my own money for my
classroom by classroom for.
Our our pre Katie son's
classroom all at at at my my my
family's expense
and I that's a story that I
think is not uncommon across
all school districts
And and and it was also pointed
out I mean this is what the
difficult thing about being the
last to speak is is that this is
also a lot of this federal money
has taken eight eight eight
three year approach in order to
phase in and provide proper
accountability for for all of
the various things that schools
are going to to provide why am
sympathetic to to the argument
that we should be using the
federal funds first I don't
think there's anything in terms
of any of the stream of funding
from the from the federal
government that that says you
couldn't supplement state
funding for any of the services
that we're we're trying to find
and I think certainly PPE for
our students is vitally
important especially with I mean
I will I will say that this is
partially reactive that we
didn't know that the Makran
variant would be this transfer
bowl so I mean I had had like I
have a K. ninety five mask that
I wear around here in the
capital I hadn't purchased any
until December
Four in my classroom right been
wearing a surgical mask which I
thought at the time was adequate
but you know things change and
and we are I react to that team
so it's not necessarily bad but
we're just trying to in our I
see with your bills being able
to supplement districts in terms
of of what they have in federal
money and and not trying to
supplant in any sort of way so I
think this is a really great
effort and something that we
definitely need to have because
like you mentioned
Representative Serrato like.
These K. ninety five masks are
not are not inexpensive and
especially now with such the the
surging demand for these sorts
of mask and it comes at great
expense to to our students that
that would need to to have the
supply certainly it was for
providing them for for our our
our little ones that are in
school and and it's for for
other families yes if at all and
being that there was a three
year plan for school districts I
know school districts have been
working through that process to
submit those plans again this is
something that's we act.
Trying to find something like K.
and ninety five where we thought
just the clock masks might
suffice but here we are.
Reacting and I think that's fine
and that's I think what your
bill is trying to addresses is
that need for our students for
PP and I think that's something
that's laudable and that's
something I think that we need
to to to certainly get through
at night I don't really see any
of the concerns
as far as your your your bill is
drafted.
But with that Representative
Roybal curry.
When it helps make motion please
Representative.
I like Google do pass on on
house bill one forty two.
You passed motion on house bill
one forty two second by
Representative Trujillo the
motion was made by
Representative Roybal Caballero
thank you on.
Is there opposition to the do
passed motion I'll put it that
way if you would please indicate
show we call the roll so I
called the wrong there is an.
We'll call the roll at current
and secretary please your
request will call the roll thank
you.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Herrerra yes.
Representative Lane.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative are.
Your.
Representative.
And gentleman armor yes.
One.
Seven to one all right so you
have would you pass on house
bill one forty two by a vote of
seven to one thank you thank you
for thank you Mr chairman thank
the committee for the wonderful
discussion I really appreciated
it great thank you so much
members we have the school board
association breakfast on Friday
if you can it's at seven AM
incumbent during absolutely may
I make cold call you us you may
be in Senate education already
by eight o'clock all make an
announcement on the floor about
the place it's usually been at
the Eldorado hotels they'll be a
time for you all to speak I
believe I.
We will begin committee I will
say definitively we will begin
committee back here in our zoom
room at nine o'clock on Friday
so given enough time generally I
get some remarks after the
breakfasts to everybody but if
you wish to can linger around
say hi to folks that may have
traveled from your hometown in
your school board will give
enough time to do that will come
back at nine o'clock in order to
hear a few bills for Friday but
without further do you have a
nice rest of your day we'll see
you all back on the floor thank
you for the good work today
thank you everybody.
