cu s
Great job, yes, here. Thank you.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Garrett, chairman,
here we do have a car. All
right, good morning, folks. So
we have our vice chair,
Representative Garrett, pinch
hitting for Representative Saana
on House Bill 110, so please.
Thank you Mr. Chair. um, I'm
here for House Bill 110, which
is the Interstate teacher
mobility bill,
my ex, he's a senior policy
analysis with the Council of
State Governments focusing on
the national packs, um, house
Bill 110 would enter New Mexic
teacher mobility compact, which
allows teachers to use an
eligible license from a compact
member state to be granted an
equivalent.
in another compact member state,
it would only be applicable for
the initial license of a
teacher, um, granted by the
receiving state, thus license
recipients would be required to
meet New Mexico licensure
requirements when they renewed
or advanced. The interstate and
why we're bringing this
Interstate teacher mobility
compact is vital for our
military members and their
spouses.
As it streamlines the process
for educators to obtain teaching
credentials when moving between
states, ensuring that their
careers remain stable despite
frequent uh relocations.
The initiative is a Department
of Defense priority that not
only enhances the quality of
life for our military families
and as you know, we have many
bases in our state, but also
benefits New Mexicans by
improving the availability by
passing the compact, we can
support our military spouses in
their professional aspirations
and provide continuity in the
education for our students, and
I will add, um, from Buena
Vista, New Mexico. John Thayer
wrote me and he said.
When I first came to New Mexico,
I was already certified in 4
other states, but my credentials
were not recognized by the PED
licensure because we lacked.
Hard to say that word, resup
reciprocity.
Oh, thank you. Good students,
uh, with any other state, so
complicated the process. So
it's, it's a very real thing,
and I'd like to ask uh Mr.
Dursing.
Thank you for the record. My
name is Adam Dier Singh, D I E R
S I N G, saying your policy
analyst for the Council of State
Governments in the National
Center for Interstate Compacts.
I want to thank the vice chair
for standing in today and for
this esteemed committee for
hearing this bill.
The development of this model
legislation began in the fall of
2021 as a cooperative agreement
between the Council of State
governments and the Department
of Defense. That development
began with the assembly of a
technical assistance group
comprised of legislators, state
education officials, members of
professional associations,
licensed teachers and other
education stakeholders. The
group met over the course of
several months to determine the
needs of the profession.
And a separate drafting team
transition the recommendations
and model from the technical
assistance group into a full
draft of the model legislation,
which is represented in House
Bill 110.
The teaching compact reached its
10th enactment required to begin
standing up the commission in
2023. So that process is
underway. The data system is
currently under construction,
and we expect full participation
from the member states to be
available before our annual.
They're currently 13 states that
are members, 5 states with
pending legislation this session
and I'm available to answer any
questions. Thank you very much.
And with that we stand for
questions, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. We will go to
the audience for uh those in
favor.
Of the bill, if you could please
raise your hands.
Thank you. If you could please
stand behind the uh the
presenters, please.
And just a friendly reminder
that you have to,
my name is Dela Rosa on behalf
of the military-based planning
commission, we stand in support
of HB 110, which directly
benefits our military families
by allowing licensed teachers to
transfer credentials across
state lines more easily. This
bill ensures military spouses
can continue teaching without
unnecessary delays, keeping
quality educators in our
schools. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, chair
members of the committee, Alison
Riley with the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce here in
support of House Bill 110. This
bill is a vital step forward for
breaking down bureaucratic
barriers that have long hindered
qualified educators from
transferring their teaching
credentials across state lines.
By enabling teachers with valid,
unencumbered license from any
member state to obtain
equivalent licener in another,
House Bill 10 not only
streamlines the hiring process,
but also alleviates the critical
teacher shortage, many schools
in New Mexico face.
especially in rural areas. This
legislation provides significant
support to military families by
simplifying the licensure
process for military spouses,
ensuring they can continue their
career no matter where their
service takes them. I'll spill
110 strengthens our education
workforce, help students and our
economy, and I urge your
support. Thank you.
Thank you. I don't see anyone in
support online.
Is there anyone in opposition in
the audience.
No opposition.
Is there anyone on opposition
online.
Nope, I don't see any. Uh, I
will go now to member questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for bringing this
forward. I support this. I just
got a couple clarifying
questions.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
Madam Vice chair.
The, the idea for reciprocity
is, is a great idea, and I know
that it's a hindrance, but
Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chair.
Would there be any other
requirements as far as pain of
the fees to get a New Mexico
license.
And is there a time um
Limit in order for them to
establish that license. In other
words, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair.
When we have a teacher.
Or we have somebody entering the
profession. There are certain
assessments or other things that
would be required under your
bill, would those be required
for a person seeking
reciprocity.
I'm gonna have my expert
witness, uh, answer that.
Thank you, Chair and thank you
Representative for the question.
Um, the compact does allow for
state-specific requirements to
stand. It just asks that those
be placed after the point of the
license being granted prior to
the first renewal of that
license. So we see in some
states that there is an exam on
the state constitution, for
example, those, those can still
stand, um, but we, um, the, the
compact does require that those
come after the license is
granted to streamline that
process and keep folks in the
classroom as quickly.
as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your answer, and I guess
the reason why is when we have
somebody we have a certain time
frame for somebody to establish,
you know, we have a provisional
license and we have a time frame
for them to meet the
requirements and take anything
necessary. Does your bill also
require a, like a set time, I
think, and again, I know it's
like 3 years, I think for an
initial license, is that
correct? And then after that,
you can ask for an extension. So
does your bill require the same?
timeline for that. Thank you.
All of those requirements,
anything that's not mentioned
explicitly in the compact is, is
intentionally left to the states
to determine themselves. What
New Mexico's current practices
for fulfilling those
requirements could stand. Um,
the compact doesn't require any
different timeline in completing
those requirements
make sure we go through the
chart, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. The, the question.
Um, is that really because we're
talking about requirements and
Mr. Chairman and vice chair.
We're talking also about.
The level license in New Mexico,
we have a tiered system levels
12, and 3.
Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chair.
How will this uh affect or how
will we recognize a license
that's being brought over from
one of our member um state
affiliates.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, my understanding is, uh,
they would come in.
At something equivalent to what
they had.
With the initial steps, so if
they had what we would call a
level one license, that would be
their license, but well, would
have to come through our system,
if they had the equivalent to a
level 2, and this has to be
worked out with PED would be
they would come in at the level
2 and to require.
And, and thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
That's actually the least to my
third question when we look at a
teacher that may come to us from
Florida, this house that has a
master's degree.
And under our standard there are
certain requirements to get that
level 3 license.
Um, I could also see is that
being somewhat complicated as to
see Madam Chair and Mr. I mean,
Mr. Chair and Madam Chair.
Where they fall into our system.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Vice Chair.
So for the rulemaking, are we
gonna be making looking at PED
for making the rulemaking on
this or will there be some input
from the LESC, Madam Chair.
Mr. Tarrant and Representative
Baca PED is required to give the
effect would be applicable
provide that list of Ru the
compact, uh, would.
Fall into
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Madam Vice Chair. My,
my other question about it, so
this is only recognizing
teaching licenses. What if I'm
an administrator coming to us
from a member state under this
bill, would it also, uh, would I
also receive reciprocity to, to
address the uh administrator and
superintendent George.
Thank you, Chair and thank you,
Representative for the question.
That would be left to the
discretion of the state
licensing agency, the baseline
of the teacher license, which
what we found is that in the
vast majority of states and an
administrator's license is
predicated on holding an active
teacher's license, any
additional license on top of
the, on top of the teaching
license, including an
administrator's license or any
additional endorsements. Those
are at the discretion of the
state. They're not required to
be granted by the member states,
but they, they perfectly able
to.
New Mexico would like to also
extend um administrative
licenses for those coming
through the compacts that hold
one in another state.
And thank you, Mr. Chen. Thank
you, Madam Vice Chair.
Um, my last question is, how do
we address when somebody has
issued a lifetime license in
another state.
And therefore would not have to
renew a license in New Mexico
and therefore not have to renew.
Or take any requirements for
that, Mr. Chair and
Representative state.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and Madam Vice
Chair, there at one point there
was a, a lifetime, but I'm, uh,
my question for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, is some
other states issue lifetime
licenses and so under this bill.
This in whatever their license
would be due for renewal, well,
it would never be renewed from
their state and that's why Mr.
Chair.
And Madame Weiser, I talked
about a requirement or maybe an
amendment to specify to
establish that license, they
would have.
The 3 years that we would when
we talk about a provisional
license and that, that just to
make sure that we're
We want to make sure that we've
grant the lights initially
there's no question that we
should grant the license upon
initial hire.
But Mr. Chairman and vice chair,
it's like, how do we
Deal with these lifetime because
a number of states surround us
and maybe some of these takes in
the compact do issue a lifetime
license. And so that's
Something that I think also
needs to be kind of worked out
and addressed or maybe even
language added to this, that
clarifies um kind of that
timeline, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice chair
Madam Viceer
representative, I don't think
it'd be necessary because they
would come in at the appropriate
initial license. So let's say
someone had a lifetime license I
would and then they would meet
in this remember it, it's a
especially targeted.
military Whitley, so they would
come in.
At a level 3 license. Oh, thank
you, Mr. Chen. Thank you, Madam
Vice Chair. So they would
basically, they would have the 9
years before they would have to
renew.
Again, and that's also Mr.
Chair, Madam Wester, that's,
that's why I talked about the
requirements under PED licensing
that we have to establish that
those are some things that, you
know,
That I think probably need to be
kind of worked out. Now again,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Vice, I, I,
I support this bill, but I think
that there is some
Clarifying points that need to
be done that addresses our
specific
tiered teacher system.
Or license your system and also
the years that we have to be
consistent.
As far as to establish a New
Mexico license. So Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair and presenter.
I'm gonna support your bill, so
I'm gonna get that out of the
way.
There's always some unattended
consequences when you have a
bill and I'm, I'm protective of
our teachers that we have now
and just through some looking
around, uh, we're still like
6000 below the national
standard. Is this going to make
it easier for our New Mexico
teachers to go somewhere else.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yes, this would
apply to.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative for your
question. Um, we do hear this
question quite frequently in, in
all the professions that we work
with, what we found is that the
ability to gain a license in
another state is not necessarily
a compelling reason to uproot
your life and move to a new
state. This is primarily
targeted at teachers that are
moving to a new state. It makes
it easier for them to stay in
the classroom rather than go
through a lengthy renewal
process, but we've seen no data
to indicate for even the
long-standing compacts like
nursing, that, that is a
compelling reason for someone to
move out of the state and so we
generally haven't seen that as
fallout from stage joining
compacts rather that
professionals that may be
underemployed when they move to
a new state, working in another
field. This keeps makes it
easier for them to maintain
their professional security
throughout that move.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters for the answer. I
just, I don't want our teachers
to leave.
I like teachers coming in, but I
don't want our teachers leaving
and at least until we get into
the middle of the pack and until
we're not last, you know,
hopefully we're gonna move
towards that, but that was the
only question I had. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Representative Cullen.
I just have a quick question,
um.
Reading through it and talks
about military.
Um, but
This is applied to other
teachers. That's where I guess.
Everything's
fresh.
Mr. Chair, yes, it would, for
example, when we thought we were
going to, my husband and we were
gonna move to Las Vegas, Nevada.
dollars
So much stuff if this had have
applied to us, OK, but.
So I'm assuming that you're kind
of focusing on the military
spouses.
Very problematication.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
this was a priority um.
Uh, collaboration with.
I appreciate that when I came.
With that
Um, there was a difference.
Colorado to
Here, so they were.
Thank you. Do I have anyone
else?
you know.
Do I have a motion, Mr. Chair, I
make a motion for do pass.
I
I would do pass motion by
ranking member Baca, second by
Representative Cullen.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Gonzalez. Yes.
Representative Kurra.
Representative.
Excuse me.
Representative
Maripal Moya, yes.
Representative Roal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Collin. Yes.
Representative Torres Valasquez.
Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Chairperson.
Vice chair Garrett.
Yes.
chairman.
Yes.
And I sure you do have a do
pass.
Thank you very much.
Next up we have Hospital 395.
Gonzalez.
OK.
We are now moving on to House
Bill 395 healthcare preceptor
tax credit, start when you're
ready.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee. Um,
I do want to make note that I do
have an amendment on this bill.
But it was Representative, can I
ask, are there any major policy
changes for them. Thanks for
that clarification.
Now the
Do I have a motion to discuss
the amendment?
manager.
Move to discuss.
Well, for discussion purposes,
OK.
Laura's mood for discussion
represented a ranking member
BACA as seconded.
Is there any discussion?
Would you like me to explain the
amendment? Yeah, um,
Representative, can you explain
the amendment? Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Um,
essentially these were just, um,
in the original drafting things
that I had missed, um,
essentially uh a volunteer that
oversees any sort of
residencies, um, in the original
language it only speciality, the
amendment clarified that that
could also be a volunteer for
the university, um, residency.
Opening it up to community
preceptors, um, and the other
clarification was specifically
naming nurse midwives, um, and
going through maybe some of the
licensing nurse midwives is its
own category, um, they're not
considered APRN so I just wanted
to make sure that they were
included.
Any questions?
The emotion.
Madam Chair.
Moved to
OK, uh, move to adopt by
Representative Lara, seconded by
Representative Roybar Javiera,
is there any objection to
adopting the amendment?
No objection. You have an
amended bill.
Do you like to explain our bill,
explain your bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you
committee. House Bill 395 income
tax credit, again, as mentioned,
a presidency, um, this bill does
include, um, medical does make
an intention to include um
social work, behavioral health,
um.
Super supervisory
responsibilities, um, it does to
be a preceptor by definition.
Um, so in
And lots of, you know,
information that we've been
reading, everything that we've
been presenting, uh, we are
right now in a current, you
know, healthcare crisis. Um, one
of the designated ways that we
are tackling this as opening up
the residency pathway, um, more
than it has to that to have
residencies provisors to manage
and supervise these um
These residency requirements,
um, so this bill is that if you
are a preceptor or not, you
would get your taxable year, um,
the license types that would be
sent, um, the tax credit the
institution.
Um, to just indicate that you
are indeed a filing your taxes.
Um, I do want to point out, I
want to introduce my echo the
spill.
Thank you, Representative Madam,
as you all know, uh, and as
you've prioritized in this
session and we appreciate it
very much as your healthcare
workforce of New Mexico, our
healthcare workforce crisis is
real and a major priority. We
appreciate that. Uh, there are
so many pressing current demands
on your healthcare workforce.
There are so few of us to take
care of so many.
We are so spread out. We're
burdened by many of the issues
that you all are addressing, be
that medical malpractice issues,
etc. uh, amongst all of those
pressing uh demands on your
healthcare workforce is also
this uh intrinsic altruistic
need to pay it forward, which
means we were all once mentored.
As required to become licensed
health professionals during our
academic programs. And it is
upon us as a limited workforce
to now precept and mentor the
next generation. Without that,
We have more Mexico. That is a
currently an unpaid.
Demands.
We all know we need to do it,
but uh with, with all the other
pressures upon us, it is
becoming increasingly difficult.
What this tax credit really does
is bust open that bottleneck
currently right now as we try to
expand uh uh spots, uh, in all
of our academic programs, be
that social work programs, nurse
practitioner programs, physician
assistant residencies as the
representative mentioned as we
try and expand increased number
of slots in those.
Programs for increased number of
students, we also need increased
number of preceptors. So by
allowing an incentive like this
and I want to even go further
and say what this.
Bill does is it values your
healthcare workforce serving as
educators for the next
generation of that amongst all
the demands and the risk of
burnout, burnout, this great
state of New Mexico, this
legislature saying.
Healthcare workforce, we know
what you're going through, and
we appreciate you now and we
want to value you with this tax.
Madam Chair with that was stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Is there anybody in the room who
would like to speak in favor.
Um, please line up behind our
presenters.
Good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Katie Gutierrez. I work
at Think New Mexico. We have a
report this year with our
suggestions to address the
healthcare worker shortage in
New Mexico and the healthcare
preceptor tax credit was one of
our suggestions. It's not the
first time this legislation has
been brought forth, Senator or
Tzino has introduced bills
similar to this in previous
years.
Um, this bill would help us grow
more of our own. We're trying to
grow more New Mexicans who are
in healthcare being trained by
clinical professionals who will
serve in their own communities.
So this will help us grow more
of our own and address the
healthcare shortage.
There's an adage that says
behind every good clinician is a
great preceptor.
And most of our preceptors are
volunteers. This would ensure
these workers are compensated
for this essential part of
training the healthcare
workforce and incentivize more
of them to do so at a relatively
low cost. So I encourage you to
support the bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gloria Doherty. I have
been a registered nurse for 35
years and a nurse practitioner
for 25 years. I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico Nursing
Association, the New Mexico
nurse practitioner Council and
the New Mexico Psychological.
Well, psychologists association.
I mean, I could tell you that
precepting is something that is
very important to keeping our
professionals where they are
training. It also gives them the
opportunity to go to areas away
from where they live. So if
they're here in Albuquerque, you
have a program that is
supporting growing rural
practitioners and professionals.
They now have a way to entice
somebody to preset them. Not
everybody needs to be enticed. A
lot of it is altruism, as
The expert said, but this is
just a great way to grow our
own, keep our own, and expand
their experiences around our
state. So thank you very much
and I hope you support this
bill. Thank you. Anybody else,
uh, anybody online, uh.
Um
Who would like to speak in
support of House Bill 395.
Hey, see nobody online? Is there
anybody in the room who would
like to speak against House Bill
395.
Is there anybody.
Um
Brief technical glitch. If you
would like to speak in favor of
House Bill 395, I see 3.
People
OK, Connie Trujillo.
Good morning, sir. Can you hear
me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Hi, my name is Connie Trujillo.
I'm a certified nurse midwife
and I'm president of the
American College of Nurse
Midwife, New Mexico affiliate.
Um, I would just like to say
that I am, uh, was born and
raised in Las Vegas, New Mexico,
um, and I went to UNM uh to
become a midwife, and if it
hadn't been for my preceptors.
One of who was working in Las
Vegas. I may not have been able
to return to my community of Las
Vegas to practice as a nurse
midwife. Um, we've a
Uh
Maternity care deserts are
growing significantly throughout
our state.
And um
We really need to work on
building
our
For the workforce and preceptors
would be
Very helpful in that, and I
agree with
Mr. Probes that we should
Um
So that we value the preceptors
and support them in the work
that they do. Thank you.
Uh, next, um, Mike McMillan, you
have too many.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mike McMillan. I'm with
Southwest Bone and Joint
Institute in Silver City. Our
providers, uh, have
Be preceptors for several years
for both residents, medical
residents, NBA MD students.
In New Mexico, this bill is
amended, uh,
Would help support our providers
that provide this mentoring and
preceptorship to those students,
and we support it. Thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Uh
Adrian Gomez, you have 2 minutes
to share.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh
Adrian Gomez is here today for
the greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce.
To support House Bill 395. House
Bill 395 provides a 1000
personal income tax credit for
licensed healthcare
professionals on staff at New
Mexico College University who
mentor graduate students
studying to become healthcare
professionals. This bill keeps
New Mexico competitive.
As there are 8 other states
offering a program similar to
this as the state faces a
medical personnel shortage.
The chamber is pleased to
support this bill at it as it is
one avenue in retaining
healthcare officials in the
state, and we ask you to vote to
pass it.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Is there anybody online who
wishes to speak against the
bill.
OK, seeing nobody, uh, will go
to members of Representative
Baca.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this forward.
Um, I will be honest, I, I, I
didn't know what receptorship
was. So thank you for that.
Uh, and Madam Chair and uh
Representative also I'm not a
tax guy, so I do have a couple
of questions, simple questions
regarding
This bill
So, um, Madam Chair and
uh representative.
Because this is a tax bill, and
taxes are based upon quarters.
Is there a minimum number of
quarters that must be
Served in this role
In order to be eligible for
this.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Baca, um, no in creation, we try
to make it as simplistic as
possible. I myself am not a text
girl. I have learned, um, I have
met with Texan Rev on a couple
of occasions, essentially the
requirement would be that you
would complete at least one
residency rotation as a
preceptor to be eligible, so you
would not be required to
complete multiple quarters or
any timing, just you would
obtain the certificate.
During the year, and then when
you come to file your taxes in
the next year you would present
that certificate and then be
eligible for the tax credit.
And thank you, um.
for that. So Madame Chair and
Representative, see that's kind
of my question about it is when
we talk about we have a
residency year, and then we talk
about a tax year which is a
calendar year.
So, Madam Chair, and that,
that's why, you know, so if I,
if I basically if I serve.
Just 1 quarter or I start in
October.
Am I then eligible and receive
the same benefit as somebody who
was January, you know, started
in January and went the full
calendar year. So that's
That's my question, um, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, you would be correct, uh,
residency rotation can vary
anywhere from 4 to 6 weeks.
Uh, on average, and so, um, you
are correct in that a residency
sometimes revolves around an
academic year versus a fiscal
year. So as long as they were to
complete.
As as a preceptor, sometime
during the taxable year, um, the
full duration of their, the
residency requirement as a
preceptor, they would be
eligible. So this does differ,
um, in previous legislation, um,
they were given credit per
rotation that they supervised.
Um, we tried to simplify this
bill a little bit, um, also
knowing that it was coming in,
again, not having the me myself
as a new legislator, not having
the interim to discuss this.
and work through this with tax,
um, wanting to make a very
simple credit either you are a
preceptor or you were not. Um,
it does not indicate if you did
6 preceptor ships versus one
preceptorship. Basically you did
it or you didn't, um, and
hopefully if this works and if
this program is successful, we
can expand in, you know, give,
give a award multiple preceptor
ships, but essentially the only
requirement to receive this is
that you are indeed a preceptor
for at least one full residency
cycle in a
school year.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you and I'm, I'm not
gonna, you know, sit here, but
when we talk about that's for
some the residency, especially
behavioral health.
could be up for
Semester
For a year
or 2 years.
And so I, I think that, Madam
Chair, that that's gonna be, as
far as, OK, so we're, you know,
and then the other thing, Madam
Chair, is who determines
successful residency. How is
that going to be reported? So I
may be a resident of a MD.
You know, and so am I gonna have
to have
Notification from my employer.
And that will be going with me
to my tax person as opposed to
somebody who um
You know, as far as it's gonna
be different for every
residency.
My, my residency is 6 months.
For a year.
That I'm uh receptoring somebody
if you make that a word, right?
Making what worse today.
So I, I guess that's where we're
talking about it and also
Um, Madam Chair, and uh,
It could also be, hey, well,
I've done it for 6 weeks and
then I'm not gonna do it anymore
because it really isn't.
benefit for me to continue.
Mentoring or precepting for
multiple people. So that's,
that's something that Madam
Chair and uh represented, I
think that probably needs to be
defined and and so I don't know
the answer to that, but I, I
definitely, as I said before,
it's kind of a tax re.
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
representative.
And what uh expert witness.
Is this voided if I'm
compensated in any way for this,
um.
For my job as my role as a
mentor.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
it is, um, by definition to
receive this, you would need to
be a volunteer preceptor,
meaning non-compensated for that
time.
Um, thank you. So, uh, madam
Chair, because earlier in the
testimony they were saying is
that I just want to make sure.
That we're not, you know,
receiving double compensation.
I'm paid and for, for certain
health cares like I can tell you
in the schools to mentor or
something, you're paid to,
you're paid a stipend, but
honestly through collective
bargaining or others.
And then you would then receive
this tax credit which you would
be, you receive two benefits. My
last year, uh, my last question,
Madam Chair, and for you is
For the preceptorship.
Is it automatically renewed or
must it be renewed every year or
every time we take on a new.
Resident intern or
Um
You know, a new person.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
being that this is a
Tax credit that you could file
for each year, um, each year, if
you completed supervisory
responsibility, you would then
submit for a new certificate
each year to be presented each
year that you were considered a.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Next is Representative Vincent
and Representative Cole and the
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative Gonzalez and
presenter, appreciate you
bringing it forward and um.
I'm gonna support your bill, so
I'm just gonna ask you a
question.
Um
So I was looking on.
The physical impact report.
So this will start in 26,
correct?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
yes.
And then it will go through
Madam Chair and representative
to go through fiscal year 20.
Madam Chair Representative, I
did not include a sunset clause
in the original legislation. Let
me get a second just like. I
didn't notice that there was an
end date on there.
OK, so, Madam Chair and
Representative on the fiscal
impact report, it shows it's
gonna start in 206.
It looks like it's going to end
in 29.
But it does say reoccurring, so.
This is an ongoing.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
it is ongoing. I think it gave
um projections through fiscal
year 29, um, but as mentioned in
the in the bill, I did not
include a sunset clause, so, um,
reevaluation would occur as
through normal, um,
When tax and Rev does their
evaluations onto current
credits, they would reevaluate
and if we ever get it to a point
where a preceptor tax credit is
no longer needed. I'm sure we'll
be evaluated and then taken, you
know, at that point, but so in
the analysis the FY 29, it just
gives projection through so many
years, but as of right now it's
not given a specified end date
to this credit. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Gonzalez.
So, um, you know, the definition
of preceptor is broad and
potentially allows for many
healthcare professionals to
qualify for the tax credit.
The only thing, there's always
those consequences and you know,
is there any kind of a cap?
Through fiscal year 2627, 28,
and 29.
That if it got to $5 million or
if it got to $10 million it
would cap out.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
no, there is not a cap, and um
that is what I can imagine, um,
where
Texan rev in general, you know,
it is, it is difficult to attend
to to amend preferable, um, that
is also the, the reason why in
the report, you know, the number
of preceptors we will have
between now and the future.
Again, should we get this influx
of preceptors that is would be a
great problem to have, and then
I would be more than willing to
come back and discuss amending
the credit.
Um, because at that time if we
had that many preceptors, um,
then we would have done this
credit would have done its job,
um, in recruiting those mentors
that we need for this healthcare
profession. Um, so but to answer
your question, no, there is not
current a currently a cap on
this credit. Um, it is open.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and my last
question was, I always like for
people to get some tax money
back. I mean, that just, that
helps everybody.
But, you know, just, just with
the fiscal impact report, um,
you know, higher than
anticipated.
Some's going out.
Sometimes I, I just worry about
it taken from another program or
anything like that. Thank you
for the, thank you for the
answers. Thank you for the time,
Madam Chair.
Representative Cohen.
Representative Baca this tax
code plus also with the, you
know what they all do. I had a
question because on um the
fiscal impact.
It talks about um the preceptors
employed at a higher education
qualified for the credit as
drafted, limiting the credit to
university.
Alchemy.
And then
It goes on to the healthcare.
authority also suggesting bro.
A little bit about that and why.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
that was the intention for the
amendment, um, in the original
legislation, um, the wording.
On page 1 line 19 after by
insert or volunteer for that was
the intention. Is that currently
In the original bill, it was
mentioned that only employees of
the university amendment does
open that up to community
preceptors. And so, um, I am
gonna pass it off to my um
expert to also describe what a
community preceptorship looks
like versus a university
preceptorship.
Thank you, Representative, Madam
Chair.
Representative Collin. Yes, so
uh in our great state of New
Mexico, um, not only is there a
dire need for community
preceptors, uh, particularly in
rural and underserved
communities, uh, because, uh, I
will also say that our students,
although it is extra time, they
also immediately, specifically
residents who already physicians
expand access to care.
And so when we can have students
out working with us in our
community sites beyond the
universities, they are helping
us immediately expand some of
care, obviously, the offset of
that is more preceptor time and
late hours in supervising that
student, um, so absolutely
that's the idea of a community
preceptorship in an immediate.
There's also it's a wonderful
experience. One of the best
experiences you can get in
speaking.
students of any of these fields
is those rural rotations. There
are so many more opportunities
in rural and underserved and
community sites to learn and to
learn about what we really need.
And the last thing that I'm
going to add on that is the
recruitment piece. So there is
the retention piece of this tax
credit, which is those many,
many community preceptors that
are already serving in this
capacity without the tax credit.
We're also trying to incentivize
more to join us that
Um, with that is, um, we know
that if they come and experience
our community sites in this
beautiful state. There is a very
good chance that they will come
back and ask our, our uh
employers for a job once they're
licensed, once they graduate and
license. So we know that that
becomes a recruitment piece for
us as well. So yes, this is the
way that uh beyond just the uh
the university sites, uh, we're
able to offer.
these rotations and grow our own
workforce and recruit others
from other states. I really do
believe that uh the efforts that
I see the many efforts that I've
seen and continue to see by this
legislature, we are uh trying
and competing with the other 8
states that already do some
version of this to become an
oasis in healthcare.
That draws not only us to retain
our homegrown healthcare
workforce, but to recruit others
from other states by leading the
way of showing that we value our
health. Yeah, and I did, yeah, I
did note the volunteer, but that
was where I was a little bit
confused.
Uh, Representative Garcia.
Madam Chair
Uh, I have a question.
of tribal.
And that
And they're both.
And they're, there are branches.
Health services
health service.
Uh, I would they qualify.
There
They recognized as in the.
They're eligible for.
Keeping a batch of
In this case, how will, uh,
would they, would it?
That area
Uh
I
I can't see them coming.
Other
Adam Chair, Representative
Garcia, the intent of of this
tax credit right now is for
graduate level programs.
However, yes, I would hope that
in future years, um, we can
expand that to undergraduate
certificate level associate
level training programs as well.
We know we have needs for
community health workers, EMTs,
um, on and on, the list goes on
and on, uh, and now that being
said, how would this help? um in
your service area.
as well in the area that we're
mentioned, we also have the
rural residency program. And so
we hope that on the path, on
that path towards
A residency, right? You may
start off and you're starting
with your uh certificate
program, maybe a community
health worker program, maybe you
go on to uh the undergraduate
program and, and then you're now
going on to a graduate program,
all with the all of those steps
with the intent of keeping
people from our communities,
interested in healthcare in
those communities and recruiting
them to come home and serve
their people when they are done.
I have one.
Such examples she would have
been another expert witness with
us today, but Doctor Tania
Reyes, who we uh at the
federally qualified health
center that I worked in when I
was the medical director, we
recruited her for a clinical
rotation. She came, she was
doing the Santa Fe family
medicine residency. She's a from
Sanaonse Pueblo, a graduate of
Espanola High School at that
step, she was, we did not have a
residency in Espanola, but we
did have the opportunity
opportunity to provide her a 4
week clinical rotation and in
providing her that 4 week
clinical rotation, she fell in
love with the services that we
provided and is now actually the
associate medical director for
the residency program, our most
recent residency program that
has been developed in Espanola,
New Mexico. So all those steps
along the way of getting to that
graduate medical program that
this bill supports, I would hope
we continue to see future
support for as well.
Madam Cheering.
Thank you. I had questions, but
my esteemed colleagues asked
them all. Thank you.
Uh, what is, oh, OK, uh,
Representative Roybar Caballero.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a do pass.
OK, uh, we've had a motion for
to pass from representative.
What about caballero and we'll
give the 2nd to what is the will
of the committees.
In that case, you have a bill.
Thank you.
Um.
We are changing the order, uh,
due to what's happening in the
tax committee. We will next hear
Senate Bill 82.
A public school capital outlay
changes.
Uh, Representative Lara does
Senator Souls know what he's.
Yeah, you pass.
Um, we're playing musical chairs
now, so we'll give uh Senator
Soz a moment.
I hope everybody's having a
lovely day.
That you're ready for a new
week, we're in our final 3
weeks, very exciting.
Too exciting sometimes.
I know, Madam Chair, I was, I
was doing a schedule for, for
March and, and I can actually
see a light of it at the end of
the tunnel to get back to my
students and so my, my note this
weekend was I will see you,
they, they only have 2 more
weeks without me because then
they got spring break and then I
get to go back, so I'm pretty
excited to get back to them.
This is our 7th inning stretch.
If you're here as an expert
witness for Senator Souls, you
can come up.
The presentation.
I guess we could have the
support and opposition.
Weather announcement, it is
snowing in Gallup right now.
It is snowing in Gallup, New
Mexico.
It is hot news from
representative Garcia.
Just so you know what we're
juggling, we're juggling two
committee chairs.
So the other chair was gonna
come last.
Anyway, anyway, this is the
exciting dynamics.
OK, we're gonna, uh, go back to
the original order as soon as
Chairman Linte gets.
So if anybody's, uh, thank you,
um.
Vanessa
OK, so we're re juggling.
And we're going to move to um
House Bill 449 higher education,
major projects fund and will be
presented by Chair Lenty.
Who is also dashing over here.
Sorry, update is, we have two
chairmen who now say they both
can't come yet.
If someone can come in the next
few minutes, we'll have,
otherwise we'll roll both of the
bills.
OK, we are going to go to um.
Chairman Lites bill.
With um
Um, higher, higher education
major projects fund.
And who would like to present
it, we have bullet points
provided.
OK, uh, Representative Bach is
gonna present it.
OK, so once again, we're going
to
It is, yeah.
Once again, we're going to hear
House Bill 449, higher education
major projects fund and our
presenter on behalf of chairenty
will be representative Baca.
And when you're ready, proceed.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee. Uh, we're
here today to present a House
Bill 449.
Which is to establish or
relating to the capital
improvements, higher education,
uh, major projects funds.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
this fund is actually uh
Intended for, for projects that
uh that are over $5 million that
would be a drain to the, uh, as
far as the geo bonds.
Uh, for, uh,
This bill basically establishes
a fund.
And would have mechanisms in
place for
Um, institutions to to fund
larger projects. It outlines not
only some of the requirements
for matching funds.
But it also, uh,
is intended for
Um
To address the high costs of uh
the construction fees that have
been a drain on the GOB fund. So
with me, I have my expert. I
have Celli with me who will then
give you more of an in-depth
explanation.
Uh, and the intent of this bill.
Thank you, representative, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Kelly Carswell, a
Capitol Olay analyst with the
legislative Finance Committee.
Um, as the representative said,
this bill is aimed at solving
essentially two problems, um,
that we have encountered with
funding, uh, capital projects
for higher education
institutions over the last few
years. Um, one dramatic increase
in, in construction costs, um,
which have far outpaced an
increase in the dedicated
revenues for higher education
capital outlay, which as the
representative said,
Come from general obligation
bonds, um, you'll see in your
FIR.
That construction costs just
between the last two GOB cycles
for new construction have gone
up by about 80%, while revenues
have gone up by only about 10%.
Um, the second problem is that
we don't currently have a source
of funding through the state
capital outlay process currently
for student life and student
housing projects, um, and
institutions have less of their
own revenues to dedicate to
those projects now.
Uh, so that's it, and we will
stand for questions.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go
online first if you are in
support.
Of um this bill, please raise
your hand.
They will go to uh Mary Par.
Sanchez.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Mary Parr Sanchez, and I
am the president of the National
Education Association in New
Mexico. Um, we strongly support
this bill and urge your support
as well. We want to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward. It's uh as the um as
representative Baca and the
expert witness said the general
obligation bond capacity is
insufficient to meet demand, to
replace and repair higher.
facilities.
Thank you. Uh, next we will have
Robert Martin.
Uh, Madam Chair and uh
representatives of the
committee, um, my name is Robert
Martin, and I'm president of the
Institute of American Indian
Arts and um and I'm speaking on
behalf of the Mexico tribal
colleges Consortium, and we
speak in support of of House
Bill 4449 because it represents
a transformative opportunity for
New Mexico tribal colleges.
Many of our tribal colleges face
challenges relative to outdated
uh, buildings, insufficient
classroom space and technology
resources, uh, the passage of
this bill will enable the tribal
colleges to address the needs of
our tribal students and
communities, and of, of course
it would support uh all of the
higher education landscape here
in New Mexico, and thank you uh
to the sponsors and to
Uh, Madam Chair, for this
opportunity to speak.
Is there anybody else online who
wishes to support the bill.
See, none will go to the people
in this room if you would like
to speak in support, please
raise your hand.
OK, we will start on this side,
please line up behind the
presenters.
Morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mark
Severo with the New Mexico
Council University presidents.
I'm here to stand in support of
449 on behalf of the 7
universities. Um, this is
something we've been working
with, let's say finance
committee for a number of years,
and this is, this gives bill
will established this fund.
And to build to build on it for
future years. One thing from the
university perspective as we
look forward to working with the
LLC and with the legislature, I
identifying those revenue
sources to be able to match when
it comes to the ING and the and
construction component of the
bill, and then as the expert We
has mentioned, the support for
student life in our dorms as
well, so I'm chairman's
committee, we stand in strong
support of this legislation.
Thank you. We'll now go to this
side of the room.
You'd like to speak in favor,
please.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, House Education
Committee. I'm Vanessa Hawker.
I'm the executive director for
the New Mexico Independent
Community Colleges, we stand in
support of this bill, we see the
opportunities that this bill can
provide in regards to the
general obligation bond
packaging, and we are very
excited with the opportunities
that this bill will provide to
the community colleges in
regards to student life and
housing projects.
On our institutions. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee, Lennia
Montoya, uh, we also stand in
strong support of this bill. We
also thank the sponsor
andresentative Baca for standing
in for him today. Uh, we have
been working with LFC and they
have been so kind to explain the
bill, go through the bill with
us, and we do stand in support
of it. We do have concerns about
the potential matching
requirements, but we will be
meeting with them to go over
that. We also think
for a potential to this
committee that will help our
branch campuses as well. So.
Thank you. Next.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
I'm Debbie Romero. I'm a region
at New Mexico State University,
and I'm the former cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Finance Administration.
Most of my state government
career was dealing with capital
outlay and so it's always
exciting to see a bill like this
come. We strongly support this
bill. It gives us opportunities
to address the deferred
maintenance that we have on at
our institutions and our student
housing needs that we have. So,
thank you, uh, Representative
Baca for stepping in, and we do
thank the chair for this
opportunity, and we do stand in
support of this bill.
Thank you. Next.
Morning, madam chair members of
the committee, Dave, I'm the
vice president of New Mexico
Highs University for government
relations, marketing and
communications.
to speak on behalf of this bill
as well.
Uh, the New Mexico Lland
University has got a serious
issue when it comes to our
residential housing.
And what we need to that through
normal capitality may be a
tremendous asset and a
tremendous assistance to our
institute and our students.
Thank you very much.
Very much.
Uh, is there anybody opposed to
the spill.
Online.
Nobody suppose is there anybody
in the room who's opposed to
this see no opposition will go
to members of the committee.
Madam Chair um prior to the
final action of the spill, I was
informed that we do have an
amendment to the bill, um.
The, uh, it's basically um.
For technical language in it is,
it will talk about.
Uh, independent colleges and
clarifies branches of UNM and
NMSU, uh, I do have this. I
believe the amendment was given
already or is it not?
It should have been,
Madam Chair, it was sent to the
committee.
maybe a week or 10 days ago
don't have it, we could amend it
in its next committee.
Your pleasure. Uh, the number is
231-359.1.
As, as a note, if you send it to
HEC at
Doesn't go anyplace.
OK, um, Madam Chair, legislative
council should have sent it
over.
So I'm not sure exactly who they
sent it to, but.
Um, Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chair, um, what we'll do is we
will hold the amendment for a
second, uh, for its next
committee, and they will there
be presented.
And we will have
Or bring this billboard for 449.
So I will withdraw my amendment,
uh, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you. So the amendment has
been withdrawn.
Uh, hold on one second.
Um, what is the will of the
committee? Is that acceptable to
you?
OK.
Uh, then do I have a motion?
Or does anybody have questions?
Nobody is.
questions
OK, uh, representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, representative
and presenter.
I was looking through the bill
and
It seems like it lacks specific
criteria for fund allocations.
So.
How am I gonna know?
If some of the bigger schools
are getting the money and some
of our branch colleges are not.
How, how does, how is that?
Gonna be fair. What's the
process?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Vincent. So, um, the currently,
um, higher education
institutions make formal
requests that go through a
higher education capital outlay
committee, um, which includes
representation, uh, of the
legislature via legislative
Finance Committee staff.
Um, who sit on those, that
committee, uh, those requests
then go through the legislative
Finance Committee budget process
in the fall and a recommendation
is made for higher education
funding, that then ultimately it
is the legislator, legislature's
prerogative to act on and make
those appropriations. So this
would be kind of similar and
kind of additional, um,
Source and process that would
kind of go through that existing
process, and then ultimately,
uh, the bill's intention is to
retain legislative authority
over ultimate appropriations. So
the idea of this bill was
essentially to establish, uh,
create the fund, establish
abroad statutory framework for
it. And then there's gonna have
to be an implementation period
for sort of developing a
process, um, and then it
would be up to the legislature
to ultimately capitalize the
fund in future sessions, and
then to make appropriations from
it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative and presenter so.
The who's the over is the
committee the oversight
committee is they're the ones
that's in charge.
Of allocating money.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, so
it's a little bit of a
combination. So the higher the
higher education, um, department
and the committee, essentially
established.
Work for
Process of a
And, and, you know, criteria
that they use to prioritize, uh,
the committee scores projects,
um, but ultimately, the
legislature as the appropriating
body makes the final decision
about funds that are
appropriated. So the higher
education department on behalf
of the committee makes a
recommendation to the
legislature, the LFC makes it on
its own recommendation and then
the legislature ultimately Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
the answers. Appreciate the
time.
Any other, OK. Thank you, um,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative. I just um wanted
to ask.
For clarity on page 4.
Um
Line 16 through
22.
Well, and yes, in particular, 16
through 181. Those are all
those.
Universities and uh that are
mentioned in the Constitution on
that page that lists every
single one, so I'm glad we, we
did that.
And then, um,
From lines 19 through 22, Madam
Chair.
The um
Does this apply also to 4 year.
Um, tribal colleges and
universities.
Or is it just
2 year educational institution,
which means a community college
or a tribal college located.
I
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
so that's a good question, um.
Before I get to that
specifically, um, the amendment
is basically a technical
amendment to this part of the
definitions, um, that would ins
insert the word public before
community college to clarify
that it's only public
institutions that would be
eligible for the fund, and then
would also clarify that branch,
um, community colleges are, um,
considered two-year
institutions, not for your
institutions, even though
they're part of
for your institutions. Um, so
the intention of this was to
include um all of the tribal
colleges as eligible for the
student life projects, um, but
only the 4 years are eligible
for funding for the major ING
projects, um, the two-year
institutions, um, and the tribal
colleges would remain eligible
for ING projects through the
normal capital outlay process
and the um established funding
sources.
For those projects that already
Thank you. um.
Madam Chair and expert for that
response.
It, I guess in hindsight, the
amendment would have been an
important discussion for here,
but um in more appropriate, I
should say for this committee,
but rolled it into presenting it
in uh house appropriations,
which is the next committee,
then it's important for it to be
addressed because that is a
clarification, um, that's really
important, um.
Particularly as it relates to
how tribal collegeists.
Fall into
Um, the nature of the tribal
colleges and how they fall into,
but.
And, and the other two
components of the amendment,
public and branch, are very
important for clarification. So
I hope that you, um.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative are successful
in.
Uh, entertaining the, the
amendment at that at that point,
and I also um think it's
important to note that within
the entire um um.
Discussion that we've had.
Uh, in terms of, um.
Including
Are
Discussions around our tribal
across the board tribal
framework as education framework
that we've been insisting on
throughout the years, I'm happy
that we're actually
acknowledging that within that
um.
Section
But it does need further
clarification, so, uh,
appreciate the continued
discussion and I know our
secretary's here and she's, uh,
understands fully the importance
of including um every single
time we do something that we
include our tribal education
frame. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Um
So with this.
And nothing's been appropriated.
Is there a number behind.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and one of the other.
Um
Activities of this will be to
identify funding sources and uh
madam Chair, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, um.
You know, we, there were some uh
when we talked about this, we
were having a conversation.
You know, whether it be
reversions that would be that
the monies that are being
reverted to the states, there's
been, I think it's like $6
billion in capital projects
throughout the state. There
would have to be an identified
funding source to see.
How much would be available for
these, but again, the intent is
to
Uh, not only address the higher
costs, but also the important
part about it was the student
life, uh, activities. And so I
will say, um, Madam Chair.
Uh, for those, uh, students that
we met from ASUNM and ASN MSU
that we're speaking there on
behalf of the projects, part of
the funds could be used towards
those student as far as that uh
identified projects, so.
Um, I'll turn over to my expert.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, so yes, what Representative
Baca said is correct, I think,
you know, the next step would be
to identify poss possible
funding sources as well as, you
know, it, it's basically would
be up to the legislature and the
next funding cycle, um, to
decide whether, you know,
putting some non-recurring
surplus its priorities. And, you
know, I wouldn't want to speak
at this point to what the future
legislature might decide on that
fund, on that.
Front, um, but the intent in
looking at funding sources would
be to, you know, I would say,
Capitalize this fund, um,
considering its purpose is to
fund those major capital
projects, which are high cost,
um, as well as provide a source
of funding for projects that we
currently don't have any
dedicated state funds toward
now, um.
I was gonna say one other quick
thing and um.
But there you go.
And the reason is is is we.
another fun also creating all.
They'll pass
Um
But uh the
Um
I, you know, I do support this,
I will tell you, I mean is a.
Graduated.
issues.
Um, but it be something that
they would be looking, I know
that.
And so
They, um
Oh that's fun.
Uh,
Thank you, Madam Chen. Thank
you, uh.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Collin. That was one of the, the
issues that they that was
identified when we're looking at
the, the cost of a new medical
school of $110 million or so
that would have taken and pretty
much wiped up the funding source
as far as the geo bonds for this
and so I think that was that
example of a high cost
construction is part of the
reason why this legislation was
brought forth.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
yes, that's a great example of
the type of major academic and
research project that would be
eligible for funding through
this new source, and that to the
representative's point, um,
we're very challenged to fund
through our current sources
right now, so, um, to give you a
little bit of perspective, um,
last year I believe our total
general obligation bond
capacity, and we only have that
every 2 years, um,
traditionally, that's been the
only dedicated source of funding
for.
in capital. So the total amount
available was, I think, 286
million, um, higher ed gets
most, but not all of that.
So let's see, um, I think there
was about 50-ish, 55 million in
appropriations for other things.
So let's say higher I got about
2:30, um.
So the medical school on its own
is expected to be like a $500
million plus project. Um, more
kind of like normal, uh, major
academic building replacement
projects at UNM NMSU now are
almost all going to run over $50
million and to the
representative's point, um, the
other kind of major projects,
major new construction, academic
building replacement project in
our last cycle, uh,
Was the UNM Humanities building
that request alone last year was
$110 million. Um, it is very
difficult to fund that kind of
project at a single school out
of a source of funding where it
would take up 50% when there's
so much demand from all of the
other institutions. So the idea
is kind of to develop another
funding source to, as the
representative said, um, in
introducing the bill to kind of
relieve pressure on those other
funds, um, so that we have, when
we have a different
source of funding those major
projects that essentially the
benefits will accrue to all the
institutions in the state
through having more opportun and
one other quick thing I remember
what I wanted to say in answer
to your last question. Um, I
just want to clarify that this
new fund is not a trust fund.
Um, it's really a spending
account. So, you know, if the
legislature decided to make.
Uh,
a significant non-recurring, uh,
appropriation to it next year.
You know, the idea would be that
it would be invested so that it
would, uh, that it would earn
some income, um, while the money
was sitting there, but really
it's intended to be a, a more
kind of like shorter term
spending account, um, not a
place you're gonna to sock away
money, uh, with relatively small
distributions, um, for all of
time.
Thank you. See, no other
questions from members, uh,
Representative Royal Caballero,
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
do.
OK.
OK, uh, we have a do pass motion
by Representative Roybach
Caballero and a 2nd 5.
Does anybody object of a due
pass with the understanding that
the amendment will go to
appropriations and
representative Bach and myself
will make sure that happens.
Thank you.
Uh, we are now going to go to
our final.
Bill of the day, which is public
school capital outlay changes.
And at least to start it, uh,
Cheromero will do it.
OK.
Uh, Cheomero.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee. So,
um, Senate Bill 82 is something
that the public school education
of the public school capital
outlay task force along with the
legislative Education Study
Committee had looked into over
the interim and this bill Senate
Bill 82 is to currently extend
um the temporary reduction of
the school's local match. Um, so
if you remember, we heard 277
about some of the issues
around small schools and um
microdistricts and getting um
funding for their schools for
capital projects. Um, this is
partially to alleviate that, um,
Senate Bill 82 also eliminates
two requirements um for small
school districts, um, one is
aimed at schools that have a
high percentage of economically
disadvantaged students, um.
And the requirement for school
districts to have at least 70%
or to have 70% of their students
that have a free or reduced
lunch and then the requirement
for school districts to have a
local match greater than 50% of
the proposed project costs. So
again, all of this is aimed at,
um, we've seen our capital funds
grow and grow and grow and it
may been harder for, for
especially smaller school
districts to access those funds.
So it's another initiative to to
help alleviate those problems
and get that money flowing into
the Mark Montoya here with the
Legislative Education Study
Committee as well as an S for
questions.
Um,
we'll go online. Is there
anybody online who would like to
support.
Uh, House Bill 82. Excuse me,
Senate Bill 82.
Uh,
very good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
can you hear me?
Yes
Yes.
I'm the president of NEA
National Education Association
of New Mexico. We stand in
strong support of House Bill,
um, Senate Bill 82, I apologize,
school capital outlay changes
for the reasons that the maker
stated, and we want to thank the
maker and expert um today. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. I will go to our
witnesses in the room. Is there
anybody here who would like to
stand and support the Senate
Bill 82 line up behind our
presenters, and
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Lily May Ortiz,
uh, legislative liaison for the
New Mexico School Board
Association and Cat Otley is one
of the New Mexico School Board
Association's top priority for
this legislative session, uh,
NMSBA supports the continued
reduction of local matching
requirements, uh, and easy match
waiver requirements for
standard-based and systems
projects. Um, we support this
legislation because it amends a
public school Capital Outlay
Act, and it extends the
temporary reduction of school,
the school districts.
Local match and it would also
eliminate two sub-requirements
outlined in waiver criteria B,
which addresses small districts
with a high level of
economically disadvantaged
students. The changes to waiver
criteria B and the elimination
of waiver criteria C would
increase the number of school
districts that are eligible for
local match waivers in the PSCOC
award process. This funding to
school districts will provide
students with safe, comfortable,
inappropriate learning
environments, we ask you to
support this legislation and
move it forward. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Joe Guian,
executive director of the New
Mexico School Boards Association
and also the chair of the public
school Capital Ola Council. So
I'd like to stand in support of
this bill as was mentioned by
Lily May.
Uh
This, uh, extension or reduction
should I say of a local matching
requirements as facilitated many
projects throughout the last 2
to 3 years that it has been in
place. It has been made the
difference between many of the
uh schools coming forward and
being able to afford uh these
projects.
Also relaxing the waiver
requirements will make it easier
for.
Uh, districts to qualify for
additional state funding that
would be made available through
a waiver.
So we feel that this will help
facilitate and maximize the
amount of money going out to
school districts that the
council currently administers.
We stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anybody online who
opposes Senate Bill 8.
Is there anybody in the room who
opposes Senate Bill 82. See no
opposition will go to members.
Mentor
Mo.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass from Representative Lauder,
2 from Representative Cullen.
What's will
OK. Uh, chair, you have a to
pass for sinophil 82.
Uh, thank you, everybody, a
unique.
in my own
experience the representative
Baca and Cher Romero for
representing bills, um.
Any announcements, any?
OK, with that.
We are adjourned.
