um, both the LESC and LFC did
not include an appropriation for
um the family income index
program.
The approach that they are both
taking to move that.
Methodology for calculating at
risk using the family income
index.
It's something that I support,
however.
That funding really does not get
down in a very.
Specific and strategic way.
To the school level that we can
see and so the family income
index really is focusing on
those schools that have the
highest rates of poverty. It
allows at a school level for
teachers.
the families and for school
leaders to determine what
specifically does that school
need to support students and
families and so we would very
much like to see uh that program
continue.
Um, we also have the special
education, um, shortfall within
the LFC budget of $4 million.
This money is critical because
it really supports.
Um, the work that the office of
Special Education is currently
doing.
They are deeply engaged in
professional development across
all levels, teacher.
Um, as well as families and
there are there are um
professional development
trainings that are done around
the state, we have a special ed
fellows academy that has
actually just been hosted, we
hosted a great parent university
with over 500 attendees as well.
Um, this funding also supports
key programming like the stay in
school initiative, which is uh
supporting our students with
disabilities, we had a pilot
program that.
Was highly successful.
Um, with
Huge increases in graduation
rates, we'd really like to start
uh continuing these programs,
and so this funding is really
essential to allowing us to do
this, and it also really
supports our legislation which
will codify the Office of
Special Education. Let's see.
else I want out here?
Um, the
Education Acts that were also
mentioned that LFC did not have
this in their budget, um, these
education acts, Hispanic
bilingual multicultural and
black education acts are asked
that this legislature.
Um, past.
And so making sure that we
continue to fund these acts,
including we have two FTE in the
Hispanic Education Act that
supports that work, supports the
advisory council.
But also administers the uh
funding that goes out to
schools, that supports important
language and culture programming
that we hear from students and
educators and families all the
time, this is really about
engaging families, honoring
language and culture, so.
Um
We
Request. So I can stop there and
then shift back to.
Oh,
thank you, thanks.
OK, so now we're gonna go
through a long list of things.
Um, before I do, actually, I
wanted to, I want to clarify one
thing that the secretary
mentioned about family income
index, and it's not to clarify
what she said, but just to draw
the distinction because you're
gonna hear
Family income index a lot this
session potentially.
There's a distinction between
the family income index
mechanism.
Which is a way that we've been
using to identify poverty.
At a school level
And that we are now proposing to
use to identify poverty at a
district level in the SCG
revisions that we've talked
about.
But the secretary was referring
to as the family income index
program.
That program has used that
mechanism.
To distribute
a non-recurring appropriation.
Two districts, but for the
specific use at specific
schools.
Right, so the secretary is right
that both LFC and LESC have not
included.
An appropriation or
recommendation for the program,
that $9 million that she talked
about is not included in the
other two recommendations.
There's about
37 $38 million as part of the
SCG revision.
Additional
In in at-risk funding as part of
that SCG revision. So while
there's not $9 million in in
this one pot for the program
cost.
There is money, additional
funding for at risk using that
family income index mechanism.
To the secretary's point, it is
not a school-specific
appropriation, the way that we
were using to uh to run the
program.
But as a state we we will be
able to if the proposal were to
pass, identify which specific
students at which specific
schools are actually generating.
Those funds for districts in a
way that we cannot do right now.
And while SCG is discretionary.
It can school districts and
charters can spend that money
however they'd like.
We are able as a state to track
which students are generating
and whether or not districts are
spending money.
At those particular schools in a
way that we've not been able to
do before.
Just wanted to clarify the
distinction between the
mechanism that you'll hear about
and the program.
OK.
Let's keep going.
Line 83. I'm actually going to
skip over a little bit uh other
than to say
This is an appropriation from
the general fund.
To the public education reform
Fund.
That public education reform
Fund is a fund that was created
a few years ago to capture
reversions from the K5 plus and
ELTR.
ELTP program, ELTP.
is redundant, um.
But we'll talk more in depth
about that on Friday. So for
now, all you need to know is
that
LFC and LESC are recommending a
general fund appropriation to
the public education reform Fund
to pay for some.
Long term, um pilots.
We're gonna go ahead and go
through these lines pretty
quickly. Again, you'll see a lot
of agreement.
I mentioned in the SCG the
appropriation for K-12 plus
units.
And in line 84, this is a
supplemental appropriation to
pay for units that were already
generated, but that we didn't
pay for last, last session. So
this will cover the cost to keep
the unit value flat for the
current fiscal year.
Line 85, you'll see $30 million
across the board.
For the summer literacy
institute, these are, this is a
program that the secretary may
speak a little bit more about in
a little while, but there's
agreement to continue that
program.
86 is going to get a little
confusing.
Because you'll see that there
are different numbers across
those three recommendations
1540, and 30.
There are actually about $45
million for for CTE work-based
learning and other initiatives.
In various places across the.
this sheep
And so even though that
particular line item, there's
actually a lot of agreement.
There's just some
Differing viewpoints about how
to pay for it and where to place
them. So we'll talk a little bit
more about that if you have
questions.
Um, line 87, and I think the
secretary will talk a little bit
about educator fellows. I'll let
her do that, but there's mostly
agreement.
about uh educated fellows.
As well as out of school time
and high dosage tutoring.
Line 89
you'll see $15 million in the
LFC and LESC rec.
For K-12 plus programs again,
and that's
If we see additional uptake in
K-12 plus, that $50 million is
there for the department to use
to pay for any additional units
that are created.
If additional schools sign up
for more days.
Um
Sorry, line 90, um.
$12 million for a statewide
student information system in
both the LFC and LESC rack.
I'll let the secretary talk to
to speak to that if you'd like.
School transformation.
Um, you'll see on line 91,
there's actually some
Additional lines, LFC has a
line.
As an appropriation in line 170.
3, I believe that we'll talk a
little bit more about on Friday
as and so does the executive.
Let's see here, what else should
we talk about?
The last thing I'll mention, uh,
again, you'll see a lot of
similarities is line 97.
Uh, where the LESC staff is
recommending $3 million for
behavioral health.
And uh that's something that the
other, the other recommendations
do not include currently.
Sonny.
You, John, Mister Chair.
I think John did a very good job
of covering the major
differences, and I actually do
wanna quote him from yesterday
that.
You know, just a few years ago,
we had only about
2 or 5 special.
Non-recurring appropriations and
the LLC.
Has been increasing funding for
non-recurring given the recent
surplus in oil and gas revenue.
I think it becomes a real
question of what is
non-recurring actually mean if
these are appropriations that
you see every single year, and
at some point, um.
There may not be enough capacity
for non-recurring to be at such
a large rate as recurring needs
begin to take more priority. So
typically the direction of the
staff is to not recommend
non-recurring appropriations if
they are.
Going to create a recurring need
in the future.
I think I'll try to wrap this up
very quickly, Mr. Chair. The,
the only, I think the last thing
I'll draw your attention to, if
you will, is turn to line 113.
You'll see in the executive
recommendation $90 million.
ended for the Indian education
fund.
And I'll let this the secretary
speak to that a little bit.
Um, I'll point out on line 94.
The um
LESC has a recommendation there
for Indian education initiatives
of $5 million which is in
addition to that 20 million that
we talked about in the Indian
Education Fund.
LFC on line 174.
As a $15.5 million.
recommendation for indigenous
education initiatives.
Again, we'll talk more about
Perf on Friday, but I, I believe
that's a, that's a 3-year
appropriation. So essentially a
$5 million per year.
the next 3 fiscal years.
Last name, Mister Chair, I'll
take us to line 132.
These are a subtotal of those
non-recurring.
Recommendations, um, again,
you'll see the exact 262.
Uh, LFC at 343 and LESC at 366
for non-recurring.
The rest of this sheet is
something that we're gonna focus
on on Friday, which is the
public education reform Fund.
Um, I already mentioned that $50
million for safety on line 143.
So I think for today, Mr. Chair,
that's a pretty good rundown.
I'll turn it over to the
secretary to speak through some
more of those differences and I
think then we'll be ready for
some questions. Chair, thank
you, John, and thank you, Sunny.
Um, I'm gonna start with the
difference for the um educator
fellows program, so, uh, the LFC
has a $5 million.
Um, shortfall from both the
executive and so I just really
wanna highlight.
importance of this program, this
is really a locally grown
educator program that the
department started with federal
funding, which ends this year.
Um, we will already see, um, a
reduction in the number of
educators in this program as a
result of the loss of that
federal funding.
Um, so this funding has um a
pre-service educator, often in
educational assistant or another
um, person, um, their education
degree.
It allows them to work alongside
a licensed teacher in a
classroom, and also allows us to
have more.
Educators in a classroom with
students, so there's an added
benefit there, um, as you all
know, we still have over 70.
This program is really critical
to make sure that we help fill
those those um vacancies because
this program is really a locally
grown program, we are seeing
these educators really in their
schools and so we, we really
feel that investment, especially
in light of the loss of the
federal funding and so having
that double hit in one year
would really be a significant
reduction in the number of
educators we have in our in our
pipeline.
But
um
Next, I'll talk about the Indian
education funding, so John
referenced.
$90 million over 3 years, um.
We are, um.
Wanting to make sure that we
continue all of the important um
Indian education efforts in our
schools.
Um, but we also want to increase
funding that's going directly to
our tribes, nations in Pueblos.
This is something that we have
been working with.
Um, tribal leaders for several
years now to make sure that we
are increasing the amount of
funding that they receive that
they can direct to support their
student, this is in addition to
all of the important programming
that are happening in schools,
but to provide additional
funding that they, that honors
their tribal sovereignty that
allows them to provide very
specific.
Um, educational and it has to be
educational supports and I'll
just remind you all not that I
need to, but Native American
students are still some of our
lower performing student groups
academically.
And we feel like this is
something that is important to
um honor that relationship and
uh provide them the opportunity
to direct that funding to
support students.
Um, I also will talk about the
$5 million that is in the
executive budget for school
safety.
As John mentioned, there is a
$50 million.
Of capital appropriation that
includes safety.
CTE and other sort of school
maintenance costs.
We
Hear from um our school leaders
regularly about their they are
significant.
It is a daily.
Issue that they have to work on.
Um, and so.
As great as it is to have that
capital funding go through
PSDOC.
We can't really address the
other concerns that we really
hear from them, including the,
the um interoperability
particularly in all parts of the
state.
response times for is extremely
long.
Or more sometimes, and we have
to really address those sorts of
um needs as like a state sort of
approach.
As well as some of the other
concerns that they have, um, for
school safety that is not
capital specific, so, um, I'm
not adverse to capital.
investment, but it really isn't
just capital to support a school
safety based on
Um, the regular sort of feedback
that
hear from
Of the agency budget of
Um, it's on the bottom of
Your
Your handouts there and so.
Um
Education department, um.
Staff wise is.
Relatively small.
Comparison to the budget that we
oversee.
Um, the
He does have
A $2 million shortfall.
us, um
is really on allowing us to
Um
um
uh
about
75
of our agency budgets are
currently funded.
able to make up that gap using
federal funding, which again is
going to funding as well as
vacancy savings. We very much
need.
The staff at the agency to do
the important work to oversee
such a large budget and all of
the programs and do the, the
support, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll say
very quickly as the secretary
was was.
She reminded me I should have
said something at the very
beginning, that's what I get for
now.
ahead of time.
I think there's some strong
recognition in in all the
recommendations here.
About the student groups.
out in Martinez.
specifically the, the
The SCG revisions.
some that are shared and some
that aren't here, but.
student groups for those of you
not super familiar with that
yet.
Uh
out by the lawsuit were
economically.
disadvantaged students.
learners
Americans and students with
disabilities.
see across.
Recommendations.
Strong efforts to continue to
support those student groups.
in the revision to this.
guarantee includes additional
money.
at-risk students and
Under this proposal would be
essentially defined as, as um
economically disadvantaged
students using the family income
index.
Creating a stand-alone English
learner factor provides more
transparency and hopefully more
intentionality on the school
district's part.
To serve those students.
And of course, we also heard
about the need for strong.
college and career counseling as
well as that secondary.
Talk more about this probably
next week in in association with
Hospital 63.
we start to see declines in
Achievement and outcomes is that
middle school area.
also start to see increases in
absenteeism and other sorts of
behavior that we know.
detrimental to student outcomes
and so that secondary piece
there, but I just.
wanted to call out that across
the recommendations.
including things like education.
fund increases, um.
have some very good options to
continue to respond and support
students called out.
That
The secretary has one more thing
to say and then I'll stop
talking.
Mister Chair, if it's
Time allows, I did not talk
about our C2, OK.
so much, Mr. Chair. Um,
I was thrilled about having um
Elias, this is really critical.
To making sure that our data
quality is there that we're, we
have one system statewide allows
us to make sure that we have an
eye on students as they move
through the educational system
as they move around from school
to school or district to
district.
Um, this would include our um
special education IEP.
with IP, which is really
important.
Um, so
Really, really happy about that.
There are a couple of other
Um
Data projects that are not
included.
Uh, let's see.
and LESC budget.
Um
Actually just
Apologize. Um, they're not very
large, but um they involve
funding dashboards that allow
the schools to better access.
Data on a daily basis, so that
they're using student data to
inform instruction and um
This, uh, this funny but also
find an IT platform that would
allow
The contracted assessment
contract with vendors that that
help support their their student
testing to allow them to
directly upload those cells.
This is really important because
it reduces administrative and
the quality of data is much
better. It removes a lot of the
manual sort of.
Ery data entry that's have a
really positive impact um on our
student data.
Um
is just really fun um our open
books dashboard. This is our
dashboard if you haven't looked.
At it.
Let me know. I'd love to show it
to you. This has the financial
data.
Um, um, our LEAs as well as um a
dashboard regarding our
attendance report.
So these are without, without
the.
Can't really uh prevent.
stop there, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you all so much for
your presentations before we get
to questions, I just want to
recognize that we have a
returning champion in the
audience, Representative.
Just part of the uh
House appropriations and Finance
Committee, and then we also have
our house appropriations and
finance committee chairman, uh
representing Nathan Small so
thank you both for joining us.
Um, so we'll go to committee
questions. The great thing about
this is that we're going to have
the presenters back on Friday as
well. So if you all do a little
bit of
Research or don't get your
question in quite today. We'll
have a second.
Um
You'll have a second opportunity
on Friday as well to ask those
questions, but please concise
questions and answers from our
panelists so our first go to
Riverside.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. the first thing I'd like to
talk about is alignment. It's
great to see.
How close these things are
coming in, it's, it's good to
have a choice.
But it's also good to have
confidence in those choices are
reasonable.
Whenever you see alignment
between, between the three
budgets.
I feel like
Whichever choice we take is
gonna be close, you know, it's
gonna be a reasonable.
reasonable choice.
I thing that
the
some of us are
We, we get to see this but
several times.
LFC.
appropriations.
We see it here.
And, and that's good for me
especially because I need to see
it 3 times. I understand it.
But the
The other, the uh, the other
aspect of that is that if
there's something that affects
us.
it up and
Let's see we bring it up in
appropriate and
we'll bring it up in education.
I mean, so, uh
share of hoping the study
doesn't throw that coffee cup at
me, but.
Recently,
Uh, the transportation formula.
was changed a little bit, and I
think the change involved maybe
density factor.
And some of our small schools.
Yes
up with a shortage, a shortfall
they weren't able to.
the amount of money they needed
to run their buses.
And uh
I noticed the the line 38,
there's, there's uh money there
for.
For
Shortfall. I don't know if that,
I don't know if it.
for that shortfall or not, but I
I've been told there is some
money to take care of that
problem.
Like
Bring it up and let let
everybody know.
But we do have different.
in the
That um
Create a problem with some of
our small r.
Thank you all for this time.
Have any comments on about the
man.
Thank you Mr. Chair
Representative.
Uh, you're right, the all of the
recommendations to increase
transportation funding to try
and ameliorate some of the
Volatility that happened.
density factor was removed.
I think that there's
still some time to see how it
all shakes out, given that.
You know we are seeing fewer
students, but as you all know,
you still have to run.
buses down those routes, even if
you're picking up fewer
students.
that is included that you may
not see in these recommendations
is uh our authority for the
department to use emergency
transportation funding to help
those individuals districts that
might be seeing significant.
false, so I hope that
your question.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah
You me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you panel. Um, I, as many times
as I've seen these numbers,
every single time I look at it,
I see something different, so I,
I, I like the fact that we get
to do it often, um, a couple of
things um.
Um, just to clarification on the
um
3 + units, um, on, um,
Or is it
The line 11, is that OK so I
know that that is anything over
180 days.
Is that also include uh the
extra money for over 190.
Yes.
R K 12 units, thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, now, um, I'm kind of
gonna go along the um lines of
uh Representative Chatfield
Transportation. Do we know with
it with what we're recommending
and what we're putting in. Do we
have any idea if this is, I know
it hasn't been adequate in the
past. Is this closer to
adequate? Is it adequate? Are we
meeting?
It's cause I
I know many.
Um
Districts are having to dip into
their operational funds in order
to to uh take care of that
shortfall. Are we getting closer
to that?
Um
That's a really great question.
2 years ago, LESD, as I said
earlier, did a transportation
study and found essentially that
that districts were spending
about 110%.
Uh, of the appropriation. So in
other words, they were having to
dip into their operational to
cover the costs for
transportation.
LES FC recently did another
transportation evaluation and
found something very similar
other than to say,
Uh, the appropriation covers
about 90% of the costs for
school districts. I think
Where, where we've both
struggled a little bit is
Still getting to the to the um
Getting to know whether or not.
Districts who who make it work.
Have enough money or they just
make decisions to make it work.
And so questions about
efficiencies versus.
Cutting costs in a way that
Allow you to to use only your
your your transportation
appropriation but may not be the
best thing for students when you
have students on buses for an
hour each way or something like
that. So I think
It's something that we continue
to grapple with and I know, you
know, some of our analysts who
have been working on this
literally for
years are sick and tired of
talking about it, but it's
because we know that we're still
struggling to understand.
What, what sufficiency in
transportation actually means
because districts are making
local decisions based on do they
have a contractor that they pay.
In that case, sometimes
districts will just take their
entire
Appropriation
And give it to a contractor, and
they say we have enough.
But we don't exactly know, you
know, whether or not those what
the true costs of that system
are. So I think there's a lot of
nuance in that conversation.
I think every year we attempt.
To get closer to that number and
sometimes when we, we fix
something from one district.
We, we, um,
becomes detrimental for others
and so.
Still, still complex.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
I think what you're hearing from
this is that there's just
something foundationally.
Um
about the transportation
formula.
It uses prior your spending
patterns to drive future
appropriations.
And so,
When you change the formula and
you change how districts adjust
to their spending patterns. It
creates a whole different
allocation each year for each
district, which is very
volatile.
Um
One of the plaintiffs groups in
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit did
highlight to the court that they
were dipping into, as John said,
their operational dollars to
cover their shortfalls while
we're also seeing some school
districts revert unspent
transportation funding into the
emergency fund, and so there's
some mismatch between how the
formula allocates.
schools and how much they're
actually spending and as you're
also well aware, our districts
are all very different in their
geography.
And how much space they have to
cover so.
Um, I can't say that there's a
perfect formula, but as we
adjust the appropriation levels
and look at changes to that
density factor.
I think we'll get closer over
time.
Presentative just to add to what
they said, building off of what
they said because I um.
This is one of the topics that I
hear regularly.
From school leaders and um you
know, there are aspects of the
formula that I think people
disagree with from district to
district depending on the size
of that district and with the
rurality factor that
The legislation we hear a lot
from districts who feel like
they really lost in that design.
Um, I will just.
Advocate for really looking at
the individual system some
school.
systems, bus systems,
transportation systems have not.
Changed in decades, even though
their student populations have
changed and so I think in
addition to looking at the
formula for funding
transportation, I think there's
a lot of value in looking at the
individual transportation
systems to see if there are
efficiencies that can be.
realized if there are tweaks to
the system that would affect
their overall cost.
Um, thank you, um, for your
answers, Mr. Chair, and, and
panel, um, I, I think this is
like what all you have have
talked about is why this
adequacy funding for rural
funding is is really important,
because I know particularly like
uh my district spans 22
counties. And, um, and we have a
school that is over 30 miles
away from where our bus compound
is. That's the school. Then we
pick up students another 10 to
15 miles on, on the other side
of that.
And, uh, and if they're the
first person on the bus.
We don't get reimbursed for any
of those miles until we pick up
a child.
And so, but we still have to pay
for them to, to get there. And,
and so it's, so it is difficult
when you have these, these, um,
a big, uh, districts that that
and I know a lot of our rural
districts, they're they're,
they're, they're in there for,
they're on that bus for an hour
and a half, um, and so, uh, so
those are, those are a lot of
miles and, and it's very
difficult because again, if we
have a drop in enrollment, that
doesn't mean that we still have
that one student that's still
out there, that bus still has to
go up there for that one
student.
So, um, so we still have those
costs. Um, so it is important,
so thank you for the LFC for
having that adequacy funding
because I think that's, that's
huge. Um.
The um
Quick question on the the
salaries. I know we have a um um
committee sponsored bill.
Um, for to increase um all uh
school employees' salaries to
30,000, does that include?
People in transportation, or is
it are they two separate things,
um, how does, how does that
work?
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Mirabel, I want to clarify that
the
So you have 2 bills coming out
of LESC that were endorsed one
to increase the minimums for
educators to the 55, 65, 75,
that's captured in the budget.
There was a bill endorsed by the
committee to increase all school
personnel to a minimum of
30,000.
That amount is not, is not
included in the budget
currently.
But yes, that would include all
employees. So if you, if by
chance you had somebody.
In a transportation position,
they would also be affected.
And then, um,
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, um,
learning the
Learning management system, I
