Representative Garrett there and
Mr chair.
We have a quorum all right so
important good morning everybody
so chairman and that is trying
to actively find sponsors for
his bills for this morning since
he'll need to stay in his
committee the tax committee this
morning so while we do that we
have Representative Trujillo
House Bill three eighty one so
Representative please so far of
house bill three eighty one good
morning Mr chair members the
committee and audience I'm here
to
present house bill three eighty
one not simply.
Adds to the Hispanic the
existing Hispanic Education Act.
It included what we want to
isn't a creative Hispanic
Advisory Council the recommend
make recommendations to the
secretary on matters that
improved educational experiences
for Hispanic students and have
approved it be too got no or not
Lhasa or anything else I'm just
being silly but it's Hispanic
students here in addition the
bill proposes an appropriation
from the legislature it says
through the department to create
this CENIC education fund which
will provide funding for
initiatives related to static
students education in New Mexico
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the money should flow
out of the Hispanic Education
reform Fund and not the
department not the general fund
not any of those things and to
my right is a the infamous
famous.
Director of LDS see that I've
known forever and ever Grande
Warniment who can elaborate.
Chair members of the committee
just provide some technical
expertise on this bill
essentially what this does is it
brings our Hispanic Education
Act up equivalent in terms of
what we see in the Indian
Education asked as well as our
bilingual multicultural
Education Act by doing two
things it creates a council so
our Indian Education Act now has
an Indian Education Advisory
Council that has been in
existence for some time for some
years and advises the department
of public education department
in terms of how the requesting
data as well as
what the Department should
necessarily focus on in in order
to meet the the definition and
the metrics of the Indian
Education Act similarly what
this would do is
establish a council that would
then advise the Hispanic
Education liaison the Hispanic
Education a team at the public
education department and then
establish a pretty minimal fund
at this point what that does is
ensure that the money that goes
to the Department in this case
there is actually already one
million dollars in the public
education reform Fund it isn't
and house bill two but it
ensures that the money doesn't
necessarily revert to the
general fund but instead stays
of the house in what would be a
Hispanic Education fund so that
it can be used over time.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr Mr Chairman I'm so
sorry.
I couldn't I'm I think I'm gonna
pass out
I can't see anything.
We stand for questions all right
but my understanding
Representative is that you have
an amendment.
The process all right thank you
Representative results thank two
two five nine.
All right so.
Have what I have thank you
correct amendment can I get a
second on the motion to discuss
our second by Representative
Oklahoma all right can you walk
us through the amendment
representative.
Just one moment Mr chairman.
Thank you on.
the.
Line one page one line fourteen
stricken appropriation sort
include their of appropriations.
Number two on page three between
lines twenty two and twenty
three insert the following new
section appropriation one
million dollars in a is
appropriated for the the general
fund to the public education
Department for expenditure in
fiscal year twenty twenty four
to support educators with
reading English to speakers of
other languages Anne unexpended
or unencumbered balance
remaining at the end of the
fiscal year shall revert to the
general a twenty twenty four
shall revert to the general fund
and I'm in it for the for to my
expert witness to explain
specifics sure.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee there's a couple
things on this ammendment that I
think we would want to address
and
it would be up to the sponsor
whether she wants to proceed
with this or if you would like
to maybe consider growing and
coming back but one is yes that
it we don't believe that it
would be appropriated from the
general fund because there's
already one million dollars in
house bill two that is coming
it's in the special
appropriation section five
that's actually from the public
education reform Fund and then
the second is once you establish
Hispanic Education fund it
should revert to the general
fund it should actually revert
to the Hispanic Education fund
but other than that I think.
And Mr Chairman just for
clarification when I when I was
looking at the appropriation.
Looking at the appropriations of
change to the.
This.
I.
I kept reading it and I kept
thinking it was coming out of
the reform Fund in it hit me
that it wasn't and so that's
what we need to a little over
and clean it up and bring it
back to you Mr chairman.
I sponsored this bill uses to
have of.
House Bill three eighty one.
Thank you Representative we have
a second by Representative Baca
that's fine if we could take
public testimony because I think
we just have some people in the
audience if we can go through
questioning like we do on most
of our old bills and then we can
at that point roll it over to we
get a clean amendment so we're
for the committee we go through
the process hear public
testimony alright so.
We have made a motion on
adopting the amendment yet we'll
leave it there but we'll go to
public testimony so
if you're here in support of
house bill three eighty one if
you're online if you please
indicate by raising your hand if
you wish to speak in support of
house bill three eighty one in
our audience if you're here in
support of house bill three
eighty one of my left hand side
would you please indicate by
raising your hand please if you
wish to speak all right so.
You'll have up to two minutes.
Once you're called upon so
please Sir we'll start off in
the front row welcome one of the
my name is Michael Rigas and
executive director of language
education Mexico and
organizations that in favor of
this bill this is the ability to
expand.
Thank thank you ma'am I think I
saw your hand go up fewer
speaking of it's two minutes
welcome.
Great thank you others in this
front row that wish to speak in
favor.
All right we'll go to the next
room the next row which is the
please Mr leader welcome thank
you Mr chairman and committee
wrecked me at I sent something
with this particular piece of
legislation I was very honored
to be able to bring those back
Education Act to the legislature
would pass it what was missing
at that time and and justifiably
so was there was no money
involved in this pack Education
Act but what we're doing today
is we're kind of find that I
think it's time it's been eleven
years since we've done that I
think they have a wealth of use
for that money there's been a
constant errors for us to put
the money in and how to utilize
appropriately so that Mr
chairman I stand strong support
this thank thank you others
which speak please ma'am okay
also not the same story and I am
a former member of the
patient Advisory Council and
also a member of the coalition
for the.
I stand in support of.
Thank you so much others that we
speak in that same place ma'am.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee Representative
Trujillo transported Mexico and
I stand in strong support for
this though I have the
experience of working under the
Indian Education Act for three
years it's notable that is quite
a difference in terms of the
kinds of resources and direction
that are included in that act
and I believe it's important to
have parity with all of the act
so I sent a representative.
Thank you thank thank you we'll
go to the next order those would
speak in support.
In the very near hand place to
and.
Yes Sir New Mexico highlands
university executive director
for the.
By the New Mexico association.
Ation and extended support of
this bill thank.
Great thank you others not read
that which we can support
placement.
President New Mexico State
University and determined by.
Cancel because I work.
Hispanic Advisory.
Thank you.
Thank you please.
Morning this mean that means
that and I'm full time faculty
and education programs at
central New Mexico community
college I work and other than.
And he's here to
supported this bill and thank
you so much.
It's always good to see a former
colleague and her colleagues
welcome.
One of the ads my name is
Michelle put other currently I
serve as New Mexico field
director for educators rising a
national organization about
build growing your own teachers
senior community and I stand in
support of this bill is a twenty
year veteran teacher at eight
fifty public schools teaching.
to Spanish and Spanish language
arts or by the program.
Thank you anybody else in that
role that would speak in
support.
Representative we'll go to the
next row those that wish to
speak in support house bill
three eighty one.
All right the next row the final
row please.
Remembers a committee agents on
the law Representative center
for the education study the
response.
You we stand firmly in support
is thank you thank you anybody
else on my left hand side of the
page speaking support.
All right we'll go to my right
hand side those which speak in
support House Bill three please
the morning everybody Dr Adam
Almelo
I stand in support is gone the
current chair for the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council we've
already begun to mobilize
without funding so I would
imagine that with funding we
would be able to service the
wonderful students of the great
state of New Mexico I stand in
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Right thank you anybody else my
right hand side the page speed
can support.
All right so we'll go to our
member of the audience.
That's a good morning welcome
you have up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair my name is
of the sicker for they receive
it I am a first grade bilingual
teacher at New Mexico
international school in
Albuquerque teaching many of our
Hispanic students here in New
Mexico I'm also a current member
of the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council with Dr mothers
and I am a mom to one of our
state's Hispanic students my
daughter Collado even as a fifth
grader here that he act as a
group of really knowledgeable
dedicated community members who
were intent on working toward
the fulfillment of the Hispanic
Education Act so I stand in
support of this bill as he ask
members really live and work
across the state and parity with
other this is important to us so
I support the legislators all
your support of this council and
its work and its potential so
thank you very much right thank
you.
All right servicing more hands
do we have any opposition either
online or in our audience to
house bill three eighty one.
Wait time all right.
So connect committee
representative please Mr
Chairman to the service of a you
stated.
At my motion was the amendment
for discussion purposes of the
okay so I just one that clear
because you said something a
little bit different there of I
don't have a problem with this
bill at all but it does need to
be fixed.
That's all Mr chairman
definitely.
Thank you Representative.
Yet that message.
Other questions.
Amendment bill okay so thank you
Representative if we could get
it cleaned up and bring it back
with the appropriate
appropriations where the money's
coming from and then we'll put
it on thank you for doing that
thank you thank you and thank
you for your indulgence with my
almost passing out there.
Course we certainly hope not.
All right so we got a house bill
one forty eight Representative
Garrett is taking that bill.
Have to one forty eight.
Representative Garrett over left
the cookies here.
good morning Mr chair and
committee I'm delighted to be
presenting house bill one forty
eight of which is the early
childhood department tribal
agreements
which is being introduced by
representative Lente and Johnson
why this is important to me
personally is languages that.
Excuse me language is the
vehicle that we really pass the
heart of the family the heart of
the culture to our children and
as we know for so long native
American children for the last
hundred years have been deprived
of learning their language when
I was thirteen years old I
worked it mostly knee boarding
school on the Navajo reservation
for two weeks and when I asked
my little bunk cakes to teach me
Navajo one of them.
Stood at the edge and looked out
for the matron because they said
if they share their language
with me their mouths would be
washed out with soap and that
was a pivotal moment in my life
and I'm so committed to making
sure the language restoration
what language means to families
and our cultures is vital so
this is actually a relatively
simple bill it relates to early
childhood it authorizes the
early childhood education and
care department ECECD to enter
into inter governmental
agreements with tribal
governments and the amendment it
is on page three section one PED
is simply says upon a request
from an Indian nation tribe or
pueblo located in whole or in
part in New Mexico.
When they entered they can enter
into an intergovernmental
agreement with the Indian nation
tribe or pueblo tribal
organization and then
You can the ECB ECECD can
disperse funding to an admin
minister one or more early
childhood education and care
programs and these are listed in
part be they pertain to early
childhood from infancy but the
key point of this amendment is
that with the Indian nation
tribe or pueblo or authorize
tribal organization using its
own culturally and
linguistically relevant
standards assessments and
evaluations so it's really
giving our sovereign partners
this aspect budget our youngest
native children it helps with
the preservation continuation of
our the languages and cultures
of all of our tribes pueblos and
nations using their own
indigenous education standards
when they collaborate with the
state of New Mexico to deliver
the early childhood and care of
programs
and so with that I think it's
very important to do this I'm
going to turn the Mike over to
my experts a witness a former
governor Regis Pecos.
Please welcome good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and thank you
Representative for very thorough
a presentation on the intent and
purpose of the bill I'll just
add one historical context to
appreciate when a head start was
first made available to tribes
nationally in the late sixties
one of the things that did not
happen is to provide these
provisions in head start so one
of the things that happened is I
were not provided the
opportunity and so when we think
about the way in which head
start.
Was implemented the question
that was never contemplated or
asked is where is head start
head start to.
If not earlier acquisition of
English then the next question
is at what expense and formal
sixty plus years tribes did not
have the opportunity as we're
asking early childhood to be
provided with this opportunity
for almost sixty years it was
English only and head start and
it created for generations of
young people subject it imposed
to English only that contributed
to making indigenous languages
today as fragile as they are and
so with that Mr chairman and
members of the committee of of.
Stand for questions a lot of the
representative thank you thank
you we stand for questions right
here thank you for the
presentations all right so we'll
go to our audience will start
off with opposition first is
their opposition to house bill
one forty eight either online or
in our audience.
The moment.
Okay so we will go to support if
you're online please indicate by
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in support.
All right so we'll leave those
hands there for a moment we'll
go to my right hand side those
which speak in support of house
bill one forty eight is
indicators and please Sir.
Give up to two minutes welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Selvi are
on top of the line foundation in
support of house bill one forty
eight.
This bill is necessary to ensure
that the collaboration between
ECECD and tribal governments
continues into the future it's
state it's vital for there to be
a stable and reliable process
for the department to enter into
these agreements with tribal
nations to fund and deliver
early childhood education
programs I want to acknowledge
that the department is actually
done a good job of this up until
this point but it's important
for this to be actually
supported in statute
and I can speak to this is a
former cabinet secretary of
Indian Affairs because I've seen
first hand how a gubernatorial
change can lead to the
dismantling of strong straight
tribal relations and the great
damage that that costs so this
this amendment would actually do
a couple things you would number
one provide for these agreements
to be made into the future
between the department and
tribes but is crucial as was
spoken about by the sponsors and
witness for there to be a
process to respect of the
tribe's abilities to provide
culturally relevant early
childhood education programs to
their communities because of the
long history of attempts by our
state government and by the
federal government to actually
actual tribal languages and
tribal cultures so for that
reason amount of Mr chair
members the committee stands
from support thank thank you
others in my right hand side
that we speak in support school
forty eight.
All right we'll go to my left
hand side those with speaking
parts will start in front please
you have up to two minutes
welcome chair members of the
committee Jessica how trees CHI
St Joseph's children I stand in
support of house bill one forty
eight we run the largest home
visiting program in the state
journey with families prenatal
until their children are three
years old so we know very well
the importance of early
childhood development in
language disclaimer we do not
take government funds but for
over a decade we've been talking
about constitutional amendment
and creating early childhood
programs that are linguistically
and culturally sustaining for
all of our children across the
state this bill is a must to
reach that visit vision it's not
an option it is a must for
millennia intergenerational
indigenous families have been
raising children.
But has been disrupted by
genocidal policies and practices
and this legislation in the
right direction to put for
policies that lift up
all of our communities across
the state thank you so much.
All right thank you please Sir
you have up to ten twelve twenty
five or three years I think in
language education Mexico as a
nonprofit we've had the
opportunity to work with many
many many can communities around
the state including our
indigenous populations and you
know with our partners we stand
in favor of this because of the
fact that it will support for
the support from nine of seventy
as well as helping our students
in New Mexico in the ways that
we know are beneficial to them
but most importantly it's it's
provides communities the
opportunity to utilize the
cultural capital the community
knowledge that has helped them
to be sustainable Jefferies.
Thank you anybody else in this
replacement of up to two minutes
walk.
Members of the committee I thank
you for your service I am the
best on the side I have
mentioned before that I was
former president of the New
Mexico association of.
Reason as well as of the bundle
Association and on top of that I
am I'm marriages of New Mexico
highlands university.
Language is that we stick by lot
of all of our communities
although I am also chair of our
first one hundred Mexico is
being
caretakers program this is
absolutely key.
Cannot take.
Children that beginning of their
very future I.
Admittedly.
Thank thank you anybody else's
for Foro.
All right the next row over
doesn't support placement you.
Please have a Timmons.
Read it to you transformative
Mexico I stand before you to
offer full support for this but
also like to offer an additional
lands that educational
development over time is
anchored to early learning so
what languages a lifeless blood
of our cultural identities that
is true for all students I think
this is
an important I pathway to
developing the systems and
processes that can also be
translated into our public
education department for working
with our younger students and I
believe that's going to lead to
greater academic outcomes that
we're all on Rafiki so thank you
for your time in a sense of
purpose I stand for this so
along with Mexico Center for
long poverty thank you but
you bye LCS replacement of two
minutes.
Good morning members of the
committee would it will settle
the same something member the
multi lingual multicultural
community Mexico and ice
formally is stand in favor of
high speed house bill one forty
eight.
native American students the
opportunity to receive
linguistically and culturally
relevant instruction thank you
right others in that same room
please leader.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee of
thank you for hearing this
particular piece of legislation
I want to commend the chairman
Lente and vice chairman geared
for bringing this bill forward
and I say that in this matter
because we've had many good
bills are coming for this piece
was added for this legislation
but this piece is indeed unique
because we are starting at the
very point we need to talk about
and that is early childhood and
preserving the language and you
can't do that in any other
better time than where their
first coming into school first
getting involved with
individuals like themselves and
hearing their language and
learning a new language thank
you Mr.
Thank you we'll go into the next
for those with students for
placement David good morning hi
missus is secretaries ECECD so I
have
firsthand knowledge of the
impact the ADA's have on the
twenty three public charging
stations in New Mexico and
indeed what everybody has saying
is this true.
What I do want to emphasize is
that the way that this funding
is distributed as consultation
with the tribe's so they let us
know what their priorities are
so it doesn't come from the
state ECECD to the communities
but they're telling us what
their needs are because we don't
know that we don't there were
not what one out there twenty
four seven seven days a week
thank community they know their
children they know what changes
need to happen so that's
consultation comes in the day
tell us what they need we need
with them they write us a lot of
requests we follow through with
that request but also afterwards
we go in and.
Awful with accountability and
how's it going to have to they
have challenges how can we help
them meet those challenges so in
the early childhood is important
but also what makes this unique
very important in the state of
New Mexico is that we are
listening to the tribal
communities and we're supporting
them and their priorities so I
do support this bill and I hope
that you
Consider to make a priority in
the future thank you chairman
members of the committee.
Q. others in that row please
give up to New Mexico good
morning Michelle put out in New
Mexico field director for
educators rising I've had the
opportunity to work with some of
the indigenous communities for
the last six months on growing
our own teachers and have had
the opportunity to be a payments
to see first hand what the
importance of this bill is.
Being in the presence of the
total language in the the agency
people it was moving and I just
wanted to add I was an educator
of twenty plus years in
Albuquerque public schools and
when I would get indigenous
students in my Spanish classes
in my Spanish classes and we
always talked about our language
connected to our heritage and
connected to our debt identity
and what I would have
predominantly Pueblo into next
students tell me will I don't
know.
And I I I that that's just
something that we do at home.
And it tires my soul as an
educator of language and culture
because I know that I'm not
serving them in the the system
that they come in no doesn't
serve that purpose well and I
just speak to you of the study
of American students at the
school heritage we have added a
program at high school and so
the they're they're getting it
at fifteen sixteen seventeen
eighteen years old with what
could have happened with them if
they had had it from the time
that they were young and so
let's not go back at give
something that they could have
had from birth and let's make
sure that we're investing in
them since the time of the
report.
Meeting those bonds so that they
know truly who they are when
they come out into our system
speaking.
Thank you others nose wrote that
wrote that which speak in favor.
With.
Committee members of the
frontier and swept up
consecutive director for the New
Mexico bilingual education
Presentation providing education
sorry and offered Mexico
highlands that I just want to
echo every point that would the
words everyone has that here and
just the importance of again in
terms of of the tribal
communities the able to have a
state and help their children
the education of their children
I think of language and culture
are human rights and our
communities are the ones who
have the right to decide how to
best educate their
children thank you.
Thank you anybody else in the
same row of speaking support.
I will go to the next.
Please Sir you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Rick
be he'll former governor to pull
up to sixty representing
governor Melton on the twenty
twenty three tribal council.
excluded to my beginning with
the early childhood program
began with them foundation just
a little bit by Mr Warren again
working in unison with former
governor Regis rate goals and
also Representative Lente.
In looking at the foundation of
early childhood program.
Serving as the northern border
governors in twenty eighteen
we've built this relationship
with metal foundation to where
the public to suki develop their
academics in developing cohorts
for some of our students.
Happy to say that my daughter
Clarissa V. hill is the
structure of the early childhood
early care development program.
And humble and pleasant to see
my granddaughters some nine.
Who has been in the program.
When she came into the programs
she was very shy.
And now it's hard for me to hear
in the house.
Seem to be doing her alphabets
talkie in our language we also
develop partnership we K. CLC at
the Pueblo coach.
Over last summer most of ours
language teachers engaged in
that conversation to build the
capacity just what the shared
audience made was language is a
primary perspective in our
tribal communities because it
addresses our way of life.
From birth to the last time what
were called home.
Every principle perspective you
can imagine.
Suki Pueblo has been the first
entity to engage in this early
childhood early care program.
Where our relationship with the
cabinet secretary.
Many of those that.
We're all pretty much supported
so I encourage.
Members of this committee to
support house bill one forty
eight thank you and have a
wonderful day thank you for
being here all right.
So anybody else in my left hand
side that was speaking for
please Sir you have up to two
minutes for members of the
committee entrance on the laws
of the directors and for the
education Senators populations
schools a long way and
supporting our tribal
communities the tribal
communities in New Mexico
to begin to rid themselves of
shame.
When it comes to our young
parents raising their children
and really begin to embrace the
value of being emerging
bilingual people in New Mexico
it's not we're not just English
learners reemerging bilinguals
and that again this goes a long
way in doing that thanks so much
thank you anybody else on my
left and said that was because
part please Sir in about two
minutes thank you Mr chair
committee members my name is
Austin at the with the is very
of New Mexico we stand today in
strong support of H. B. one
forty eight we want to thank the
sponsors for all of their work
in making sure that this is a
strong respectful piece of
legislation and really want to
underline what has already been
said that this is of important
measure for respecting tribal
sovereignty and our cultural and
language preservation to make
this a conversational things
from a very young age that with
what we know as a crucial age in
our development and making sure
that our culture and language is
not something which is outside
of our family units but
something which we as health
deeply and in everyday practice
for us so we want to to the
committee for support think that
Sanchez you.
Thank you others on my left hand
side please have a first two
minutes morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa development I'm gonna
turn you for New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty and I've also
Representative PLC plaintiffs in
the house working as lawsuit so
we see in full support of this
bill for all the reasons given
here today and I would just add
that the judge in the house were
to this case found that early
childhood education excuse me
education is an important
component of a sufficient
education and so for native
children that needs access to
early childhood education and
care programs that center their
native language culture and the
for these reasons and many
others the day we urge you to
support this bill thank you.
Thank you very else militants I.
All right so we'll go to our
online audience for Stacey's
secretary Johnson.
Good morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Randall dissenting on the
governor for the pueblo of
Acoma.
The mobile isn't to support of
this legislation bill house bill
one forty eight this bill is all
about recognize and sovereignty
of the state and the New Mexico
tribes and empower tried greater
responsibility and control over
the education and early
development of young native
children.
Aqaba we are proud to have
programs that provide early
childhood services for our
children between the ages of six
weeks to five years all.
Or how good learning center uses
the carriage language in a
variety of learning strategies
for infants toddlers and has
stockholders.
Instruction is based on how
Kamose culture and taught by
staff members who are fluent in
the optimally which.
We have witnessed first hand the
importance and benefits of not
only teaching our that I can
language short children at a
very early age but also focusing
on early childhood development
from birth to five years of age.
It is my belief that our
children's language skills
social intellectual emotional
and physical development have a
direct correlation to their
lives as a tribal as a bill
tribal members.
We have set our own standards
for early childhood development
for those reasons Mr chairman we
ask that you and.
We asked the committee support
house bill one forty eight why
thank you all to the sponsors of
this house bill one forty eight
on.
Thank you governor all right
Christine good morning you have
up to two minutes welcome.
What the but my name is Dr
Christine Sims I'm from a comma
Pueblo in I am also director of
the American Indian language
policy research trip of training
teacher training center at the
university of New Mexico in the
college of education
I want to express Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
appreciation for the the
representative Lente to bring in
this bill forward and also
Representative Garrett because
we know that from good
longitudinal bilingual research
and when young children have the
opportunity to develop their
their linguistic of language
skills that this budget them in
more than just learning and
language we know it benefits
them cognitively socially
linguistically emotional all of
the early kinds of development
that are so essential for young
children we see this time and
time again in those examples of
of programs where young children
below the age of I have that
opportunity to learn their
language and their culture and
so we stand in support of this
bill and we we hope that all the
members of this committee will
do so as well thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Less good morning.
Okay morning I can Mr chair
thank you so much I thank
representative Lente Garrett for
bringing this bill in my
professional and personal lives
I witness how languages that and
honorable element of our
children's identity at home and
in the world as a parent of a
bilingual child since birth and
as an educator of young learners
I can see the power of early
childhood programs the truly
have agency to a farm and foster
the language and cultural
learning that our kids deserve I
support this bill fully to
provide formal processes for
opposing tribes to continue
delivering and developing
culturally and linguistically
sustaining early early childhood
education thank you again.
Thank you.
The Tina good morning of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee when it was
between Santa and the director
of the hospital education and
training division and I oversee
our head start early head start
and.
we support house bill one forty
eight because this will
strengthen the relationship
between my department and the
early childhood education and
care department and will enable
us to do more for the young
members in our community
our early education programs
find essential skills for school
readiness and assist families in
managing stable household on
butter programs also offer are
tested before Belize and they're
extremely important to our way
of life but we're limited in
what we can do for all the young
children in our community
cause and those not enrolled in
head start but we appreciate
that so far the early education
and Care Department has been
supportive of our initiatives
but further we need to invest in
our children and ensure that our
languages taught at a young age
our children and families need
to meet avenues for knowing and
appreciating the depth and
meaning of what it means to be
from possible and only we can
do.
so we should have a major role
in determining what is created
and funded in our community and
our main goals are to further
incorporate our language and
early education programming our
world view is contained in our
language and it will help us to
maintain our tribal life ways
and culture so for these reasons
Mr chairman members of the
committee we urge you to vote in
favor of house bill one forty
eight thank you.
Thank you and Carlotta.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes Carolina.
Good morning to everyone there
I want to thank representative
Lente and Garrett for bringing
this forward as this has been a
long time coming and I want to
thank the legislators for
supporting this I cannot but
endorse everything that has been
set this morning in support of
this legislation it's so
important for the children to
get that early learning in our
languages and with these
agreements with the tribe being
officially
recognized we are short to
enable our early childhood
centers to begin wholeheartedly
and supporting the languages of
the community state are in thank
you so much to everyone for
supporting this bill.
Thank you.
All right so we will come to
committee suffer some analysts
Representative made a lot more.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and and governor
I just have a quick of COVID
because what you would spoke
when you were presenting the
bill really struck me about your
conversation with that with the
fellow student at that point my
father is he's in his eighties
and of several generations here
in New Mexico and he he is
expressed to me several times
that back in the thirties and
forties he would get punished if
you were speaking Spanish in
school he would he would get so
he says oh yeah they would hit
me with the ruler and of course
he was a little table and he
would do it on purpose just to
do it but but so they in fact I
had a conversation with my with
my parents this this weekend and
we were talking about the fact
that out of all of us I grows on
the youngest so I'm the one the
probably knows Spanish the least
because I was the least around
my grandparents
and I and and why they never
taught us the use to to talk
about us not talk to us and so
and then my husband is the same
way his parents are very are
completely fluent in he doesn't
know either but they but they
told me was at that point where
they grew up was because they
were punished to speak Spanish
and in in schools and they knew
English was at that point in
time the language to feed us and
so they were going to do it now
that is a completely different
society now now of especially
being you know having taught
psychology and knowing that when
when the brain is ready to
develop all of these language
skills these young minds are the
exact time that you need to
reinforce that not to mention I
have a luxury of you know
picking up babble if I really
need to in learning Spanish
native of the people don't they
have to go back to their.
Chair and so and this is
something that cannot be lost
for for the native community
cannot be so I am strong
supporter of this thank you
thank you Representative Roybal
covering it up.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative expert.
On governor
of Texas Regis thank you
To think that a couple of things
that I want to bring up that I
think are very important that
for someone ask in terms of the
early childhood excuse me
getting over a cough I think
early childhood department have
they.
How are the moving along in
terms of
instituting any type of
direction or guidance in terms
of curriculum has there been
there is there any action
already moving since this is
been in discussion for for a
little while now I'm wondering
if they've been making any
progress so far.
Mr chair can the W. secretary
dress up please W. secretary
assistance system secretary yet
so Representative
we currently have a contract
with Emory primary if so we see
to developing curriculum with to
Pueblo tribe right now and once
that's completed which the
completion date is June
thirtieth of this year we'll go
ahead and extend that invite
that to all of the twenty three
public tribes and nations to see
if they would like to adopt that
curriculum and personalize it
and and make it culturally
relevant to their own
communities so yes that work is
being done there also has been
and I need a with cares at KCL
seekers
Center of the early learning
center what they're doing is
they have recruited and our
training ten other community
members in the care something
which so they have developed
their own curriculum which comes
in the form of a models so that
that's also in motion as well
so.
They are the communities are
seen the need for developing
their own curriculum and ECECD
just provides that support for
them whether that means from
connecting to of the communities
whether that means us providing
some resources for them but that
that that need is out there and
and the work has been done and
and it's already been it's
actually already been
started in these communities
they just needed the backing for
for moving that for thank you Mr
chair and thank you
Representative and thank you for
your yes Mr pickles Mr chairman
and and Representative the irony
of the example of utilizing or
contracting with keris
children's learning center is
that is probably the most
prominent Montessori early
childhood program and that is
exactly why this amendment is
necessary because they are
consciously choosing.
Not to contract or not two one
access state dollars for the
very fundamental fear of being
imposed upon so they are
struggling with one continuing
to up look for and receive
funding from the private sector
from foundations for this very
reason and if there is one I
need to open up the opportunity
for you don't have to compromise
your vision and mission.
That's why this ammendment is
absolutely necessary.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Representative percent of it
is absolutely critical
critically important I think we
have to there's several factors
here why this makes it so
critically important is that we
had it's important at every step
of the everywhere we go every
step we take an education that
we honor elevate and respect
tribal sovereignty and tribal
self determination that's
really what I think is the
foundational motivation for us
to be doing what we're doing
second as someone mentioned is
institutionalizing it in statute
because accountability is
critical and the only way that
we can hold our institutions
accountable is if there were in
the low a hearing to the law and
that's really important and the
other thing that I would hope
and I would say to the
Department and to everyone
involved is that we need to in
my opinion Mr chair and I hope
it's soon the opinion of every
one of us that are making that
are decision makers is that we
have to break down this
I don't know what to call it
this notion or this stereo type
it's it's getting to be a stereo
type that our children are at
risk when they enter school
they're not at risk.
there culturally linguistically
enriched they come to the
classroom already.
In richest.
They're not at risk we're in
there only at risk because the
educational institution has
labeled them this way in order
to be able to historically as
you mentioned Mister chair
Mister pickles and
Representative
Place them into categories
and so that that's really I
think critically important to us
that that takes a change of mind
set.
as well as the approaches so in
this case were using Mr chair
the approaches to change the
mindset and that's that really
has to happen in order for there
for us to break down those
historical
disparities.
And to create a whole new
acceptance of our children and
our.
Communities as they come into
the school system so I
appreciate the the.
This amendment and I think we
need to do a whole lot more in
this area the thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative and Mr.
I thank you Representative
BIZZARRO.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I appreciate your being here
today and I do understand this I
have a grandson that's have
Hispanic and he does not know
how to speak Spanish and that's
very troubling to me.
Unfortunately Mr Chairman one of
my children used to ride the
school bus whenever they were
little we all understand that a
younger child picks up.
Other languages a whole lot
faster at that younger age and I
think that's remarkable we do
need to started earlier.
And I would come home because.
They have very long bus trip to
commend our to get into town to
school.
And they would come home at the
age of kindergarten all the way
up through eighth and ninth
grade and.
I can speak Spanish very well
used to very well.
Some of the phrases that come
home with no no no no no we we
are not going to be phrases like
that so I do understand that it
is picked up at an earlier age
lots of my friends right now Mr
chairman of their
kindergarteners or learning
German their learning French
they're learning all sorts of
different languages and we do
have to keep that culturally
relevant language in place to me
it's very very important.
Mr chairman I did learn
something today but and I I do
I'm kinda chastised in the
audience okay today on the news
we are New Mexico is ranked
number six at the top of the
list and not for this I'm very
proud with the top of the list
this time.
We speak the slowest.
Have any of.
Thirty five fifty four other
state but there's some members
of the audience because I always
like to write down purses names
is testifying and I'm not going
to point out anybody's names but
please speak a little bit slower
so I can write down units I do
like to I do like to visit with
members after after the
committee.
And Representative.
And the governor pike is I have
gone through
analysis and I'm finding for.
It is this bill does not have an
appropriation attached the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for early childhood.
Tribal services
It's B. C. ECT is request to
seven point five million for
twenty twenty four for a total
of two hundred and twenty nine
for early childhood tribal
investments.
I'm also seeing another one
here.
ECECD notes that H. B. one forty
eight creed creates a mandate.
To provide ideas but does not
have a four to does not provide
for an appropriation and this
one is the same way it creates a
mandate does not provide an
annual appropriation or not to
create recurring appropriation
can you explain that to me I
want to make sure that
everything is in place we're
going to do this Mr Chairman
representative important
question and governor because
will address okay.
Mr chairman and representatives
of thank you for that question.
It it's perplexing.
How those.
Analysis articulates that there
is not a special appropriation.
There's tremendous amount of
Everyone else who will be
access in these programs it is
perfect so I say how we
continually have to respond to
analysis that are totally
unnecessary but fundamentally
reflects a lack of understanding
with regard to what we have to
be subjected to but in order to
qualify for every other entity
qualifies for that somehow or
another in this kind of
articulation in in the analysis
points out that there has to be
special appropriation with this
amendment to make tribes
eligible it doesn't change
anything other than those who
wish to pursue accessing
resources that are available to
every other entity to have the
same opportunity and so the
analysis I would have to
strongly disagree with that it
that that this amendment would
necessarily require additional
resources.
Okay thank you for that
explanation Mr chairman and
representative and governor pike
is so there might be a little
bit of a problem here for.
With getting the early childhood
education and care department.
To get it done is that that what
I'm hearing is their lack of
trust there anywhere on them
actually step and.
Forward to help you all out and
what we're trying to get
accomplished during this bill.
Chairman representative I think
the response has been by the
secretary publicly that we are
already doing this that is why
in the earlier statement by the
representative is what we wanna
do is to enters
institutionalize that make this
part of the statute so that it
is permanent and unchanging as
administrations come and go and
the fact that they're already
doing this addresses of your
earlier question with regard to
additional appropriations in my
might not be necessary okay
thank you for that Mr Chairman
one more thing.
And I'm I'm not disagreeing with
this my concern though Mr
chairman members of the
committee is we are continuing
to grow our budgets are getting
very inflated here in the pop
but scaring me right now.
We've seen this happen before
you have been here whenever
there thing fell down to the
bottom are we going to be able
to state sustained this and
that's my concern so Mister
chairman thank you very much
thank you for your responses
today thank you Representative
it up.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you sponsors for bringing
this forward governor pickers
can you tell me the name of the
woman who started the keris a
school.
Mr Chairman representative that
is Tricia Moquino who's Parker
to Tate Kaling gate and Santo
Domingo Tricia Aquino I she is a
remarkable leader a remarkable
visionary leader and I just I
wanted the committee to know
that we both received to women
this award eleven years ago I
was leaving the foundation she
had just started the school and
at people were.
Very aware of kind of the the
vision she had and I just want
to tell all of you she was a
public school teacher and she
saw what was happening to kids
in her tried and she said I'm
not going to do this anymore I'm
going back and I'm starting my
own school we cannot and I'm
gonna start with early childhood
we cannot we have to keep our
children strong and she saw all
these kids dropping out of
school and it broke her heart so
she went back and started keris
and.
I was so impressed with her that
I I I was leaving the foundation
but I said can I come visit your
school and I went early in the
morning I wanted to see how the
school started because I think
that's an important quality in
what she had done she had she
had a preschool teachers there
but she is also higher degree a
group of elders so she had all
these elders there and they rape
they brought babies and one year
old that we're just walking you
know and they had it wasn't just
you know preschool three
department if you had a baby you
you to come to the care center
and you know that they would be
left and they were growing their
own food it was just kind of
remarkable when they opened up
that classroom the all the these
little kids stood in a circle
somewhere holding babies with
the grandparents and they
started out with the prayer in
their native language it brought
tears to my eyes they were
writing their own books in their
language because at the time
they had notebook so they were
just riding their own it was she
was a remarkable visionary is to
this day has set the model
really I think for for other
tribal nations to follow I'm
sure she has because she did
such a good job and it and I
just want to say I just want to
recognize her at this committee
up for what she did what she
continues to do and and I guess
the recognition of of all the
tribal nations recognizing how
important this is and
so I I really don't have a lot
of questions Ms clearly a strong
supporter and I'm proud at the
time the level foundation we we
were under DOD contract dollar
many had to go to public schools
that next year you know at left
when the new kind of funding
took place allowing the Landel
foundation to now take part in
this which is huge too so I want
to can't congratulate them to
and backing this bill and and
all of you for your work thank
you for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative bye.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
by triggering this for.
I support this bill I was
fortunate enough to be at the
groundbreaking at Amos
reputation of a.
My actually college friend of
governor Dominic respond.
Language I think it's very
important for us and as we
become more connected to the
global.
Society global world the ability
to speak a second language
support okay so I I definitely
am a supporter of of keeping and
teach in the native language
also for other students as well
whether be Spanish or German or
French
Mr speaker back when I was an
elementary school teacher.
One of the.
Activities that I did was
actually I went out at that
point there was instant
immersion was different
languages and I bought.
Four different languages French
Italian German Spanish and for
half hour day when our students
to rotate that so they could
pick up a second language so I'm
very interested in in the
ability to for people to speak
language I know that has to be
exposed by the four eight years
old I think actually you if you
have exposure to the language.
You actually have a greater
chance of becoming a more by
legal
so Mister chairman committee I
think that in addition to taking
a look at of languages I think
from through the L. U. S. C.
process we may need to take a
look at what are some important
components to bring languages
back to our schools and that
means that elementary schools
also I would love to see more
offerings are middle and high
schools for the different
languages so I do support this I
do think that is good but I
think that we New Mexico
I think we need to take a look
at this because at one point.
We all spoke different like my
great grandfather spoke to a
because of that the trading so
like it but we've lost that so I
think that it's reduced language
brings brings back Richard it's
also celebration of our culture
so I think that we need to look
in to see who's doing it well
and try to create programs and
opportunities for students state
statewide thank you Mr chairman.
Representative cool.
Thank you Mr chair I move up to
passed house bill one forty
eight hi second all right so we
have to pass by Representative
well second by Representative
Roybal Caballero
ma'am secretary called role on a
do pass motion please
Representative Parker yes
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative is up.
Of Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative for yes
Representative lane yes
Representative Lara yes.
Representative nearby Milan yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Garrett yes and
Mr chairman yes all right we
have unanimously passed bill one
forty eight.
Thank you.
We don't show emotion in the
room please we have very
controversial bills so respect
that whether it's controversial
or not please respect that thank
you.
All right so we will move to the
Joint Memorial.
House memorial three.
Right.
House memorial three
Representative when you're ready
place thank you which of class
yes Mr chair committee has no
not but I'm is that accurate
really really a pleasure to
present is house joint memorial
the reason for me to be here in
every every sense is really one
of the patient so
everything that I was that was
safe for the previous bill could
easily transfer here what
Representative back I just say
about making sure that we have
all the resources and money well
education is actually working in
a state this is a reason to be
here we're celebrating the
fiftieth anniversary of the
waiting going to the kitchen Act
and with me we have somebody who
the city too much introduction
but I'm gonna as former person
that the media would have wanted
one of these House strongly.
Thank you Mr chairman as
chairman members of the
committee
I will be doing a with the the
sponsor of the bill this
afternoon I'm sorry this morning
says a but I'm here to help her
up with an amendment if you no
speak German I believe you have
an amendment and I want to help
you through the amendment
process we could get the
amendment distributed please.
Thank you.
Right so give it a moment all
the amendments passed out.
All right may have a motion
professional.
Four
all right so we have a motion to
discuss the amendment sep second
by Representative Baca all right
Sir and discussion of the
amendment thank you Mr chairman
of the amendment is is necessary
as you're going to read through
the entire memorial it's a it's
a compact Moore we have many
people in the on selected dress
the issues of it as a state I
want to help with the amendment
part of the reason for the
amendment is a in our rush to
get this build a sort of more of
on to the floor for introduction
we have a Senate Joint Memorial
number six as you can tell and
then we have a house or memorial
here
there was of a process where the
and this ammendment by the way
comes from the drafter of the
bill she made a mistake on
between the two women went to
proving so what you have is an
amendment that will make it look
like Senate Joint Memorial which
is already on the Senate floor
and so these minor amendments
will just make the amendment
make the this one will look
exactly like Senate Joint
Memorial so with that I'll stand
for questions on the amendment
right members do we have
questions on the amendment.
All entertain a motion on the
amendment.
Right so we move adoption of the
amendment second to second by
Representative Garrett is there
any opposition to the option of
the amendment saying none do
have evidence showing all
probably stand up and support
the bill in a few minutes and
that I do have we do have a
couple of individuals who are
going to be expert witnesses on
the morning.
All right if we could have those
that are experts if we have one
up here one perhaps in the CF
American you're one of them all
right.
Please if you introduce yourself
Antarctica Mr chair members the
committee agents on the line
once again unfortunately
Representative Ezzell is not
here so that way she can know
that I'm taking a little bit
more slowly right
so once again I'm I'm the
current director for the center
for the education study of
diverse populations and a very
humbly want to
salute you all in the variety of
languages that we have here in
New Mexico at least a few so the
they have been at the sprint
agents on the one hand she.
Iglesias open.
Kishi.
The one of the US economy says
your silence on the line but I
mean process that I can say is
so I think it's important for us
to recognize and value those
various languages that we've
been talking about everyone in
here including individuals in
the audience have all been
touched by the linguistic and
cultural heritage of of New
Mexico right and I see that in
in a pool for
When I think about the fact that
what we're doing here today is
truly honoring fifty years of
bilingual education in the state
of New Mexico that means a fifty
years ago your colleagues your
predecessors begin to affect my
life.
I am a product of bilingual
education here in the state of
New Mexico.
I'm originally from Las Vegas
New Mexico and for me I just
want to thank you.
As legislators that come to us
with open minds that come to us
with forward thinking
to make these types of decisions
that impact or impacted my life
personally.
I think it's important for us to
recognize that fifty years ago
that efforts from your
predecessors actually created
the political to Education Act
which was the first in the
nation.
I want to repeat that it was the
first in the nation and since
then many states to follow
through.
That's astounding.
When when I thought of my rule
this morning I looked at it as
Salvatori.
I looked at it also as
historical because really as we
look and I consider what this
house joint memorial is is
attempting to do not only is it
offering information if you
reach through it very closely
but it's also encouraging us to
be reflective.
And it's offering guidance about
the next fifty years or perhaps
the next ten to fifteen.
that's profound.
Because as we all know no matter
what efforts we put forth
there's always continuous
opportunities to to improve.
And some of those ideas I feel
are pretty fairly in strongly
outlined here really for example
the notion of establishing
greater infrastructure.
Many of us mentioned that yes we
come from that legacy of a
language other than English or
culture but in some instances
we've lost it.
I think that speaks to the
notion of why Martinez Yazzie is
even in our midst because we
need to continue to grow to be
reflective and to push forward
to think about ways to create
programs that are truly high
quality and are embraced
Committee to within each of our
districts throughout the state.
We are encouraging really
quickly.
At least five different areas
that for me the state out one is
for us to really look at things
like some of the labels that we
utilize instead of just English
learner really recognize as I
mentioned previously and
emerging bilingual.
and valuing individuals for the
fact that there really are on
this pathway towards
bilingualism and
multiculturalism.
support the development of an
elementary building
multicultural education degree
to increase the number of highly
qualified New Mexico bilingual
teachers.
And request that the New Mexico
public education education
department in consultation with
the PM you see the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
Council convene a task force to
address the New Mexico
legislative finance committee
program evaluation on bilingual
education that would be
fantastic yet another
collaborative effort.
And lastly really think about
ways to.
Create.
Higher education pathways for
future bilingual education
teachers for future doctors of
education about education.
Making culturally relevant
relevant materials truly on the
on the forefront of priorities
so that we are children are
interacting with materials that
do represent them and that are
created here in New Mexico.
And ensure that the Mexico
Public Education adopts a
bilingual multicultural lens.
In all the things that we do so
that way when there's dialogue
about early childhood education
and important by language the
importance of bilingual
education that conversation
takes place there.
We're talking about assessment
that conversation takes place
through that lens and not only
is it through a lens of by
literacy but it's through a lens
of understanding that some of
our languages in New Mexico are
not written.
spoken to verbal the oral and
how do we assess and value those
things obviously we grant or we
recognize that each one of our
tribal communities have
sovereignty and they can
determine how they assess their
own languages but how do we
value it through that English
Development lands that by
emerging bilingual lands
so with that stated I think one
of the final outstanding pieces
of the house joint memorial that
really is about guidance is
encouraging our governor to
recognize this year the year of
bilingual multicultural
education our state and I think
in collaboration with all of you
we not only recognise that is
important but we recognize it in
future years really every year
because the second that we let
it fall off our radar is when we
start to lose ground with value
in many of the things that you
mentioned with that I closed and
I stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair I have we
have here also equipment and she
will be your with this expert to
I don't want to add anything
oranges yourself.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is merry
entries and I'm here to protect
the call support thank you we
stand for questions thank you
thank you we'll go to our
audience I'll start off with
opposition is our opposition to
house joint memorial three.
And our online in the room.
Figure that might be the case
okay so we will go to.
Support those in support on my
right hand side and online if
you please would indicate by
raising your hand please you Mr
speaker please have up to two
minutes welcome thank you.
Chair madam chair members of the
committee Dr Adam although chair
for the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council as of just a
lifelong educators
administrators watching children
translate for their parents is
of hunting and and saying at the
same time but we should not be
looking at acquiring other
languages as a deficit my dad a
Vietnam veteran who went to our
school systems was was beat as a
child for speaking Spanish in
school and he still has letters
from his teachers calling him
ignorant and pop guy.
For speaking Spanish.
And that educational come again
allow them to do just Spanish or
appreciate our native heritage
as well so I stand here in full
support of this as someone who
acquired the language through
means of education to wanting
and having a thirst for learning
so thank you for allowing me to
be here to speak.
Thank you anybody else American
side the which speak.
All right we'll go to my left
hand side those which cause for
please hold certain front order
way back you Mr thanks committee
again Michael Rodriguez
executive director of language
education in New Mexico as a
twenty six year educator I've
had up to serve as a teacher a
cooling which administrative
starting three different
programs here in New Mexico and
for the last six years I've had
the opportunity to work with
state agencies districts school
leaders around the country in
support of starting to language
programs
when it comes to bilingual
education New Mexico really is a
place that people look to to see
what we've done in the started
with the.
The the V. eight.
And our organization holds the
largest the largest to language
conference in the country right
here in Santa Fe and Albuquerque
every year and people come here
want to see our schools wanting
to hear from our experts wanted
to know what is working with our
Spanish purpose was working with
our indigenous programs and this
memorial really does celebrate
all the work that's been done by
those that came before us to
really set the foundation for
the students the bilingual
students in our state and it
also outlines you'll see the the
the responsibility that I have
that my colleagues have that we
have as a state to really truly
honored support all the
languages the cultures and
identities of students through
our educational system.
For all the reasons that have
been stated by the committee as
well as the.
Audience so are.
you know I to feel very strongly
as a person about this memorial
my parents too were punished for
speaking Spanish their their
native language
didn't speak it to us we heard
it they we never we never got a
chance to speak my dad was a
Spanish teacher impact was is
all career ended I think it the
opportunity to learn Spanish to
a fluid level I had to go to
college and paid to get my
language back.
So in terms of identity we need
to make sure that we're
supporting our students from the
beginning with the educational
system.
And you like they are supported
miss straight thank you so much
others in the strip please and
welcome you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you all for your service
thank you Representative and R.
Sanchez
this is this memorial why we did
the more I see into it it really
provides the vision.
And backed off the backed up
that has always been presented.
I was very lucky that I did not
have my mouth washed out with
soap I did not get spanked thank
goodness Spanish has been in my
life might be listed like left I
have taught that and promoted
through by the people that and
with the Spanish teacher at the
secondary school level.
Grandmother.
It was my grandmother actually
help with that to learning
English when is this happening
in the case.
In order to provide you.
Bill sage words still ring in
the in fact but on our.
I think the litigation.
But I spoke about a vision there
are many areas that are so
relevant in here for for the
future for right now but
certainly for the future I
referred to house bill one fifty
two which is coming up on
Wednesday for funding to update
that I more important it's to
create the committee programs.
Patient we have an endorsement
process but many people see the
endorsement at.
Nearly an add on it should not
be an add on it should be the
very important how we are
constructing that the funds that
and the kind of please that this
land you throughout Mexico.
And then I have to bring up to
convene an emeritus professor
and having other professors here
present.
We have to look at.
How.
Is to the query how the system
professor can be earning fifty
five thousand dollars with all
the responsibility that that
entails including promoting.
Please consider that for the
future thank you for your time
thank you anybody else in that
row.
All right we'll go to the next
for those in support please up
to two minutes welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is red and I'm
sending you have to transform
education Mexico for support of
this for more L. what I want to
offer is sort of a bottle to
Representative Colorado your
comments about at risk and that
problematic that determines I
think that's a reflection of the
under funding that has happened
over the last fifty years of the
maybe the session invasion.
And what I want to offer is that
when we convene in conversations
and education sessions in last
year's New Mexico that we talk a
lot about academic outcomes and
what I propose is that if you
can harness is cultural richness
I believe very strongly that we
have a solution in our equipment
we have in the education
scholars that are in our higher
institutions education we have
in our teacher
workforce that there may not be
bilingual but understands the
value of their cultural
identities and I want to offer
that there is a certain charm
tapi Pueblo classroom right now
there's a young person sitting
in a room that doesn't think
they can do it.
And it's not because they can't
it's because some of these
resources haven't been made
available session will last ten
years so I respectfully submit
that this is a memorial that has
the power to change the future
course of education Mexico I
think it could be does away from
those outcomes that the don't
reprised to.
In our state that's let's change
that I stand in support thank
you for your time right.
Thank you others in that row
please Mamula two members I'm
not the same.
Retired professor from eastern.
And my career and bilingual
education in New Mexico actually
started in nineteen seventy
three with the binding
Education.
And I was proud to have been
able to have my children.
It will provide program US
produces New Mexico thanks to J.
Paul Taylor and that they are
truly by and I.
Urge everyone to read the book
that came out it did I got my
the maze and Mary Jean Stapleton
this call the history of
bilingual education in New
Mexico.
And several people here have
written chapters but it really
highlights.
The role The New Mexico's plated
by legislation in the United
States thank you.
Thank you.
Experts.
And public commenter.
And the.
Thank you Mr chairman vice
chairman and members of the
committee and also very proud to
who are these people together at
their requested help reduce this
particular piece of legislation
that you see in front of me and
I set up to talk only about
parts of it and the point of
affected be Mr chairman
you know it goes back fifty
years ago goes back even further
think about it go back all the
way back to sent out of this is
part of that is and it takes it
from that and but talk about the
past and talk about what we are
the first we are we're the first
in New in the United States that
have Hispanic Education Act
we've heard about that one we're
also the first in the in the
nation to have.
The sealed bilingual seal and I
was very proud of it but you
allowed me to carry that
particular piece of legislation
through its fulfillment and so
many other firsts but what we
want to come from this
particular memorial we all want
you to read this because we're
going to keep this memorial as
it passes through as a first of
what we still have to do there's
just so much more left to do Mr
chair members of the committee
we have done everything this is
gonna be mention some more that
than in the past but I want you
to continue thinking about is
we're in a position now where
were we going to be fifty more
years from now what we gonna say
a hundred years two thousand I
misspoke yeah we're are we still
there have we not move forward
this memorial gives us I think
the footprint on how to move
forward and how to to talk to
the individuals that need to be
listened to and I'm talking
about the students themselves
what is it that they need and
how is it they can move forward
because we can have I think will
not just budget things and but
it'll bilingual education
throughout the state of New
Mexico and this is I believe the
manner in which we can do that
Mr chairman members of the
committee so it look forward to
real quickly saying that we're
gonna hopefully past this one
out here we're going to get it
to the floor of the Senate the
senator was already on the floor
and then we're gonna be inviting
you all to a big presentation
about the our fiftieth
anniversary that is going to be
celebrated not only New Mexico
but in the nation thank you Sir.
All right thank you an extra we
spent two minutes I just want to
speak from other parents first
and then as a bilingual
educators as a parent of two
children who are twenty to
twenty five it by the oil from
birth I come from the Yuma tell
reservation my husband isn't New
Mexican immigrants and we chose
New Mexico specifically what my
husband and shape they just
brought it.
Right we moved to Oregon for
four years and we came back to
make sure that our children have
access to bilingual education in
two thousand three this would
allow us point children's
teacher and she has become a
lifelong friend in my position
that I'm very lucky to serve
with many of the people here I'm
able to go around the country
and work with school districts
and states on language
development and of course the
spaces are calling extinguish
language development and I'm
able to position New Mexico and
what we do here and they are
always in office how can we do
this so I want to invite you to
do that not only can you is
Morial
sustain us for another fifty
years that hopefully my
grandchildren and my great
grandchildren will be able to be
able to speak their languages of
their home but also that we
become a national leader because
we have the potential to be a
national leader yes New Mexico
comes off as the last education
but because we are assessed
through an English only lends I
don't want to cultural eight we
are no way at the bottom of the
barrel I swear I have been all
over the country and work with
teachers and from Katie to
college and I come back and I am
grateful every day and I get
home and I kissed the ground
that I live on but I live here
but I also recognize that there
is still so much more to do a
minute doctoral program at the
university of New Mexico and
they told me that I was going to
have to leave New Mexico.
When I finished and we finally
came to the Senate's decision
that no way I'm not going
anywhere I started to serve my
community and this is where I
will stay to continue to serve
my community.
What I said we need to make sure
that those opportunities are
forty two are owned as they
continue to grow thank you two
minutes up to teach two minutes
please next in support.
That replace.
The chairman members.
So I am the co chair of the
funds will take which is the
patient Advisory Council passed
by the river.
some of the
With the memorials and the I
think that we have written
there.
Marred by with that we do our
center.
And I think in particular one of
the things that I want to
highlight is just that it is
very important one that really
resonates with me as an
assistant professor now it New
Mexico State University is that
in the LFC report there's only
five hundred will take
classification professors in the
state of New Mexico and stop
be one as I see right now it is
a lot of work out in the sense
of we love our work but if we
want to continue on with our
part is that we done in
bilingual education we must
definitely four more.
Representative without consent
because of them we are able to
have more by legal educate
educators New Mexico from Mexico
in our from our group wrote you
are all so I think I really want
to highlight that particularly
because of my position at the
university
I want to say that I am an
outcome of bilingual education I
was fortunate in the seventies
to attend you know public
education in California and the
borderlands of taxes and so I'm
very proud of that because my
children were also went into
participate in bilingual
education.
And Longfellow elementary in
Albuquerque New Mexico and then
not only professor of funding
going to coach of the creation
so the power of it is great of
the students that I have there
from the borderlands is so
powerful for a date for them to
say you don't want to go back to
my community and teach the
heritage language in the
different the school districts
in southern New Mexico and
beyond as well so I just wanted
to share that with you and again
these are all a lot of these of.
Or or or funding.
Thank you ma'am.
All right please give up two
minutes.
Committee members.
What the clients want assistant
professor of by the legislation.
For city and I'm also.
Mexico Association provided will
education and I continue here
today in
Because of the shoulders correct
that I stand on based on all
those mobile because they have
been fighting even before state
correct to continue but it will
also enable legacy of our state
not only terms of Spanish but
also indigenous languages into
recognize that I think the
people support refuse to
recognize that New Mexico this
plans correct always been by
the.
And that is something that we
need to continue with about it
in terms of almost sixty percent
of our population I think
that.
We need to really consider for
all our students and that's what
are you don't have here the
actual bill that was introduced
thirty first legislative
session.
Senate bill for twenty one the
center left is tackled from just
introduce fifty years ago along
with right Leger from Las Vegas
New Mexico and so when I think
about for you know the work that
we've done to to right because
don't memorial the ones that are
here that part of that is that
of it would be the way to to
honor all those that like I said
hold will be kind of that have
been in this fight for a long
time and it does not just I but
that because and also think of
you know those those that stand
on but also the future in terms
of the next generation.
I had the privilege of being
a bilingual teacher all my life
Twenty.
For almost and so I think my
children I think of our children
I think of.
Thank you ma'am.
Support all right.
Others a wish speak on my left
hand side.
All right please up to two
minutes for.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee again Rick BDO
former governor from the people
of the city on the sponsor this
bill is again representative
Lente.
And as you heard the
multicultural environment here
in the state of New Mexico.
Little better history.
The ground that you're situated
in is the historical lands of
the Pueblo to suki.
Where again that multi cultural
perspective.
To where many of the folks that
is.
I do talk the language.
To.
I community members.
Where again our sober
relationship between the City of
Santa.
It took a long while to build
that relationship.
But now we're having that
interaction.
With the city more city council
and it's one of the first in the
nation.
That I would believe and tribal
sovereignty.
The sovereignty our relationship
to this relationship that we've
built.
And that's were you looking at
this celebration X. share by
many of the individuals talk to
date.
Opportunity to celebrate
something fifty years from now
or a hundred years from now to
where again the education to our
young people that these were the
sacred homeland of our people.
And that has a great reflection
for our young people today.
A couple do this well we
identify.
This City of Santa.
And its historical program
committee is that we now reside
at the public's.
For more information Stewart so
I look forward in the committee
the supporting the Joint
Memorial thank you thank you.
All right others is for on my
left hand side please and then
back.
The members of the committee
again my name is Lisa deal and
I'm an attorney with the New
Mexico Center on property and.
Thanks for the opportunity to.
So we stand in full support of
this memorial and celebrate with
the system act for all the
reasons that have been using
expertise in this room today so
I would only like to point out
that in the other team is ruling
the court actually look to the
NBA finals.
What educational sufficiency
looks like for our students
however the five decades since
its passage the educational
promises and rights created by
the NDA remain unfulfilled so
while we urge the committee to
pass this wonderful and
historical Morial.
We also urge the committee and
the legislature as a whole to
continue to work to achieve a
necessary tool fully implemented
to give you a for our students
thank you.
Right anybody else my left hand
side of speak up please and hi
there.
Former co chair of the NEC and I
also would like to say that I'm
in favor of this memorial and
and I'm happy that all these of
wonderful people across the
state have come together to
bring.
Such an important movie to the
table thank you.
All right anybody else
militants.
Please.
Chair
members of the community
it took me awhile to this to you
then what I would say because
I'm overwhelmed.
With the prospect of having this
bill passed as an educator here
in New Mexico since two thousand
six and public schools and now
to make passively as well time
faculty member in the community
college in New Mexico and as a
mother up to fall taking will
children increase me a lot of
join a lot of hope to have this
attitude that is going to
materialize for their support.
For our students in K. through
twelve education but also at the
higher level and higher level
Education because not only is it
going to materialize but it's a
symbolic act it is important to
have to reinforce our mall type
thing like that yes state so I
encourage everyone and I what
we're reading.
To the house to the table this
bill.
It continued to affect every
community.
Thank you to my left and so.
All right so good online.
The it's under secretary Johnson
I believe this governor.
Good morning governor I believe
that you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
on the Joint Memorial.
My name is Roy this anti on the
governor of the Pueblo back on
we are in full support of this
Joint Memorial claiming twenty
twenty three as the year of the
bilingual multicultural
education.
The mobile back with Billy's
preserving and promoting our
cares language is our most
important to our community and
our cultural heritage.
Our languages and an essential
part of who we are and our life
please well more than anything
we have a duty to pass on our
language to future generations
of us with children.
The memorial before you will
play a crucial role in
supporting tribal communities
educators political leaders who
advocate for teaching New
Mexico's heritage languages.
It is equally important that are
bilingual and multicultural
education programs receive the
necessary funding and support
for preserving tribal languages.
Apple Commons educators students
parents families and communities
who have contributed to the
multi level multi lingual and
multi cultural legacy of our
great state.
We appreciate our native
language American language
teachers as professionals equal
to teachers of other languages.
They have the expertise but they
need the resources to develop
the appropriate tools for
teaching native languages and
for evaluating indigenous
language programs.
Public education department must
make the resources available I
urge the PED and our governor
fully support this memorial in
order to linguistic rights of
the New Mexico native American
students the pueblo of Acoma
stands with the sponsors of this
Joint Memorial thank you
chairman so I all right thank
you.
All right Christine Sims good
morning you have up to two
minutes welcome.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee I'm Christine
Sims of associate professor in
the bilingual program in the
department of language literacy
and social cultural studies in
the college of education and
human sciences at the university
of New Mexico I stand support of
this Joint Memorial I would just
mention very briefly in nineteen
seventy three when this first
the bilingual education act was
first passed it was really the
initiative that jump started
many of the state funded
bilingual programs for native
American students that we began
to see back in nineteen seventy
three fast forward to today I
see young generations of
students who are in regular
teacher education programs we
know very little about the
bilingual Education Act which
tells me that we need to
continue to keep this at the
forefront of our of our
education on here in New Mexico
is so a a stand in support of
this memorial in urged the
members of this committee to do
so as well thank you Mr chairman
thank you professor send all
right Carlotta good morning you
have up to two minutes.
Good morning legislators and
participants in the house
Education Committee I'm speaking
on behalf of the New Mexico
tribal language consortium for
which I am an officer.
We provided feedback on this
memorial to ensure that
increases nest of all languages
were considered and especially
recognizing the work of native
language teachers the efforts of
native communities to maintain
their languages and the
recognition.
Of preparation of instruction
and teachers in a different way
for native languages.
So from the New Mexico tribal
language consortium we've are in
full support at this memorial as
it underlines as one of our
members said since time
immemorial.
We are in the land were multi
lingual ism has been valued work
cultural diversity has been
valued for centuries and we want
to maintain and keep that going
so thank you for all of you
considering this Joint Memorial
from that perspective and for
honoring all the languages we
have in New Mexico as we are
still very fortunate.
In a different city that we
honor.
Especially in light of what's
happening nationwide.
To dismiss many of the heritage
is that we are thank you very
much to all of you for
supporting this legislation.
Thank
the Tina good morning of up to
two minutes welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Fatima Santa on the education
and training division director
for possible and we fully
support HM three.
And in addition to the
proclamation are we asked to
fully fund bilingual and
multicultural education programs
so that those of us and tribal
education departments can't
implement them effectively and
we ask the state to provide a
system of accountability to
measure whether the programs to
provide every opportunity for
sufficient education and that
they're spending state funds in
a way that effectively meets the
needs of our students
so we ask that you support HM
three thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee all
right thank you.
All right so we'll come back to
committee for some I let's
Representative get.
Thank you Mr chair
when I read the title said
honoring New Mexico's bilingual
multi coach multicultural
Education Act requesting the
governor to proclaim twenty
twenty three is the year of
bilingual multicultural
education when I read the bill
there were twenty one
significant requests and nothing
in the opening paragraph which I
forget what you call that
opening paragraph doesn't state
anything about the fact that
these massive requests are done
and there's no response from the
PED I see that we have a
distinguished representative PED
can I ask of Mr chair for her to
respond to see what PED's
thinking sure if you would.
Thank you for.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee vice chair Garrett
first of all I would say that
all of the provisions that are
in this Joint Memorial or
something that we should be
paying attention to in education
in New Mexico.
I think preservation of culture
and language is of utmost
importance and speaking as a.
As a let the know who never had
an untranslated conversation
with my grandparents who are not
on the loss of language is
severe right.
So I would say fundamentally in
terms of the rights of all of
our children that what we see in
this Joint Memorial is a
critical and.
As you said there's an array of
ways to continue to improve
education in the state of New
Mexico I think we did not do an
official review of this we can
if that is a request of the
committee of.
I I do think that because there
are so many requests that it
could could be important as we
move into the future I know
we're sort of past the deadline
right now for new bills but I
think as we move into the future
we may want to look at areas
where we can have a deeper
impact with the bill that would
concentrate in each of those
areas or or combine a sub group
of those areas.
so with that thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
panel so I have a few specific
questions on page three line
eighteen to twenty three
it says the PED and the director
of language and culture division
be requested to provide a report
to the legislature on how the
requirements of the bilingual
multicultural Education Act are
or not being to fill my reading
of the bill says there's no time
limit given for that actually
the the time limit in the
amendment refers to page seven.
where it says be it resolved
that the public education
department in cultivation with
Advisory Council the requested
to convene a task force to
generate a report to address
specifically the New Mexico LFC
program evaluation that report
is due September first twenty
twenty three but there's no date
as pertaining to a quite a
massive requests as well as
commented on
I think that's needed or it
could be ten years from.
I don't know
that's a question I have and
then let's see.
On page.
Four of this is one example of
actually
Page four lines twelve to
sixteen of resolve that funding
for professional development
time and resources be allocated
for educators to develop a scope
and sequence for bilingual
multicultural education programs
appropriate for the language
being taught I did a bill that.
Twenty minutes before was heard
on the Senate floor call for a
Spanish
Scope and sequence and including
indigenous spoken languages that
are written that never went any
place I don't know if that's
even happening now can you
answer as particularly either
PED or experts can.
Thank you Mr chair by her
parents I do want to say that as
we speak we are how will have a
Spanish language arts
instructional scope if I can
thirtieth there is a group of
educators we put out a call
across the state for educators
who have expertise in the area
of Spanish language arts I think
I believe we had over fifty
applicants and we are now
currently reviewing those they
are scheduled to start in the
next couple of weeks to begin to
write the Spanish language arts
scope in terms of other
indigenous written languages
that is something that we could
definitely consider in
partnership just out of
here due respect for are
sovereign nations and tribes and
pueblos we could consider
partnering and working in those
areas as well but the Spanish
language arts that will be
published probably by the middle
of July.
That's around perhaps offering a
timeline I think it's prudent
of course recognizing that it
was a memorial
obviously what we were thinking
about having we're adding that
degree of specificity but I
definitely value your
recommendation I'd like to add
as well really quickly of it
with your permission just
A lot of the the comments that
were mentioned a little bit
earlier spoke to the notion of
gaps in support over the years
and I I wanna make sure that all
of us are aware of HB four six
four that will be coming up it's
intended to speak to the the
notion of proffer of offering
the and infrastructure
offering
some clarity as a foundation for
many of the things that we've
talked about too often we think
of K. twelve education as just
K. twelve education and R. Ellie
aids our districts and we forget
about the role that our
institutions of higher education
play within that system
and so H. before sixty four is
really speaking to how are local
I. H. she's institutions of
higher education can speak to
many of the gaps that we've
acknowledged all of us today.
Thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
and and we just had a bill to
extend LFC to include higher
education and early childhood so
I guess is my question is if the
memorial and I don't know Mr
chair this is kind of new to me
how.
How directive or need to
accomplish is memorial so
memorials are typically non
binding on Joint Memorial fact
passed through the Senate and
the house typically have a
little bit more weight because
it's both chambers deciding
together on different
initiatives but memorials are
non binding thank you Mr
chairman and because that that's
my concern it's like I read
issue paragraph it's like oh
that's two people
it would take me months just
doing the bilingual coordination
at Wilson middle school to do
this so I think it's a great
list of what has to be done.
And we do have the one date for
what you've identified is very
important the response to the
LFC report so thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Sanchez for bringing this bill
forward it's deeply appreciated
I I just have to recognize the
my grandfather.
Who spoke English Spanish she is
born and raised in Saint John
little now it's only two hundred
population in Clay County he
spoke English Spanish Hopi and
Navajo and that was a traitor it
later on in life in family lore
has it Representative Baca that
he also spoke get H..
USA
he was the the the interpreter
for the state capital during the
session in the thirties and so
he really worked in this around
my neck I was reading this bill
I couldn't help thinking about
my grandfather and what his life
must have been like and I just I
just want to say everything we
can to to New Mexico it with him
when I was I it was a big moment
in my life I've never been away
and I remember him walking along
Syria's Avenue and that was a
dirt road at the time serious in
Saint Francis were still dirt
roads at that time on he we
would go to every house and I
realize later I realized as an
adult he was campaigning but we
we would hit every house and he
would go into and we always went
in the back door and they've
opened the door they say
tackling on the you know we'd
walk in in the they put you know
the lady of the house would put
on a pot of coffee on the stove
and take out the tenant this
cheetahs and and the kids were
sent outside to play and then
he'd get out we'd go to the next
house and and everything was in
Spanish at that time you know it
was all Spanish and I just
remember him leaning down to me
at we're at the corner of
surreal since St Francis at the
time it was the only place in
town one of the few that at a
stop lied again third road still
in those states and he leaned
down to me and he said Susan
remember remember this politics
are not made in the state
capitol there maybe at kitchen
tables.
And I remember that to his to
this day and I just remember we
go out to pueblo communities and
he would he would he was just
this gregarious guy that was
amazing so I fully intend to
support this bill and it brought
back all these memories of being
with my grandfather and and what
New Mexico was like in those
days and it was it was a value
then it's a value now and I will
do everything I can to do to
support these values for the
state of New Mexico thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Mr chair I now move house joint
memorial three.
We move it to do what.
To
To pass as amended all right I
was testing you Mr chair all
right.
I think one all right so we have
a due pass motion on house joint
memorial three as amended second
second by Representative in the
morning is there any objection
to the pass motion I see none.
This has been more thirty here
as amended thank you all and
thank you audience so much for
that.
We will reconvene on Wednesday
everybody so we'll see you
Wednesday thank you.
For those of you in the eyes
that are going to be here would
still see when state I'll feel
better I promise.
I know of.
