Good morning senator Neville
Senate morning or Mr chair is
when you're ready what Mr
chairman I'm gonna let Senator
Stewart go for she has another
committee she needs to get to
and she's actually experienced
education for more than I have
she's a long time educator and
was around during the time when
we have a different set
situation we do now I think it's
speak to that not from the for
her for the initial.
Thank you Sir and of those thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee so.
Representative Trujillo will
recognize this that this joint
resolution of goes to the voters
in twenty four if they approved
it it wouldn't start till twenty
six and what it does is it takes
us back to when we had a
statewide elected partially
elected partially appointed
state school board who would
appoint the superintendent so
for forty years we had three
superintendents we had Leonard
delay Alan Morgan and bill Davis
we had much more consistency
Senator Neville brought this
idea to Senate rules and I
jumped on just hang up I will do
this with you but only if you
change.
The way I want so he finally
went to his colleagues and I
went to mine and what you have
now is a plan that would take
the current Public Education
Commission districts that have
already been redistricted and
starting in twenty six the
twenty six election twenty
twenty six election they would
become state school board
districts instead of Public
Education Commission districts
in addition in the governor
would have I appointees so this
would not begin until the it the
current administration is
finished this would not start
till twenty twenty seven and you
know the idea behind it is
really you can't point to any
governor that's the issue the
issue is the whiplash that
educational community happens
between administrations yield we
recall under governor Martinez a
date change the teacher
valuation considerably and we
had to sue that administration
to stop that valuation from
potentially ruining the lives of
quite a number of teachers so it
was it was based almost solely
on park test scores so that you
remember those days at.
Representative Andrea Romero.
So the idea behind this is to
have those return to a more
stable governing body and of
course it goes to the voters we
don't decide this weeks we sent
it off to the voters so the way
it would work and twenty four
people would decide if they
wanted to go back to the system
then in twenty six the current
PVC districts would become the
state school board districts and
they would be elected in twenty
six but the governor would have.
I appointments and then it would
begin at twenty seven so
I apologize for having to run
off I can I can stay a little
bit more to help senator Neville
but.
This past thirty six to one in
the Senate.
It really was shocking to me
that everyone decided that they
wanted to move forward with this
so Mister chairman I'll turn it
over to my cohort this thank you
Senator this started long long
ago actually in my mind we were
haven't conflicts as she
mentioned during the past
administration we've had a lot
of turmoil in this
administration if we're going to
improve schools are going to be
Martinez Yazzie requirements we
have to have stability in the
only way we're going to get that
is to have a situation where we
have a long term
administration in place that can
actually work to try to to do
the things try out some things
if they don't work we go back we
do something different but we
have to have stability and
that's something that hasn't
happened for the last twenty
this was passed with the current
situation was passed in election
of special election September
the twenty third of two thousand
and three that's an odd time if
you think about September twenty
third not even an election year
I think the voter turnout was
virtually nothing very small and
with numbers or but.
I don't know if that's what the
citizens of the state wanted or
not but we know that we had a
stable system now we've got a
lot of things that have changed
we have this any lawsuit we have
the yes you for Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit we have things that are
in place we know what we gotta
do we got to get to a certain
point the only we're going to be
able to do that is to have some
kind of stability in the and the
key thing is far less politics
we gotta get politics of the
schools and try to make it
something that would the
representative of the
representatives citizens and
their children and get things
done.
That we need to do for education
I'll stand for questions with
that Mr Chairman thank.
Thank you all so much all right
so we'll go to our audience if
you are in opposition to Senate
joint resolution one online if
you would indicate I reason your
hand please on my right hand
side those in opposition to
Senate joint resolution one if
you please indicate there is
your hand if you wish to speak.
Please the other two minutes
welcome Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul from public
schools in New Mexico.
Disagree with the identified
problems we just kind of
question whether we've done
enough thinking to know that
this is the appropriate solution
moving forward we appreciate the
Sanchez they're both long time
influencers and making education
better in the state
the Public Education Commission
is our authorizer and and when
when something this meeting is
going to change that group we
just we just have concerns of
whether we're we're thank you Mr
went off and we would love to
see it go through the process so
we do appreciate the Sanchez but
we also oppose the bill right
others Americans please ma'am
you have a few minutes good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee in an outgoing
executive director New Mexico
kids count
same as Mr Paul we agree that
there has been a lot of
challenging issues through the
public education department over
the last four years and and
maybe even the years before what
we would say is since we change
to the structure and twenty in
two thousand three two of our
cabinet secretaries have served
for seven plus years so we have
had stability within a system as
currently structured by that
election in two thousand three
the turnover is a more recent
issue that again we have three
thousand challenging problematic
and we hope the secretary
designate Romero will help solve
we feel very confident in his
leadership we also agree that
this is a huge change education
in New Mexico and perhaps taking
a step back and letting it
through the alley as the process
through the summer would be
better Path and giving us more
time to really evaluate what the
best governance structure is
moving forward and lastly we
above all also agree that
politics should be out of
education but running ten
elections across the state of
New Mexico that will in many
ways follow what we've seen in
school board elections across
the state and across the country
have become more political more
ugly and cause more chaos.
The local level doing that level
we don't believe is the best way
to remove politics from
education
thank you first place secretary
doesn't any of up to two minutes
welcome thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for having me here today
the secretary of education
doesn't I I just want to put
forward that I would like to be
able to really study this option
moving forward and what what the
path forward is to date three
for me and I want to thank you
all for the warm welcome that
you provided but there's a lot
of work to be done moving
forward there's a huge shift in
the act and my worry here is
that if we go into a different
path is going to become very
difficult because we're gonna
start transition immediately
it'll be hard to be able to move
forward with the the goals I
have for for pandemic so what I
am asking of this committee is
to give me the chance the time
to be able to to right the ship
thank you thank you anybody else
my right hand side opposition
all right left hand side in
opposition please many of a few
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee par Sanchez
president of the national
education association
I want to thank the club for the
we all agree that
That something needs to be fixed
there is something broken you
know I think we all agree that
that every level of education
we've got a revolving door today
that we have even if you're out
of we went of with the
department of cabinet level
secretary who is a qualified
experienced educators that that
hasn't even been true of those
three
Separately you know the previous
secretary of the provision of
the situation was New Mexico's
version of Betsy to boss having
spent one day in the classroom
hadn't spent one day as a
principal or a superintendent or
or or so I think the statute
wasn't even follow.
with the second secretary of
education so we are in the have
come out of a global pandemic
things are very unstable we do
see problems of the two thousand
three constitutional amendment
was to fix a very diffuse
executive branch that that the
number that it diluted the
governor's ability to hold have
accountability for education and
it's that in that accountability
I don't want to go back to the
diffuse of way that we were in
two thousand three what we want
to do what I believe is to force
to more thoroughly look at what
we want to hold to account and I
think we really need to
streamline what we want the
public education department to
do and for this for these
reasons I hope that we would
slow this down and we would
study it for a year Navajos
great thank you ma'am.
All right others in opposition
of my left hand side.
All right we will go to our
audience online so we have Terry
good morning Terry of up to two
minutes welcome.
Well good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee you
know I always difficult for me
to propose legislation with of
legislators who we have worked
so well that over so many years
how are.
Senator Neville and Senator
Stewart is with all respect that
we propose as J. R. one this
morning we believe that putting
a partially or fully elected
group of people in charge of our
state's education system will
result in greater politics not
greater progress all of us can
agree more politics is the last
thing we need an education it's
not a perfect comparison but
let's not forget that we put in
a elector body in charge of
utility regulation and ended up
with a daily cocktail of
dysfunction and poor decision
making and we retreated from
that model in addition lawmakers
are considering bills this
session that deals with the
history of poor governance of
school boards all across the
state we are concerned the same
thing would happen with a state
level school board finally the
number of the Gulf decision
makers and our public education
system is not driving our
students and acceptably low
academic performance we can have
more deck chairs to rearrange
the shift still going missing
unless we become more student
centered and relentlessly
focused on growing high
performing public schools of all
types replicating innovations
and practices that work
requiring every child to read by
the third grade and requiring
the highest level of training
and development of our school
leaders and teachers so Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you for letting
me share these thoughts and with
all due respect we present thank
you very much thank you that is
a good morning of up to two
minutes welcome.
Thank you so much and Mr chair
members of the committee and
thank the sponsors
on.
Standards are I serve on the
Public Education Commission and
fully understand the concerns
that are attempting to be
addressed here but I was stand
in opposition to this resolution
as it is written it appears that
the resolution contemplates the
state school board also take on
the responsibilities of
authorization.
Eliminating the state authorizer
places all fifty seven of our
state authorized charter schools
in a very precarious situation
authorizing so skill set the
takes time and commitment to do
well the Public Education
Commission has engaged in a
continuous improvement process
which helps assure schools have
a constant level of oversight
regardless of who sits on the
commission state the commission
has built relationships with
schools outside of the
traditional accountability
process and offer supports that
respect and protect the autonomy
in schools these relationships
built with schools prioritize
all voices with the goal of
building systems that are
honoring the school's mission
ensuring autonomy and equity the
fifty seven state authorized
schools exist to a contract
signed between the PC and school
and the schools governing body
all state and federal moneys
flow to the schools through that
contract as written in this
resolution all historical
knowledge all expertise in
authorizing will be eliminated
and charters we placed in a very
vulnerable position.
Charter schools are in need of
specialized care and support
because of the nature of the
contracting system there is a
right to the system as it exists
today not all commissioners are
up for re election at the same
time there is a level of
continuity that will be lost
when this board begins and not
only has to navigate oversight
will describe thank you so much
also two minutes thank you.
All right so we will go to
support now support for Senate
joint resolution one if you're
online and support please
indicate by raising your hand on
my right hand side doesn't
support if you please would and
keepers and please Sir you have
a two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee staff around for
the New Mexico college of
education leaders New Mexico
school superintendent I've lived
in both worlds I work for the
state department of education I
serve one of you is a
legislators on the state board
of education I was one of the
people there was a proponent for
the current structure I'm here
to tell you today I was wrong.
The structure doesn't work like
we had designed it you talk
about the volatility in the
problems that are there.
This puts trust back into the
back of the citizens of New
Mexico to feed those voices
along with the governor being
able to point.
third of that membership so that
we can move along as far as the
public education commissions
duties yes of the charters that
would be subsumed in the PED
Ifill technical also most of the
elections are parsed out so they
roll over six year period that
allows a continuation
consistency should PC water run
for this now position which by
the way the PED at the time or
for that because the the report
of the time became the PVC and
then transitioned and so well
that's not the case in this bill
those are the facts we as
superintendents have to have
consistency policy can't change
overnight.
If you want better public
schools we have to have
consistency I want to thank both
of the sponsor for this this is
the right thing to do we stand
of strong support thank you
thank you others please Sir you
have up to two minutes welcome
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Dennis Roch
superintendent of Logan schools
of
but actually want to speak to
from the first person
perspective I actually served on
the Public Education Commission
I thought that was one of the
first elected folks after the
board changed over and we had
zero capacity for in the charter
authorization process zero we we
had no idea it was a brand new
task given to the commission to
brandy Commission
and we learned and we develop
those relationships and it's not
something that is impossible to
do especially if some of the
commission members continue into
the new state board
Representative Trujillo actually
served on the board came and
joined me on the commission in
that process that and we build
capacity very quickly and did a
good job I will also say as a
former member of this body it
it's been interesting to see
over the last few years when a
Republican was in the governor's
seat the Democrats were in favor
of going back to the state for
when a Democrat in the
governor should Republicans were
going back.
That should send a message to
all of that the schools have
been reeling from the policy
swings that happen in the
gubernatorial election change in
the policy perspectives on the
fourth floor have that effect.
School leadership at the local
level is best with there's
continuity to pretend in some
local school boards it will be
the same with continuity of the
state for level superintendents
stand strongly behind this
proposed thank you thank thank
you others in support of my
right hand side please
superintendent welcome you have
up to two minutes morning my
name is that superintendent of
schools in Artesia wanted echo
the comments made by
superintendent Roch but I want a
picture to you guys to picture
the children of being on the
plan by little grandfather clock
swinging back and forth as a
political climate changes across
the nation and we change and
change governors and with the
with the state school board that
that is a much slower process we
have a we have an opportunity to
think about our policies and
think about things just a little
bit longer with the
representative form of
government where our parents and
and our businesses and our
educators can come together with
their elected people and and
have a voice with with education
so right now children are
changing and the staff members
are changing very fast the
grandfather clock as you watch
it's really pretty slow but
right now with the with the way
that it's the structure it's
it's about Shropshire and about
children it's happening way way
way way too fast and gentleman
right here is a secretary to
outstanding educator but we need
to give them the ability to be
more stable instead of getting
an order from the executive and
saying this is what I want to
try in the next I'm getting the
next time you get a government
by the way you know you have
jobs anymore I mean we got to
have stability is about children
and having careful careful
conversation about education
policy thank you thank.
Thank you my left hand side
doesn't support placement
welcome you have up to two
minutes thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee please forgive my
allergies I'd like to leave with
two points and there's been some
excellent comments so far
you know I was plenty of this
PED which isn't called the state
department of education when
this change took place and
working as a deputy under Dr
Steven Sanchez and who okay we
also know all right our new
secretary but one of the things
that I experienced and I'd like
to share with you when there is
a state board the state board
actually meets regularly and as
an employee at the state
department education Dr Sanchez
and I would all right go to
those meetings a lot of the
meetings were very very focused
on making regulations excuse me.
The rule making process which
takes the statutes that you
actually put in place and then
write some regulations for how
PED and the education system
implements those statutes those
are critically important staffs
and influence tremendous numbers
programs how things are done
standards you are right on so in
those meetings the state for
meetings with representatives
from across the state you had
one of my key point to that
issue that will diversity you
have to voice of the communities
to the forces of the school the
teachers they had places.
Making important decisions that
okay.
My second point I think it was
mentioned earlier by Senator and
that is stability all right we
have seen again all right as we
would ministrations community
priorities change expectations
change all right that has a huge
ripple effect across our state
and I know we all care deeply.
Those two minutes thank you so
much others in support of my
left hand side.
All right we have one online.
More information good morning
give up to two minutes all
right.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on merit vacation
and I'm speaking on behalf of
American Association of
university women in the league
of women voters and also from my
experience the of thirty eight
years of teaching and working
with higher ed and with public
education we strongly strongly
support this move and have
several times when this kind of
resolution has come up before
the legislature I'm old enough
to go back to just all Ellen
Ortiz at the capitol and there
been many attempts to return to
the system when the governor
Richards and put is that what
the constitutional language
authorizing the PVC it had much
broader
duties constitutionally that
it's ever been used by statute
Radhika Garcia a good friend and
colleague and she was also felt
marginalized with that with the
kinds of duties that were
assigned to the PC and then the
PC just recently gave up our
voluntarily vocational education
there's a great there are
departments within the PED that
can handle vocational education
and charter school and we we
need to have a strong board were
the only state that does not
have one at and we and we you
know we have to look at the high
performing states and they have
the stability that Senator
Stewart was talking about and
stand around to talking about we
need to go back to a system that
worked and I appreciate
everybody's work on this and we
stand strong support and and
will continue we will help to
get voters to the polls thank
you thank thank you.
All right so that concludes
public comment members question.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you very much Senator for
bringing this I thank you Mr
chair I did serve with Mr
Russian with several people that
were in here today usher and
doggerel as well trying to for
eight years I was an elected
member of the state's school
board.
And I was one of the opponents
of the change that Dr that the
governor Richardson and of the
chamber of commerce had had
initiated because I felt that it
would be too political even more
not to political even more
political than it was there and
Mr rush can can attest to the
fact that we had some very
strong conversations in the in
that committee in the on that
board regarding the direction we
wanted the of public education
in the state of New Mexico to
go.
So I so it was not a proponent
of it initially.
But to pretend that it's not
going to be political is.
Is incorrect it is a very
political position and because
you rejected and and the you do
what your constituents tell you
to do and we face that in that
committee I agree that we need
to have some stability.
There was a lot of stability
when the governor Richardson
first created the board we had a
long term of superintendent of
Veronica Garcia that serve their
it is changed.
A often since then but not
because.
Not because of the
superintendents that served its
or the directors that have
served just because of the the
leadership and they're going to
have we're gonna have the same
instability with the of the
board of directors
that appoints and directs the.
The the board the board that
directs the superintendent so at
this point in time Mr chairman I
think this is change for change
sake because right now people
are uncomfortable and a feeling.
And feeling frustrated because
we've gone through enough people
but I truly believe that we you
know the the preceding board Sir
for forty years this is been
twenty.
I think that we have an
opportunity stabilize it and
and.
I oppose this bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman if you're ready I
moved to pass all right so we
have a two passed motion we do
have further discussions older
representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator what can you explain to
me what would be the role of PED
and this new format.
Mr Chairman representative PED
would continue I won't say
exactly the same but they would
move over under different type
of administration that would be
the key thing it would this is
going to take about four years
for us just if the vote happens
in eighteen months and then
another two years have another
election so it's going to be a
long time getting in place so
we're gonna have to do some
a qualifying legislation and so
forth in between probably we
could even start with some
some preliminary subject to kind
of legislation at the next
session if we wanted to do that
but we if this passes in the
next general election we would
then know what to we need to do
as far as setting up the the
operation of of the way this is
going to work but the way I see
it is that PED would just to
more or less change under a
different administration as
opposed to the initially they
wouldn't go away that would
change that stay in the same.
Function then as the new
superintendent comes on board
and start figure out here she
wants to to do what direction
should they want to take as far
as sitting at school policies so
forth then that would certainly
start to be some evolution with
take place this isn't a new idea
this is been proposed I I don't
know how many different attempts
have been made by Senator
Padilla mentioned in discussions
of our debate on the floor that
he proposed more than one and I
don't know who also on it but I
know that there's been any
number of attempts to try to go
back to the old system or not in
the service sector the oil
system or something similar just
because of all the turmoil that
we've had.
I'll give the governor
Richardson a lot of credit his
first secretary of education
stayed there the whole eight
years and that's but that's the
last time that's the last time
that's happened and he probably
felt making he needed to make
sure that his idea was was going
to be valid and he tried to keep
that position stable but that
hasn't happened you know there's
a if I might continue there's an
old joke we all share thank god
for Mississippi is everybody
heard that because New Mexico
was always just a notch above
Mississippi you know where
Mississippi is today.
They're about twenty fifth in
the country you know why they're
twenty fifth stability they
didn't set up this exact system
but they set up a system very
similar with the state school
board state superintendent and
that person is been there
something like twelve years and
they reverse the whole situation
specific has a lot of the same
problems with if the ethnic
diversity and all of their
poverty and some things that we
do but they've managed to revamp
and rebuild our whole system
because of stability somebody
mentioned that to school
districts that are stable we've
got in my County we have very
stable school districts
Representative Lane served on
school board and as to same
superintendent for however long
and a long time same
superintendent Farmington for
long periods of time in the
their predecessors were all long
periods you have good schools
and you have that we would have
a good states school system if
we can try to get some stability
and it
a lot of reasons but
Both will a couple things I want
to mention all of the on a roll
here staggered terms we're gonna
have six year terms but they're
gonna be staggered two years
with with the the draw of lots
or something for the first run
the ones the governor appoints
also staggered.
Removal for cause how many times
have we had to change university
presidents this boards of
regents are stable they get
appointed by the whatever the
governor's currently is they
can't be removed except for
stealing money or something like
that so they stay there they
work on
making their school better
rarely do they change the
president of the president
retired detection of the job we
don't have the turnover in the
turmoil in our universities
again because of stable system.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator you know I was around
when we haven't the elected
board to and
I think that was very political
I remember It is being very
political I remember those
selections being very political
in our district and I don't
think our.
I school district was in turmoil
at the time to has and so is our
board I I think I think we have
two thirds of our
superintendents are brand new
this year so I think I think we
can work with somehow school
boards and superintendents so
that we can build stability at
the schools and that that matter
is a you know I agree I agree
leadership matters and and
stability matters but I think it
matters more at the local level
frankly than it does at nine
hundred I think that's our big
problem in the status is huge
turnover of superintendents and
and and school board so I.
I have reservations about this
bill because I don't think it's
the answer that's going to solve
it I think we put a lot of
things in place I think it's
going to take five years to see
those changes take place at this
this members of this body have
put together like like good
salaries for teachers and
educational assistants and all
of those things that we have
tried to do to you know we
really basically gave education
pretty much what they ask for so
now it's but they've got a
produce now it's their turn for
both school boards and
superintendents to come forward
and and implement these changes
and make them happen in a
meaningful way so I.
I I have lived under at two of
the systems to and I everybody
I've ever known that's worked
for PDS hated and I'm just
telling you I I don't know what
they put in the water over
there.
Under Republican Democrat it's
just true so I'm I'm I'm I maybe
we need more time in the interim
to look at this because we
really haven't talked about it
that much but I'm gonna tell you
I.
I think it is change for change
six I don't think I may madam
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator for bringing the bill
forward I'm actually quite
excited about it of.
already we elect the ten people
for the Public Education
Commission so there's no change
in the election part correct he
would stay the same other than
we make them staggered terms and
six year terms again a
I don't see this I think
Democrats want to have good
schools just as bad as
Republicans to so I'm not
particularly concerned about the
partisanship role that will have
some of come from Republican
districts some for Democrat
district I'm not worried about
that they're going to be on
there for a long period of time
six years is a long term and
they will be able to work with
the appointed who are also six
year terms nobody can just come
and go back at the whim of the
governor that's that's one of
the things I think it's crucial
that I think we need to try to
to mitigate again I'll give
credit to the governor
Richardson but since then it is
been turmoil and.
Mr rounds might have some
additional comments but I think
the turnover and superintendents
or mentioned can be equated
somewhat back to and I won't
speak I'm not an educator or
superintendent but he may want
to have some comment if you want
to ask you about trying to
stabilize PED and what goes on
and and the turmoil that this
are superintendents are met
administrations have to deal
with as far as what direction
we're taking and so forth but.
In and Mister chairman Senator
The governor still gets the
influence because the governor
is appointing I and I note.
In the bill that there's certain
things you can't a point
everybody from the same party
one person has to represent
tribal concerns so even the
governor is appointing there's
some guardrails in place
and then I just want to say Mr
chair education is political it
doesn't matter how we organize
it it is political
and that is in the best sense
and sometimes percent.
So let's see and and the other
concern I have Mr chair is when
the change happened
I was a little disturbed that
some of the Public Education
Commission with limited
basically to do charter work and
it seems to me that that can
continue it's not going to go
away it'll continue with that
expertise and that role which it
has now so and I can Mr chair
Senator I have to say my
personal policy is one of the
sponsors of to modernization
bills that are constitutional
amendment is I feel things need
to go to the people and so I
can't be hypocritical I what my
bills to go to the people I'd
like to see this bill go to
people so thank you for bringing
forward correct thank you.
All right so there aren't any
other questions I just want to
make a quick statement about
this is that you know we've
heard comment that you know
change doesn't happen at the top
of the top level of
administration doesn't matter
but all can you come back to
when I first took the
chairmanship of this committee
and we had a new administration
is that we overhauled the
evaluation system there was a
school grading just to name two
of them on the and not only did
I serve in this capacity but as
a teacher going through the
systems and that whiplash Israel
having to go through a new
evaluation system how are
schools are assessed very much
comes from the top level and
filters down to what we're doing
at the school level and I think
that's important to keep in mind
because I think in this case
stability at our schools at all
levels is crucial not just up at
the top up at the top through
the middle in our school
districts I also amongst our
color to school principals
teachers stability is important
everywhere so I appreciate you
all bring this forward and
working on it I did have to pass
a motion by Representative
Chatfield the second second by
Representative a more as a
critical role on the defense
motion please.
Representative Baca yes
Representative Chatfield yes
Representative is up yes
Representative corolla.
Yes.
Representative Herrerra.
No.
Representative Lane yes
Representative Lara
Representative Madrid is.
Representative more about
million yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
Representative Trujillo no.
Representative Garrett yes Mr
Chairman yes and the two right
you have a to pass and.
Six two two.
Negative.
Yes thank you.
Yes.
Thank.
All right so we have Senate bill
three eighty three so I think
that's Representative Sarinana
we.
we do have a student yes I see
them posing thereafter so are
deputy secretary of elite State.
And son I believe.
All right hi Atticus welcome to
health education.
I
appreciate the matching gray
suits almost.
Almost.
All right representative.
Of the fun part here
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm here to
present Senate bill three eighty
three the public education
background check in the expert
is Greg frosted from PED
secretary this.
Are you ready we are okay okay
this bill is Mr chairman this
bill is to address the situation
we have in PED the FBI has
notified PED that the current
state law is not in compliance
with federal requirements for
background checks in their
change to kind criminal history
record checks that's what they
refer to the bill this bill is
intended to bring New Mexico
into compliance with public law
ninety two dash five four four
which authorizes the FBI to
exchange criminal history record
information with officials of
state government agencies for
licensing and employment
purposes.
Only the state statute which has
been approved by the Attorney
General United States can
authorize these procedures and
PED has received a waiver from
the FBI to continue background
checks through June of twenty
twenty three so it's really
imperative we get this past PED
has worked with the FBI and the
department of public safety to
ensure that current versions of
the bill meet federal and state
requirements.
The bill would amend the school
personnel act to clarify and
expand the types of school
personnel who are required to
have a criminal history record
check currently the P. PDD PS of
and if we are required to
conduct criminal history record
checks for all applicants for
licensure teachers volunteers
and contractors and expansion
for background checks falls
under the instructional support
provider license which includes
and these people I haven't
really heard of attendance
coaches some of them practical
practical nurses health school
health assistant school business
officials rehabilitation
counselors athletic coaches
educational alcohol and drug
abuse counselors and substance
abuse associates they would need
to get background checks now the
bill would prohibit PD from
excluding any otherwise
qualified person from light from
licensure solely based on
previous arrests or convictions
unless the person has a
qualified criminal conviction.
The criminal history information
received by DPS and F. and the
FBI is confidential and there's
no appropriation for this bill.
And with that I will defer to my
expert witness Mr fost thank you
very much Mr chair and
representative and members of
the committee the only thing
that that was a great
introduction to the bill the
only thing I would add is that
the it is required in state
statute that we have a
background check before we can
issue a license so if we aren't
if if this doesn't get fixed at
FBI Holzer ground starting in
July we the agency would be
unable to issue licenses.
Thank you all right so we'll go
to opposition online if you're
in opposition to Senate bill
three eighty three please
indicate there is here and.
Those in our audience in
opposition please raise your
hand.
All right so we'll go to support
is there support for Senate bill
three eighty three.
All right so we'll go online
first so we have Meredith since
you waited so patiently on the
last one.
Good morning Meredith you have
up to two minutes apart
I.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think this is a
crucially important bill and
should be an emergency bill if
it's not I'm sorry I don't
remember because wait until July
first is is not going to be
acceptable even though most
schools are out for the month of
June I have to I don't want to
tell you the stories of people
that I have hired as teachers
who have had criminal background
problems and we never knew about
until read about something in
the paper and we have to protect
our students and I eight thank
you very much for bringing this
to our attention I'm sorry we've
been on waiver I didn't realize
that we need to be in compliance
with federal law and I speak on
behalf of the legal rural voters
New Mexico the Merrick
association of university women
and thank you very much
thank you.
All right so.
In the room please see of up to
two minutes.
Can't stand around in the
superintendents and themselves
this is an important part of the
fabric that we hire folks the
FBI through all of those you're
faxing it in this bill we
appreciate that I know Mr
chairman Representative Baca in
your day job this is she is
really critical to getting
through our candidacy and
getting things done so we urge
you to vote in favor of this we
can right the ship here and
continue with business as we
need to thank you right thank
you on my left hand side doesn't
support.
Okay welcome to committee
representative please.
Thank you Mr chair I think of.
My question is been after so I'm
going to make it in the form of
a statement I believe this bill
just helps to stay the line
policy with F. B. I.
requirements in our sport bill.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman I do think that.
By Representative that went to
Representative.
She vocalized and shows I think
there are a double hi is there
any opposition to the past
motion any other comment anybody
all right Representative.
I just have one coming did you
say there was an emergency or
there is an emergency clause
here no we might want to just do
it but do those states comp
conflicted sounded like when
does it end when does the FBI
June thirtieth of twenty twenty
three on this goes into effect
July thirtieth I guess we're
first I guess for we're good.
Right.
So any okay nothing if you press
Senate bill three eighty eight
thank you.
All right House memorial forty
four.
Representative Lujan.
Good morning Mr chair morning
committee members to be in front
of you it's my first time this.
Session being.
Education so today
I'm presenting House memorial
forty four and
My guest would like to introduce
herself I think we all know her
but hi Bridget Condon with the
legislative education study
committee good morning chairman
and members right so House
memorial forty four requests the
Public Education Department to
convene a task force to analyze
and evaluate adequacy of the
current grant funding to hire a
full time school based community
schools coordinator and support
high quality implementation of
the community schools strategy
of study or evaluate the effect
of the lack of recurring state
funding on the sustainability of
community schools and their
initiatives and the need for
indicators of high quality
community schools including
implementation of a
certification program for
eligibility for annual funding
and it also to analyze and
evaluate the cost of return on
investment to the state of
supporting and funding community
schools and we already know the
return on investment with our
community schools and some of
that information comes the
finance project in the national
center for community schools
that show a social return of ten
to fourteen dollars for each
dollar invested in community
schools so we feel like this is
a worthwhile study and getting
getting back information to see
how we can better fund our
community schools and get that
that the return on investment Mr
chair with that we will stand
for questions right in the room
is our opposition to our house
memorial.
Right online.
Support the House memorial.
Your online please indicators
please Sir we'll go to our room.
Dale Stanley superintendents.
Community schools becoming more
more part of the fabric I we
help the children and their
parents.
this deserves study we hope will
be part of the study group of
the education standing committee
that's the right way ladies and
gentlemen of of this committee
for us to conduct business the
LFC is your arm the allows us to
do comprehensive study in areas
that matter we respect that we
appreciate that in all things we
suggest that that's what's
happening here source stand in
full support thank you.
Great thank you others for
placer.
Chairman of the members of the
committee to be in with the New
Mexico school boards association
are up organization has endorsed
community schools as a very high
priority projects anything we
can do to expand and remove any
barriers to participation also
by providing additional funding
support thank you thank anybody
else in the room support.
All right online Meredith.
Three for three estimates.
Mr Chairman the committee I'm
more information I'm speaking on
behalf of the league of women
voters of New Mexico and the
American Association of
university women and we are very
very pleased with our community
schools we've been advocating
for funding for them and this is
just a very important step
to make sure that they're
performing at the top level and
hopefully we can expand them
across the state thank you very
much to the Sanchez thank you.
Ruth good morning Ruth you have
up to two minutes.
Chairman members of the
committee on Ruth Williams chief
of staff for the Santa Fe public
schools are district distance
local support of house memorial
forty four and we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward it is critical for
community schools in New Mexico
to continue to grow and flourish
sufficient funding for community
school coordinators after state
funding expires are critical
needs this study proposes this
memorial will look at
sustainable funding and result
in strengthening community
schools which are tremendous
benefit to our district in the
state we are need to pass this
memorial.
Thank.
Thank you.
All right so good for committee
Representative Ezzell please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank you Representative for
being here misconduct at can you
tell me what the difference
specifically is between the
community schools and
distributional school that we
have in our state's right now.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I appreciate the question I'm
gonna support to Bridget to
respond Chairman representative
of these out a community schools
have four pillars when this
legislation was first introduced
of how they're trying to help
engage with students and provide
family supports we have now on a
national level seen that move to
six different pillars are sort
of key areas and so we know
currently the PED when schools
are applying they are doing
specific training for principals
for schools are asking for
indicators and really that
bigger pieces that community
input so they're working with
stakeholders building
relationships and purposefully
engaging with the community in a
way to find the support students
today thank you very much for
that response Mr chairman.
And Representative misconduct
hello
In the.
Memorial on page two line
seventeen the states are
currently more than one hundred
community schools and sixteen
school districts across the
state.
Mr Chairman representative to
do you have any information on
where the majority of these one
hundred community schools are
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for the
question right now we have sixty
nine school community schools at
present we're looking to build
currently to get two hundred
schools but as far as the
geographic range I'm gonna let.
Chairman representative he's
also we do see them across the
state for example you have three
schools that are in Travis
county and those are across some
of the different grant
implementation you have an
planning grant a first year and
then a further a second or third
year school that's there with
there is actually there's
stopped really all across the
state I think that is again the
purpose I know during LFC is
meeting down in hatch over the
interim superintendent Dempsey
said that he believes that
within gaps and school districts
they have what would be
considered community schools
that have not yet fallen under
the classification so part of
this memorial the purposes to
identify other schools that
might be performing similar
things that community schools do
but creating a unified
clarification of what is a
community school and then
rewarding those schools who do
qualify under the six pillars
with funding from the state
thank you very much for that
response that's all Mr chair I
thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I would I would
argue that all of our rural
school this schools are really
community schools they just
haven't gotten the funding I
want to say that's another thing
on my list of things to do is to
make sure we reach out to the
school this my school districts
and those principles especially
and them and them the parents of
those schools so that we get
them put into this category
because they really do serve the
whole family it's the it's kind
of the only center and some
little rural places and and if
we can get so I appreciate this
bill I supported this bill
obviously so we can so we can
move forward and helping rural
districts understand what this
can bring to their community
because I think it's it's really
just all things good thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative for hearing this
bill thank you Mr Mr chair I
move that to pass right we have
a due pass motion by
Representative Garrett a second
by Representative Ezzell is
there any opposition to the path
all right.
Seventy five.
That includes our meeting for
member their breakfast burritos
