To that point in the session
where we have multiple
obligations
For better or for worse so with
that being said good morning
Representative sorry no no we
are in house bill one eighty
eight secondary computer science
teacher Weiss and morning
Representative welcome back
thank you good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's like I never
leave this committee and I don't
know but
I am Representative Debbie
Syriana and I'm here to present
house bill one eighty eight and
my expert witness today is Page
Prescott executive director of
New Mexico computer science
alliance
The purpose of house bill one
eighty eight required PED to
create a license endorsement in
secondary computer science
available to all teachers who
hold a valid license and
demonstrate significant content
knowledge in computer science by
December thirty first twenty
twenty one it requires PED to
consult computer science
education experts with the
experience in creating or
supporting computer science
endorsement pathways in the bill
allows PED flexibility to
determine the significant
significance.
content knowledge or sufficient
content knowledge so I was ready
for this have been talking all
morning it has a one hundred
fifty thousand dollars
appropriation.
And this bill will help us get
teachers endorsed in computer
science and I'm endorsed for
those of you who aren't teachers
I'm endorsed in secondary math
science and social studies and
secondary means seven through
twelfth grade and an indoor
cement is attached with T. C.
teaching license to specify the
teaching field in which a
teacher may teach as authorized
by PED.
In a little background with this
over the last three years New
Mexico has taken significant
steps to achieve greater access
to computer science education
across the state in order to
increase equity and provide
consistency in content for
students and educators across
our state teachers and school
administrators have asked for
specific computer science
endorsement to add to their
existing licenses this bill will
lead to the creation of the
necessary standards and
competencies teachers need to
teach computer science courses
at the secondary level.
And a little history on this
bill in twenty eighteen to PED
adopted the computer K. to
twelfth computer science
standards so we have to start
standards we need more courses
and many teachers endorsed
in twenty nineteen we we got
funding for professional help
development for teachers in the
twenty eighteen twenty nineteen
school year only twenty three
percent of our public high
schools tied a single computer
science course in twenty
nineteen twenty twenty it went
up to thirty two percent this
year we're hoping it goes it's
it should be about forty four
percent and by next year we're
looking at fifty percent but we
do need our teachers and
divorced in this and teachers
are reporting hesitancy to come
commit to teaching computer
science because there's no
existing endorsement pathway.
yes our computer science
computer science jobs among the
highest wage and price demand in
our state.
And
With that Mr chairman I'd like
to the point my expert witness
for additional comments.
Please welcome good morning.
Good morning thank you chairman
Romero and members of the
committee and especially I'd
like to recognize Representative
setting out of for being a
champion of computer science
education for New Mexico
students I'm page press guide I
am past president of the
computer science teachers
association of New Mexico and
currently the executive director
of computer science a lion's
we've spent the past three years
at reading teacher professional
development workshops in
computer science we've trained
over one thousand of our New
Mexico teachers to bring this
content to their students Kate
through twelve this bill is
focusing in on the high school
endorsement or the secondary
excuse me endorsement one of the
things that we consistently hear
through our teachers is
questions around what can I do
you know what is the endorsement
how do I teach computer science
and although the PED's through
the career college readiness
bureau has done a good job of
you know in the course code in
the Star codes and and
indicating some of the of
licensure is it still is unclear
because there are many different
Is sort of at it it's just
confusing to not have a specific
computer science endorsement and
so that's what we're advocating
for this bill is also is it was
a big part of the conversation
we headed up the computer
science education task force
that just finished a draft plan
that was delivered to the PED
and one of the parts of the that
plan which we hope to debut
debut soon
focused on the teacher pipeline
and the fact that there is such
confusion around the endorsement
or who can teach what course so
by having an endorsement we can
Just to clarify this for our
teachers as well as
administrator so that they're
not hesitant to bring this to
their students and to create
courses at their schools
we are seeing that there is more
and more interest from our
students to take these high
quality courses and that there
are career technical lead
pathways that are being
developed
and so we just need to support
our teachers to give them
clarity about how to gain an
endorsement and how to teach a
computer science course in
middle school and high school
and so having that endorsement
having the competencies.
Clearly defined a is what we are
asking
for this bill so thank you very
much and I will be here for any
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman chair we
stand for questions thank you
very much.
Thank you so we will go to the
audience so is there preemptive
hands up I'm going to put hands
down on those of you that are in
support of house bill one eighty
eight please raise your hand if
you wish to speak please be
brief but you'll have up to two
minutes and please do not repeat
people that came before you all
right Roy.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman can you
hear me thanks again okay good
but Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roy Soto
and I'm a lobbyist for Microsoft
Corp oration I'm also the former
cabinet secretary for department
of information technology.
Microsoft is many of you know
continues to support and partner
with nonprofits governments and
educators businesses to ensure
that all students have access to
additional digital skills
training and includes of
computer science skills today
I'm here to express Microsoft
very strong support for H. B.
one eighty eight which would
provide the endorsement pathway
for teachers in computer science
by adding this computer science
licensed indoor indoor spent we
would increase the number of
teachers with computer science
backgrounds and interests and
more importantly Mr chairman
members the committee will
provide our students with
another tool to meet the
challenges of the future as many
of us to know I was watching
earlier having challenges with
what we do with that we would
also like to Mr chair bank of
Representative sorry on a and
the Senator Candelaria for their
continued advocacy in making
computer science available to
all our students across the
state currently ranked at the
bottom of computer science the
teaching in schools across the
nation and there are we just
want to thank both of them for
trying to get the New Mexico
higher up thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Right thank you.
All right we'll go to stand
around.
Good morning yep up to two
minutes Sir good morning Mr
chairman members the committee
stand rounds for the school
superintendents and the
education leaders in New Mexico
we generally support this bill
well we would wish that its
scope eventually would include
all teachers are we believe that
perhaps it might in fact take a
direction as we have done in
bilingual education where you
have a bilingual endorsement and
then eight illustrious ready T.
solemn doors front page indicate
strategies used in classrooms
but we think there is our skill
sets a teacher today need we
would love to have an
opportunity to be part of the of
the work on this over the next
year should this be successful
Mr chair thank you great thank
you.
All right so we'll go to be
Smith.
Mister Smith if you would please
make sure next time if you wish
to speak you need to put your
first name
I'm sorry this is just my my
default zoom setting so at at
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
if there is any noises online
that's Milo
And I'm a computer science
teacher at Santa Fe high school
and I'm speaking to support for
creating this endorsement right
now we have a a patchwork of you
know some math endorsement some
science endorsements actually
very hard for people to figure
out what they need to do in
order to be able to teach
computer science as has been
mentioned we have a shortage of
computer science teachers in New
Mexico and it one way that we
could help support that by
creating to to get more computer
science teachers is to create
this endorsement so that folks
who would like to come over from
industry people who have
experience with computer science
could apply directly for
computer science endorsement
instead of having to try to
other eight a math or science
in.
Course work that they took hello
you.
Hello hello.
Yes.
Sorry.
Somebody was unmuted okay and so
and I think that I I strongly
support creating this
endorsement not only for folks
who are are currently teaching
computer science to give them
more clarity in terms of their
licensure but to also make it
easier for other people who are
not currently teachers to to
come over and be computer
science teachers based on their
their work experience or even
their licensure experience in
other states there are other
states that already have a
computer science endorsement and
it would make it much easier for
those folks to bring their
endorsement of the state as well
thank you.
Great thank you.
Soon go to.
And.
Keep jumping up and how to.
Good morning you have up to two
minutes the morning in a chair
there's nothing else on the
register lobbyist with the New
Mexico technology council we
stand strong support of this led
peace legislation you know the
New Mexico technology council
and and the technology industry
really uniquely sits at the
intersection of innovation
education and economic growth of
the tech council supports
policies that expand lifelong
education in computer sciences
and promote is kids what
workforce that meets the needs
of growth and solidifies our
ability to compete globally and
and thank Representative
Sariñana for her continued work
on this and really over the last
several three four years really
being deliberate about building
the teacher pipeline about
building the way she's on the
computer science New Mexico so
we stand it's transport thank
you right thank you.
All right actually.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee actually along
with the American federation of
teachers New Mexico and we
support the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Alexis good morning.
Good morning Mr chair you know
the lax's note that here again I
am the director of state
government appears for co dot
org we stand in strong support
of this bill I oversee computer
science advocacy and policy
across the southwest and western
United States and we believe New
Mexico has an incredible
opportunity to become a national
leader in this space we've seen
tremendous progress over the
last two years thanks in large
part to at champions like
Representative setting and that
and Senator Candelaria and we
look forward to continuing to
support our New Mexico champions
on this bill it was many of the
points been already mentioned
the only piece I would like to
just reiterate or add I I would
say is there is a strong equity
component that needs to be
discussed as part of this bill
unfortunately we see that the
offerings of computer science
tend to favor schools that have
higher incomes schools that are
in suburban communities and less
so in rural native American and
Latino communities and with this
I endorsement license we we
believe that there will be the
opportunity to put these equity
gaps by providing teachers with
the greater content knowledge
and understanding and competence
to teach the course thank you so
much for having me thank you.
All right.
Michelle please be brief you
have up to two minutes.
Your muted Michelle.
Michelle you were having trouble
with your audio you're fading in
and out.
Okay.
Can you hear me now there you
have a wonderful good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Michelle
Cruz Arnold and I serve as the
executive director for
government relations for the
College Board we stand in strong
support of house bill eighty at
one eighty eight I will repeat
what anyone else to say but I
will note that.
The pandemic has highlighted our
society's reliance on computing
yet at the same time has
surfaced to greater disparities
for students studying computer
science.
At New Mexico students are
unable to access computer
science courses without
qualified teachers to teach them
without clear standards to drive
their studies and without
pathways to teach these courses
to that end this bill is a great
step in the direction to connect
New Mexico students and teachers
to computer science courses
thanks so much for your
consideration.
Thank you.
All right.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chair Ellen
burns Steen president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
I stand in support of the bill
and I think the sponsor for
bringing it forward
since I was a young teacher
getting involved in my union the
Albuquerque teachers federation
has been an advocate for
creating a professional
standards board so that we could
move away from our very general
credentialing system and make
sure that we have people who are
actually credentialed in the
subject that they teach teaching
students to that end I think it
endorsements as well as micro
micro credentials in many
different areas will help to
increase standards in our
profession and build a career
ladder for all of us to make
sure that we can get the
credentialing we need have the
appropriate
Endorsements and build our
careers as well as our ability
to teach students I think this
is a great compliment to house
bill eighty three so that we
have many choices for our
students as they pick their path
through high school thank you
very much right thank you.
We'll go to Reina.
Good morning.
We can.
Everyone thank you very much for
letting me speak I am the
secretary of the computer
science teachers association of
New Mexico and I've been
involved in computer science
outreach education for six
years.
our mission for the CSTA New
Mexico support teachers and
bringing computer science to
their students and providing
these equity opportunities
across the state so this bill
would really help the teachers
that are looking to basically
move up in their current studies
we've done professional
development workshops in Los
crucis for the past six years
and all of those teachers say
they have brought their desire
to teach computer science to
those workshops with very little
reward other than their own
learning and what they can take
back to their classrooms but a
lot of our computer science
teachers you get pulled off to
teach other subject.
This is sort of first and
foremost in people's thoughts
because it does central skilled
in computer science and
computational thinking we also I
just want to say eight or four
hundred people in Irma's serve
so all those one hundred.
Or just and Peter science field
and teaching computer science to
their students so this yesterday
New Mexico would just like to
endorse this bill thank you very
much great thank you.
All right Steve.
Morning Steve.
Good morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee on Stacey on is
government relations director
for any New Mexico I'm gonna be
brief on behalf of our members
we support this bill and thank
the Representative for bringing
this legislation for we do have
a concern around the issue of
equity and we ask that this
issue be addressed as to this
bill continues and hopefully
becomes law that said thank you
very much.
Great thank you.
All right Willie Mae good
morning.
Morning Mr chairman of pleasure
to see you be with the committee
again thank you I'm of the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
of the New Mexico school board
association maintains a
membership of eighty nine school
districts throughout the state
of New Mexico with four hundred
fifty strong school board
members Mr chair for many of the
reasons that have already been
stated we support this piece of
legislation and we especially
appreciate the attached
appropriations and we ask the
committee to favourably consider
this and we thank the sponsors
thank you Mr chairman right
thank you.
All right.
Matt good morning.
By Mister chairman can you hear
me we can thank you this is
Matthew then yes registered
lobbyist with University of New
Mexico we want to thank the
sponsor for continuing this
effort to bring this bill
forward and we stand and support
thank you very much great thank
you.
All right so we don't have any
other attendees and support so
we'll go to opposition is our
opposition to house bill one
eighty eight.
All right seeing none will come
to committee first on my list
Representative Williams
Stapleton are you with us.
Okay.
Okay place.
Mr chair representative
Sarinana.
Warning.
I
Question about your bill I'm
maybe PED might be have the
answer.
the appropriation four hundred
and fifty thousand dollars.
To create the licensing dos
then.
I'm wondering why it would cost
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and what is entailed in
creating this endorsement for
that amount of money.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
and Representative I would like
to add that on to my expert
witness or someone PED if
they're here.
If somebody is PED on the list I
see Mr Santa.
Pluck you out of the crowd Mr
Santa.
Mr Senator with you hear the
question Mr chair on I can us.
I did I did Mr chair thanks
So it does.
Sure
part of this would just be
establishing opted tendencies
for this particular
License.
We appreciate the appropriation
speak directly to what it would
pay for.
so we're having a hard time
hearing you John I think you'd
mentioned that it would go
toward creating the
competencies.
that's that's right Mr chair I'm
sorry my my internet connections
acting up this morning I know
you're good.
So if that captures it
Representative Stapleton.
For further questions Mr
chairman
We already have our teachers
teach in.
Popular science so are we saying
Mr chair representative seven
Adam is to send out that the
competencies I'm not already
established.
I have many teachers teach in
computer science.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
you're right that there are
teachers teaching computer
science obviously those teachers
don't currently have an
endorsements because one is not
exist those are teachers are
usually licensed in math or
science.
And so we would we would creates
computer science license
specific competencies for those
teachers that might.
C. disbursement.
Okay thank you very much thank
you Representative and thank you
Mr chairman.
Right thank you representative
next on the list is
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair my question
was answered.
All right thank you
representative Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill.
Well all of our computer science
experts are on the line you know
COVID has shown us that the
positive thing that issue it has
shown us is that we can create
consortium online so in dealing
with equity where maybe it's a
small school or large screen
does not have a computer science
teacher I would just hope to see
this developed into some sort of
situation where a student going
to school with maybe eleven kids
could access this course so
that's just something I'll be
watching thank you so much Mr
chair and representative.
Great thank you are there
further questions from our
community.
Mr chairman second.
was that what you're going for
representative Lente did you
have a question okay
so we have a due pass motion by
Representative Williams
Stapleton I couldn't hear the
smattering of seconds.
Mr chair Christine out great
thank you Representative
Trujillo
I would just like to say and and
before I accept the motion is is
Representative Sarnia and I
think the the audience captured
it well is that I think you're
you're you're really building
computer science in in the state
and I think that's a wonderful
thing to see I think you have
another bill that is you know
requiring the the courses and I
think that
if we get this part done and
done well that the logical next
step is
having it available and and I
think as an option for students
to take currently in house bill
eighty three it's as an option
for their for their Matt credit
but I think if we build that up
it's certainly a viable option
for school districts to really
utilize and take advantage of
and I think as Representative
Garrett pointed out I think not
only does our current situation
Wind itself especially to the
need of something white computer
science when we're navigating
this digital world which I think
a lot of the skills that we I
think collectively as
legislators are learning
navigating this field
will prove beneficial for for
our students and and certainly
with the students that I teach
expanded tremendously helpful
because you know where they may
be proficient in opening apps
downloading apps and things like
that they were necessarily
computer literate and I think
this will go a long way in
ensuring that for students and
beyond computer literacy in
being able to to
Really utilize the technology
for for what they see fit for
their future site thank you for
bringing this forward but with
that madam secretary if you call
the roll on a do pass motion for
house bill one eighty eight
please.
And when they are muted.
Thank thank you representative
Representative Baldonado yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Daryl yes.
Representative is now yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid at.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
The robot provided all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Swetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes.
Fifteen two zero.
All right so you have the
unanimous do pass on house bill
one eighty eight thank you
representative.
Chair and and and committee
thank you.
All right.
So we will go to
we'll start going almost in
order house bill one sixteen I
see representative Thompson and
Mr get together.
See Sir president of Thompson.
For bringing her on board all
right Representative Thomson did
you have an expert they need to
promote.
Mr was called you Mr speaker Mr
chair no it's just me all right.
Well.
We'll give everybody a second to
open up the file and share file.
Service wait time.
And Wall our bills being
considered member one other
thing
That if you could can you change
so that Representative
There is co host and bills being
considered is not.
Thank you may have just split
the computers over.
Thank you.
I noticed that it.
Teachers see all okay
Representative Thomson please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so this is a
fairly simple bill house bill
one sixteen I'm.
To correct what I think was a
mistake back in two thousand
three when the three tier system
first came in and what the issue
is is that it left out a whole
big swap of professionals who
who help our kids most mostly in
special education people like
occupational therapists speech
and language pathologist
audiologist social workers those
kind of people so so that's
actually was my first part of my
first introduction to
advocacy wasn was trying to get
that are included in that bill
and I am retired from that so it
this it affects me in no way but
for seventeen years I have been
trying to get this to happen so
so the issue is not what when
people are hired because
generally you cannot hire a
physical therapist for forty
thousand dollars I mean that
that it just won't happen so
it's not so much about the
minimums but what I've seen
happen during my time
particularly on probation is
when there would be discussion
of a raise for educators I would
say good you know my my my my
special people are going to get
a ring is that people in the
appropriators would think now we
need teachers so what's happened
is that teachers would get a
three percent raise we are
speech and language pathologist
who works at side by side in the
same classroom would get a one
percent raise so all this is
trying to do is to put those
what we decided to call duly
licensed professional so you
have to have a license as an
occupational therapist and then
your your teachers like license
so essentially and I do have an
amendment Mr chair
And I don't and unfortunately my
printer cut off the two oh two
number but there should be only
one Mr chairman.
Okay.
Representative Weisel
Provide that for up can you hold
off on that for a second in this
going to for discussion purposes
no I appreciate that I'll take
that in a minute once we allow
for a little bit of wait times
so people can pull up the
amendment and I can read the two
oh two number for representative
Thompson but thank you
Representative these are.
so the two oh two number it's in
your share file it's two one
nine four eight one point one.
Okay and Mr Mr chair
you want me to go ahead
explained the amendment please
if you would so as I and I did
not sure how I'll just call it
on COVID blog or our fatigue
there were there were increases
in the face Valerie but get
there for everyone so when I got
the FIR it said sixty one
million I said well wait a
minute so basically what it does
and I won't go through it line
by line but it removes every
Every mention of raising the
minimum five five thousand
dollars and it's just it was
just to have an over I don't
know how it got in there and I
don't know how it stayed in
there but so so if you I and I
had requested that the FIR be
re done to
to reflect that and I have not
seen that FIR I hope that you
have it.
We'll need to double check
Representative but we had the
motion from Representative these
out for discussion all all
second that is there discussion
on the amendment.
So again it's removing those
those minimums which brings down
significantly the FIR original
estimates that I think at
Representative Thompson is
leading to.
Discussion on the amendment.
Okay.
So I entertain a motion on the
amendment.
I move the amendment.
Production of the amendment.
Thank you Representative
Garrett.
Also I can that is their
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment.
Okay seeing none you have been
amended bill thank you
representative so you have house
bill one sixteen as Amanda that
concludes our presentation
Representative yes it does thank
you Mr chair all right so we're
back on the bill as amended we
will go to the audience all
right.
So.
Do we have those in the audience
that are in opposition to house
bill one sixty switching it up.
Opposition.
Okay so we'll go to support
support for house bill one
sixteen as Amanda.
All right.
So.
I'm gonna give it a second
because it's messing with my
screen okay.
Ellen please good morning
welcome back.
Good morning Mr chair Ellen
burns Steen president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation.
In two thousand and two within
the New Mexico state legislature
created the three tiered
licensure system for teachers it
was only for teachers and since
that time we have been
struggling to ensure that our
colleagues who are counselors
social workers nurses and
therapists are treated as equals
and essential personnel in our
district we have an APS over a
thousand professionals in these
categories in fact for
audiologists and physical
therapists their entry level
credential into the field is a
clinical doctorate and it's
essential that were able to
attract and retain those
professionals for our kids in
the educational system as it
currently stands as the sponsor
mentioned when raises and
increases in the three tier
minimums are procreative for
teachers we have to negotiate
with the district from their
operational funds the amount of
money we need to provide equal
raises for all of the supporting
related service person which
means that there's less
discretionary money for other
needs in our district I thank
the sponsor and I think that
passing this bill is essential
so that we can provide for the
social emotional and special ed
needs of all of our students
thank you.
Thank you all right so the to
actually.
Morning actually.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee actually long with
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico we echo the
comments of Dr Byrne Steen with
the Albuquerque teachers
federation and with that we
support the bill and thank the
sponsor for her work thank you.
Really may welcome back thank
you Mr chairman good morning and
I'm glad to hear of the
amendment I have not seen the
amendment nor the FIR again I am
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico school board
association and we initially
were in opposition of the bill
because of the unfunded mandate
that the the bill would have
created and I'm hoping that the
addition of the amendment that
removes the raising of the
minimum is by five thousand well
eliminate that sixty five to
seventy million fiscal impact
that was indicated in the FIR is
The New Mexico school board
association's continuously and
consistently throughout the year
supported the creation of the
three tier lost your system to
include all certified
professional staff they were
very happy about that language
and we support the inclusion of
the additional staff again as
long as there is no fiscal
impact this does not create an
unfunded mandate because our
school districts districts do
not have the financial resources
required to cover the additional
costs without the accompanying
many of the school board
association supports intent of
this bill and we supported as
long as there's no this call
back thank you Mr chair Preciado
thank you sponsors for all
including our additional
instructional support program
administrators.
Thank you.
All right stand.
Back good morning thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
we want to fight the sponsor for
bringing this forward we as
those school boards were having
to stand in opposition to this
without the FIR Mr chairman it's
hard for us to give us all an
absolute support we're going to
review the bill with the
amendments as I recall there was
a one year lag on the efforts of
fiscal year this rollout and if
that is true that would give us
time to solve the FY are
question this will bring and
imputed cost with that it should
not be large and should be
something manageable so Mr
chairman in general we stand and
support we've always supported
bringing those not named in the
initial bill under this retired
licensure system it is a matter
of equity in appropriateness
thank you.
Right thank you.
And finally Steve.
Morning.
Good morning.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee on Steve ceiling
is government relations for any
in New Mexico
and I just want to I will I the
the support and on behalf of our
members we we definitely support
this bill and thank
Representative for bringing
forth this bill we do we haven't
seen the amendment but we do pre
with the impact of what HB one
sixteen is trying to to address
those reasons we supported we
urge you to vote in favor of HB
sixteen thank you right thank
you.
So we don't have any more.
People in our panel where our
attendees list wishing to speak
so we'll come to committee first
on my list and Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative I appreciate you
bringing this again I think it's
long overdue my only question is
on the LAFC analysis it says the
bill creates a definition for a
dual license instructional
support provider and this new
definition does not align with
the definition of instructional
support provider I just didn't
know how that was going to be
addressed.
Mr chair and representative
Sweetser it's nice to see you
I'm.
I'm actually that's a good
question I'm I'm not exactly
sure what they're referring to
but I'm.
I.
That's all I can say I will take
a look at it and and see if it
needs to but it was I mean it
was drafted in the normal way so
I as though the director got got
the definition I think it may
have something to do with the
phrase duly licensed and that's
kind of the language that we
settled on because we wanted to
be able to.
Press who these people were and
and that was the language that
we we came up with because as I
said before you have to have a
license in your profession and
then and I I a teacher license
for lack of a better word.
Thank you for that and thank you
Mr chair it went on to say the
sponsor may want to consider
amending language to update the
definition I guess I only raise
that because I just don't want
that.
Hi I don't want the
The bill to be held anywhere for
a technicality because I do
think we need to get it done so
thank you for that thank you
thank thank you Representative
Sweetser.
Great thank you I'm so we do
have the deputy director of the
nest so would you be able to
weigh in or point us to maybe I
see as Chelsea and
Joseph that did the FIR or the
LFC analysis the morning chair
Romero members of representative
Thompson Joey Simon just stuck
his head in my office and he
said that concern revolves
around the instructional
assistance and that they are
defined currently in statute but
not in this bill.
Mr speaker that's because
they're not included in this
bill you eat that this is
specifically for duly licensed
so this is for I'm cert.
Right and and and Representative
Thompson I believe that's that's
another initiative that separate
from this that you pursued
before as well is that correct.
Mr Mr chairman I I don't
remember that although I do
always say that we don't pay our
educational system half of what
we're.
Okay okay I thought that might
be where the mix up was so thank
you for that clarification.
Was that it Representative
Sweetser.
Yes thank you Mr can great thank
you thank you.
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr chairman
you know I I guess I'm looking
at it from a school board
members perspective on often
times when I was on the school
board I would see on the
role of the state again raised
to our teacher effective
whatever and but I would be a
six we got some more money
that's available you know when
we just sat we after all that
money from our budget somewhere
so much my question is what is
what actually is the fiscal
impact of this bill.
Do we know thank you.
Mr chair and representative
Chatfield I have not seen the
updated FIR it was supposed to
get sent to me and it did not
but might my and my guess is and
and this is having thirty six
years in the field is that there
will be.
Probably no immediate fiscal
impact because as I stated
before these are professionals
who don't come in at minimum
wage these are professionals who
you do not get unless you pay at
least the minimum so really what
when this would take affect as
when we as a legislature decide
that we're going to do let's say
a three percent raise I'm that
it that then if there will be a
fiscal impact because there will
be a few more people but
I went when we do a raise we we
I mean I know I know there's
some.
There are differences of opinion
but when the legislature gives a
raise we we get the school
districts the money to do the
right so it would just be it
would just happen when what when
there is an increase in the rate
because I don't believe I mean
there may be ten or fifteen
people in the state who are not
at the minimums although I can't
imagine how you could hire
someone with the doctoral degree
at under forty thousand dollars.
And and Representative if I may
add to that as well as a I think
the last time we we had included
such
an increase in the minimum
salary is it was about fifty
five to seventy million dollars
and that's roughly the impact
that the FIR has with the
original bill language in there
so if we were to raise it to
that level it would be somewhere
in the ballpark of the of of
that same figure so I'm just
using the previous time we we
added these a five thousand
dollar increase to the salaries
that was the the cumulative
fiscal impact.
So Mr chairman my question I
guess still is currently is
there no fiscal impact.
Mr Mr chair and Representative
Chatfield I can't say that
without looking at the FIR but I
I you I would be confident in
saying if there is any fiscal
impact it would be tiny.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
so Representative this do you
believe that this would attract
more of these kind of support
personnel are speech therapists
are PED's with this contract
more and keep the more in the
public school system.
Mr chair and representative gear
I believe that would yeah
there's there's nothing quite as
got raging as working in a
classroom with you know you have
the teach you have the general
ed teacher at the special ed
teacher the speech and language
pathologist in an occupational
therapist and that physical
therapists that may be a social
worker and the teachers get a
right get a three percent raise
and the other people who are
just as important to you get a
one percent raise it's just it's
it just doesn't feel good.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you representative that I I know
that my elementary school we had
a contract speech pathologist
working over the internet from
Denver
because the pay was better so
thank you for bringing forth
this bill thank you Mr chairman.
Great thank you I'm so are there
further questions from the
committee.
Okay so I mean I would like to
mention also is that I believe I
heard the other day the speaker
take the state government
referral off of this committee
and referred to finance
probation is that correct
Representative yes that's
correct.
Great and I've mentioned this
committee before we
unfortunately the Education
Committee is in charge of the
finances for education as it
stands and as much as we would
like to make those decisions
hopefully that's something we
would be able to to do in the
future but I think that house
bill one sixteen would go
definitely a long way in being
able to keep these professionals
these licensed tool licensed
professionals within our school
when when we do not incentivize
and being in the schools these
are professionals that could be
making a good amount of money
outside in private practice and
elsewhere that is outside of our
schools so so I think this is
definitely has been worthwhile
approach and something that that
should and and does need to do
to get done
but with that I will entertain a
motion.
Mr chair I know the do pandemic.
Right so we have a two passed
motion by Representative
Sweetser.
All right the race to second it
is one by Representative
Figueroa.
All right so madam secretary if
you would call the roll on it do
passed motion please.
Representative Baldonado yes and
as amended director chairman
yes.
As Amanda yes Sir yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative all.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Gleim.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative robot Carreiro.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative.
Stapleton yes.
I'm I'm here and my vote is a
yes.
Thank you thank you
representative.
Representative there yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Chair.
Yes so before we go to the vote
I'll allow Representative Dow to
explain vocally.
Mr chair.
This bill I just think that you
made a very important point that
there really is no correlation
between the work of the LFC and
LESC in the interim and then
again the committee on the
Appropriations Committee.
Thinking of maybe we could
consider.
Keeping tabs on these bills that
keep coming back and we as
policy makers and folks that our
educators I think are a good
idea that died appropriations
maybe we can make a list of
these types of things that
continue to be brought back and
continue to be ignored and ask
them to be part of the interim
committee coming up and maybe
since our meetings thank you Mr
chairman.
Great thank you representative.
All right so you are by fifteen
zero unanimous vote you have a
do pass on house bill one
sixteen as Amanda thank you
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr members of the committee bye
bye.
Great thank you all right so
we'll go to Representative
Ashfaq sh so we have house bill
one.
It'll start pulling people in
separate Senate if you can raise
your hand in the.
Attendees.
And your skyrocketed to the top
part.
All right good morning
Representative.
All right there you are.
Did you have an expert
Representative bash that needs
to get pulled into the meeting.
Yes I do Dr more the the group
is the dean of the medical
school at UNM.
All right thank you Schmedes
being promoted.
And is with us so this is house
bill one fifty everybody in your
share file medical school
scholarship act.
All right when you're ready
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee.
this is a bill that I think was
before you
In twenty nineteen.
And we're bringing it back.
this bill would provide for
medical school of medical school
scholarship.
That would cover the cost of
tuition.
That would cover the cost
tuition or medical school for
all four years.
And up there would be a
contractual agreement that on
the completion of residency.
Of these medical students who
received the loan who are now
doctors would return to New
Mexico and live and practice in
the state as you know there is a
terrific shortage of physicians
in many parts of the state and
in fact even in Albuquerque if
you've ever tried to get an
appointment with the
dermatologist you know you
probably have to wait for a long
time.
What this bill would do is some
first of all encourage doctors
to return to New Mexico to
practice and second of all it
would enable minority students
and first time college students
who are interested in medicine
to enter medical school without
the burden of a huge debt.
medical school students usually
graduate with student loans in
the area of two hundred thousand
dollars.
And so this would go a long way
in in.
Are in.
Solving our physician shortage.
that this bill has a six million
dollar appropriation which is
what you and them
And figures it will cost to
provide everyone in the class of
one hundred students a
scholarship.
And there is a return of of the
positive return economically on
this investment and according to
a two hundred eighteen study by
the New Mexico Medical Society.
Each position in New Mexico is
responsible for creating eleven
point four jobs.
Adding one point nine million
dollars to the state economy.
Bringing in nine hundred and
twenty nine dollars and two
hundred and twenty cents worth
of wages and benefits and
seventy five thousand six
hundred and twenty five dollars
in state and local tax revenues
so if you have a class of one
hundred students who return to
New Mexico to practice that
would be a return on investment
of one million five hundred and
sixty two thousand dollars
Because it would bring in taxes
of seven million five hundred
and sixty two thousand five
hundred dollars so with that Mr
chairman and your permission I
would like to invite doctor the
group to
And to the testimony.
Please briefly after murder.
Well thank you Mr chair madam
vice chair members of the
committee good morning I'm the
interim dean of the UNM school
of medicine and thank you
Representative **** is you know
students everywhere burdened by
debt and pry no we're more than
in professional schools and
medical schools and particularly
in New Mexico where we have a
commitment to accept students
from the state many of our
learners grow up in under
resource families and parts of
our state and we're really proud
of having a class that is
primarily from New Mexico I
difference from last year and
even more importantly are the
effects of the pandemic and the
need to have physicians is more
critical and even more so I
think with the number of doctors
in our state who are over fifty
plus the pandemic will be
looking at retirements in that
the near future maybe at a
higher rate although anecdotally
then we would have in the past
we have the pre situation at the
medical school over the last six
years by about a thousand per
medical student the the six
million dollars that comes in
now is from tuition eight it
would greatly diversify our
applicant pool to be able to do
that and the powerful incentive
to stay in the state is one of
the biggest things unlike many
well they're just a few other
schools that do this but the
requirement would be for full
four years Arizona has a program
for primary care that's two
years but we know that when
learners are in a community for
only two or three years they're
less likely to stated if they
stayed for three or more years
so would be a year for year
Hey back there's every shortage
in New Mexico I you know we
always talk about primary care
which is bound specialty that is
Representative bash said
dermatology has half the number
of providers in the state that's
true for neurology endocrinology
many other so one of the
interesting things about this is
that it covers all of those
specialties
it.
It would be a great boon to the
students of New Mexico we would
be one of the leaders here in
doing that our average debt at
U. and M. as a hundred forty six
thousand four main some have
more but some have I need some
have less the most have far more
so that's a really important
part of this issue be happy to
answer any other questions I
want to respect your time.
Thank you to.
Representative bash you're on
mute.
Sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman and with
that we're ready for questions
from the audience and.
All right.
So we will go to the attendees
list is their opposition to
house bill one fifty opposition
the attendance.
Right so we'll go to support on
the attendees list is there
support.
So you'll have two minutes.
Many get ready.
Good morning welcome back.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Maximilian's
registered lobbyist with the
University of New Mexico we
stand in support of this
legislation as we all know we've
had a shortage of doctors for
many years prior to the pandemic
of the pandemic has really
brought forward the issue of our
doctor shortage in the state we
realize this is going to be they
came from this bill will be
realized it future years but
it's a positive step forward we
stand in support of this
legislation thank you.
Great thank you.
All right so go to Sharon.
Good morning sharing in two
minutes.
Hello good morning Mr chair and
committee members.
I am Here and Clemente I am a
civic engagement and policy
manager at New Mexico First and
I'm also a registered lobbyist
for New Mexico first thanks for
the opportunity to speak in
favor of house bill one fifty
and thanks to Representative
bash for introducing this bill.
we want to let you know that
this bill is in keeping with
recommendations for more recent
town hall on health and higher.
Well one was on health and
before that higher education and
workforce and other gatherings
of the public that we've
organized and facilitated and I
would hazard to say hundreds for
sure hundreds if not thousands
of New Mexico New Mexicans at
these convening continually have
emphasized the critical need to
attract and most importantly
keep doctors practicing in New
Mexico we heard time and time
again stories from people around
the state of the impact of their
communities with positions come
and go and the need to
incentivize doctors to remain in
the computer community and then
not having enough doctors or
doctors at all often forces
people to either go without care
or figure out how to travel
sometimes up to six hours each
way and
We were also heartened by the
projected returns of investment.
So we encourage you all to
support house bill one fifty
let's keep the best and
brightest in New Mexico thanks
Mr chair and committee members
for this opportunity thank you.
All right.
Dan good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman Dennis
are representing loveless health
systems and we strongly support
this bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it we continue to
have trouble recruiting
physicians to New Mexico
particularly young positions and
our age our position population
is aging as you heard from the
expert and we urge you to pass
the bill thank you.
Great thank you.
We don't have anybody else in
the attendees list wishes to
speak.
So we will come to committee so
first on my list as
Representative Williams
Stapleton.
Mr chairman.
And I have a question for the
representative and perhaps Mr
chairman that
Representative bash.
Good Mr chair you could give
permission for somebody from
higher read to give an
explanation of
The the fact that Mr chairman.
When I proposed the loan
forgiveness bill but teachers
years ago I proposed it after
something that was already in
law in rest in reference to
medical students get in I'm this
type of scholarship so I'm
trying to find out if that's not
still in place and we're
creating a new one or did the
other one go away.
Representative he has.
And Sir is anybody from higher
read all somebody that can tell
me whether or not that is not
still in place.
So I'm seeing the attendees
listed there somebody from
higher ed I don't recognize
anybody.
On on the attendees list.
Part of higher ed
We'll try to work on it
Representative.
Okay.
Was my only question because I
believe that it's already in
place that system for medical
students to receive scholarship
come back and work is already in
place.
Representative best place.
Yes Mr chairman thank you and
Representative Stapleton there
is a scholarship in place that
is available to medical students
to
Nurses pharmacists and other
medical professionals that
is up to two years of loan
forgiveness and up up to two
years of service for loan for
partial loan forgiveness this
would be a couple loan
forgiveness
for only medical students at
this point
who would not be competing with
other professions and
Who will and that's it
will not be competing with other
professions divisions for a
longer term of service and the
longer term of service
Eight two more likely
Staying in place in the
community.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative bash.
Great thank you I would like to
add to that a little bit I think
you did a good job in the
differentiation there
Representative passed it's also
in our our committee analysis
under substantive issues the the
Third paragraph outlines some of
the differences there as well so
if you have further questions
Representative Stapleton we can
certainly come back to that.
He
yes Mr chair I don't know if
it's appropriate to I want to
ask for respond now.
This is.
You if you or if you have a
response to in which to color it
further please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative sentiment for
asking that question one of the
differences with this is that it
commits our students before they
get through medical school many
times once they graduated you
know they go on to do residency
program which can be three to
seven years and they often do
that out of state many times and
once they're there they're more
easily recruited to stay in the
state in which they did their
residency training we know that
residents to use their jobs one
based on their partner to based
on where they trained and so
this pro actively commit the
students to come back to the
state even if they go out of
state for residency training.
Great thank you.
Representative Dow.
You're up next.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative from the
building.
Yeah I'm sort of along the same
lines as Stapleton so you're in
the bill Representative Dow if
you would speak up a little bit
your volume is kind of
fluctuating a bit or get closer
to whatever your microphones.
You can come back to me and I'll
get my little piece okay that
would be awesome thank you
representative Representative
let up please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill I have a I do have a few
questions Mr chair number one
is there anything anywhere in
the bill the act requires or
asks that the students are
working in rural communities.
After the graduate.
Mr stern.
Mr chair and representative
there is not however U. and M.
has a program to encourage
students to do rural practice
and perhaps Dr McGrew can say a
few words about that.
Mr chair Representative Lara
thank you for asking that
question you're right we do have
a program is called the rural
and but underserved program
which which actually encourages
our students to be placed in
more rural and urban under
served areas but now it doesn't
require them to go to rural area
in many cases some of the
specialties that this would
cover such as obviously you have
an of the G. and they can't go
to an area where there's not a
hospital and surgical capacity
that sort of thing same with
dermatology they might need to
be in a larger metropolitan
areas to draw from that area but
the hope is that because we have
one of the highest rates in the
nation of our graduates choosing
family medicine in particular
and primary care over all that
retaining those in the state
would have them go to those more
rural areas.
And their specialty from yes.
Thank you Mr chair I I I'm so
concerned with that because you
know what we still need to
determine colleges to rural New
Mexico and I'm yes as were since
this bill Mr chair proposes to
pay their tuition and full you
know they they I would figure
that they would that they would
be that they would be more
inclined to vote their practice
in a more urban area where they
can make more income.
As opposed to a rural area and
so one of the things that I
would like to see this bill is
for that emphasis is in the in
the rural area actually written
into the bill another another
question I have a Mr chair and
representative is you know
there's another medical school
in New Mexico.
So with those students be
eligible for that scholarship
because I was looking at the
bill and on peach to line one.
It says do the eligible
institution music University of
New Mexico school of medicine
what about the broad college Mr
chair.
Mr chair and Representative
Lara.
I considered putting Burrell
College in but they already have
a pretty substantial scholarship
program and again Dr McGrew may
be able to answer that.
Yes thank you
We get thank you Mr chair
representative lark you're right
I think that Burrell does have
that but in addition for
University of New Mexico one of
the things that we are
particularly interested in is
that the largest majority of our
students are from New Mexico
unlike the broke college and we
think there is a high likelihood
that the students who are from
New Mexico will be more likely
to go back and practice in the
community such as the ones you
speak about if they don't have
so much debt in medical school
and particularly I agree in the
primary care specialties.
And if I may have returned here
last point you representative
Lotta is on page four of the
bill or it outlines award
criteria there's also preference
there's in there is preference
in making awards number
to individuals who agree to
practice and specializations in
which health profession
vacancies are difficult to fill
and may address some of your
concerns preferences also making
award should be given in the
district individuals who agree
to practice in geographic
locations work vacancies are
difficult to fail so when you
say rural New Mexico is in need
of of dermatologists as well it
seems like those two provisions
is geographic location and also
the these types in areas of
practice where these areas may
need.
Thank you Mr chairman dot thank
you for that response so what it
one of the analysis I was
looking at that this scholarship
would be also available to non
New Mexican residents who are
studying medicine at the at UNM
soccer Act Mr chair.
Chair Representative Lara that
is correct but as the dean of
the medical school said we have
a high percentage of students
from New Mexico and I believe
that there is a preferential
admission for local students.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative for for
answering my questions and nine
I'm still I'm still undecided on
this but we'll we'll see how a.
How the other questions go thank
you thank you Mr.
Right thank you and it is page
for Representative Lotta and
that's the first preferences of
or should be given to
individuals who have graduated
from the New Mexico post
secondary educational
institution
So we'll go back to
Representative Dow.
Thanks for chair and thank you
Representative for that matter.
What better all right thank
thank you Mr and Representative
bash so the the I'm trying to
understand the mast when you say
the majority of of the scholars
are New Mexico students could
you give me a break there's
currently about four hundred
students in the program could
you give me the breakdown of in
state out of state students.
Mr chair at Representative Dow I
can speak to that ninety eight
percent of our students are from
New Mexico leader grew up
completely here moved here went
to high school here the only out
of state students that we take
our princes Navajo students who
are on the part of the
reservation it's in Arizona or
at at we are part of a program
called which sheet which can
grant an admission to very few
students from our state for the
medical schools while being
Montana Idaho but we have an
accepted one of those students
this two thousand fourteen.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for that and so
the six million dollars.
Which would cover all the
students but in this bill is
that correct it's saying that
the dollars are reoccurring and
would not revert to the general
fund where do you how do you
spend the dollars that don't
revert.
Mr chair Representative.
Mr chair representative that
that question is for me
the the you know what what what
we're asking for the for the six
million intuition is just the
tuition and fees which comes to
about just under twenty thousand
dollars a year so about eighty
thousand overall in fact there's
also the living expenses of you
know housing food clothing
childcare and eldercare and that
is really a huge issue right now
we with the new residency
interviews that may be less but
the cost of living beyond that
could be used to extend to some
of that as well.
So Mr chair representative bash
and so so so who so you're just
if the dollars are not spent on
tuition you're just going to but
it won't revert to the general
fund you'll just give more
benefits to the students housing
child care you just keep giving
it to the students we could use
it for that yes what are yet
that's part of what they borrow
their money for and what part of
that's about half of their day
at.
So Mr chair representative bash
when you say you could use it
for that what else could you use
it for it's very unusual that we
don't revert unspent dollars to
the general fund so what else
could you use it for.
At the school of medicine Mr
chair Representative Dow are you
and I think that questions for
me drive very well
Yeah that's what we would use it
for I I think that would be the
thing that we would use it for I
don't think we would use it for
any other programs that are
already receive funding.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative of us thank you
Dr Andrew and I I.
I really like the approach of
loan forgiveness and even though
it has you know that the loan
forgiveness is taxable we could
also get a tax credit so I
notice in the bill on page five
it says that the medical school
could sue to recover that
someone gets this money as they
go they have pre college and
then they can leave the state
and the only recourse to the
taxpayers because we're trying
to build a workforce and we're
trying to build high quality
health care for New Mexicans
across the state and so the only
recourse we have as taxpayers
because this is a scholarship as
they go is just for you as an
institution to sue to recover
the balance with does UNM do
that I mean you've you've
received a hundred percent
converts compensation from the
state because we're paying for
their scholarships as they go if
they leave the state and they
don't serve their term one year
of service for one year
scholarship how often does you
in sue the students to recover
the balances.
Mr chair and Representative Dow
we've not had that experience
before that we needed to do that
I would assume that we and again
I'm not the expert at the long
loan repayment but if someone
they would have to commit to
that up for of course and then
they would have to sign a
commitment that they would pay
back that loan just like any
other loan they got that they
would need to pay that back in a
certain period of time I would
hope we would have to go to the
point of having to sue people to
to pay it back.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you representative
bash thank you doctor for that I
in the F. I. R. they're telling
us that ninety eight medical
graduates from UNM combined from
that from your program since two
thousand six there's been ninety
eight graduates seventy six are
still completing their
residencies twenty three are in
state fifty three are out of
state of those that have
completed their residencies
enterprise six are practicing
outside upper Leo so I'm so you
have it.
How many of these folks really
are going to be six million
dollars a year is a lot verses
six million towards a loan
forgiveness or an increased
rural health care provider
supplements you know our tax
credit the other bills that
we're considering that have
similar price tag that keeping
retain people in rural New
Mexico I guess I'm not opposed
to the idea of growing capacity
and and placing people
throughout the state I'm trying
to decide you know which are the
best ultimately it's up to the
Appropriations Committee because
we don't get to really weigh in
on education budget but this
kind of my thought process of
where I'm coming from.
As to whether we do the
scholarship as they go or
whether we give substantial tax
credits and and and loan
forgiveness when they're serving
in our state and we can assure
that the work is being done in
the areas that need it most
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
for Representative Baldonado
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative bass
so in I look at this billion
I'm.
At honest I'm I'm frustrated
with the the feel like
thank you want to you know hand
out scholarships to.
The folks that are going to
actually be very big earners in
their in their lifetime there
these are people that are are
you know top of the top right
when you think about these are
the bright people they've
they've chosen a career path
that's that's long and very
difficult to get through
they they know those those
things going into it I've I've
talked to young kids before that
someone to be a doctor you know
that's about ten years of
schooling probably by the time
you're done in before you
actually make a penny and and I
get it the that up.
That the you know graduating
from a a degree program with a
lot of that is is a difficult
thing but want why aren't we
including the six million dollar
appropriation for New Mexico
tech for engineers why aren't we
gonna give six million highlands
university so that we can put
out you know maybe more Ph.D you
know educators I I guess I feel
like why are we why is it so
important to say to get one
one group of of covert kids that
that we're gonna say okay here
here's your here's your tuition
now you know it it's basically
just appropriation the UNM and
with all due respect I am in a
UNM alum and I and I do
appreciate the fact that we have
a good university this in the
heart of New Mexico.
But it just seems to me a little
a little disingenuous when we
say let's just let's just cater
to this one group of people
that's very frustrating to me
and I and I get it that
that there is a a good intention
underlying all this but you know
there's there's other issues
with the billing and and all the
other folks and ask questions of
pointed those out that I agree
with many the the non resident
piece for the the the person
that that man is not the survey
New Mexican you know anecdotally
we can say will most of our kids
are this the most for kids are
New Mexicans are they went to
high school here and I hope
that's the case but I also know
that New Mexico unit University
of New Mexicos medical program
is is probably if I'm not
mistaken has been considered to
be one of the most affordable in
the nation over the years so
that tells me that maybe there
would be a lot of people that
want to come here already
because it's not you know the
tuition costs the.
It makes me happen down the road
from other university so also
the disparity that
Representative lot of pointed
out with you and and and and
then the the school the for all
school down and in Los crucis
you know wearing of Larry and
given appropriation one school
and that the other it just
doesn't it doesn't make sense to
me at that I think I've by honor
the fact that you have a good
heart for this bill but I just
can't see myself voting for
something that's just so
unfairly on on balance to two
other other kids that want to
pursue a degree the Repatha said
become a medical doctor it's not
for everybody so thank you Mr
chairman I don't have any
questions further.
May I respond Mr chairman
Representative bash please.
Yes this bill is directed toward
medical students and and
physicians because of the
physician shortage throughout
the state of New Mexico it is
also trying to encourage
students from our tribal areas
and our minority communities who
otherwise who look at the cost
for medical school and say I
can't do that.
And
Traditionally medical students
have come from upper middle
class families and and the
university is doing a good job
in in recruiting minority
students and we want to continue
to do that so that they and
minority students are more
likely to return to their
communities to practice.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
the answer I I did want to say
one thing maybe Representative
Representative Representative if
if if we can have Dr McGrew and
then we can come back for you
for your response.
Mr chair representative
Baldonado thank you for the
opportunity to address that
you're absolutely right that
that we are one of the lower
cost medical schools in the
country but at the same time we
also have a population where
there are attendees come from
families that are less wealthy
than other parts of the country
and so it is harder for them I
think it's two areas that you
talk about that right one is the
specialties and the higher rate
specialties and just keeping
them in the state so that's one
issue would that be an incentive
to keep those specialties in the
state the second is that the
debt often drives our attendees
who are under represented in
medicine toward those higher
paying specialties so that they
don't go into those very
specialties that we need the
most which is primary care and
other things that might be more
likely to go into those rural
and underserved areas where we
need physicians at a higher
level.
Representative if you wish to
respond please thank you Mr
chairman I guess you know one of
the thing occurs to me that you
know we haven't you know this is
the Education Commission I'm
gonna talk about you know legal
issues but you know my
understand a big a big part of
why physicians don't like to
practice in New Mexico's because
of the the structure and medical
malpractice and and no limits
and things of that nature so
maybe that's a conversation that
that UNM Health you don't want
to get into to to really try and
generally attract more more
positions to the state of New
Mexico I think there's some
other things we could be doing
for that thank you Mr.
Great thank you Representative
care.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative bash for bringing
this up I want to remind our
members that UNM is a public
institution advertorials is a
private institution I think it's
just important to remember that
and I support both of them
I also want to say that I've got
a lot of feedback I have a
retirement community in my
district over half of the six
hundred residents are from out
of state they research the best
places to retire and they chose
the west side of Albuquerque but
they're constantly talking about
the difficulty in making
appointments so I think this
bill helps address that but my
question and and this might be
more for document group.
Has a program of the U. N. M. BA
M. P. program how many students
are admitted to that every year
and with this six million start
covering their scholarships or
is there a separate scholarship
fund for that.
Mr chair representative here at
thank you for that question the
the B. A. M. D. program is about
twenty three students per year
added to the seventy six that we
accept you know directly into
medical school and as you know
there is a scholarship that
covers there for four years in
undergraduate that would replace
that but it would give them the
additional four years of medical
school coverage.
I'm thank you Mr chairman thank
you doctor my group for
explaining that
and the of the eight M. D.
program how many people have
graduated from that so far do
you have any records of where
they're at right now.
We do and the largest major and
I'm sorry that I don't sorry Mr
chair and representative here at
do I don't have that data with
me right now it is about twenty
three year it started with a
last minute increased over the
years and that program is over
ten years old now about twelve
years old and what we know is
that those students are more
likely to choose primary care
specialties and to to of those
who choose primary care
specialties tend to go more into
rural or perhaps an urban under
served practice such as a
federally qualified health
center community health center.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
thank you a document group for
that answer and I just want to
compliment you because I'm a
former employee at the
you and where you get a lot of
work working with our tribal
traditions and cultures and I
really appreciate that thank you
that's it Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative batch for for
this bill
I I appreciate Representative
Lawrence comments are
particularly sensitive in rural
areas coming from a roller and
was part of the state.
And you know he gave the example
of the dermatologist and that's
that's the reality for us my
predecessors why isn't
dermatologist for many years we
had one told to serve our area.
And I do you recognize what Mr
chairman mentioned about the the
preferential criteria contained.
Section eight subparagraph a so
my question is the amount of
money that's being requested how
many.
At what percentage of of the
incoming class with this with
this fund in terms of students
Mr chair.
You
Mr chair and representative line
it would depend on the number
who accepted it you know who
chose to do it at but our
prediction is that fifty percent
somewhere between fifty and
seventy five percent might
accept it but we know about
fifty percent someone accepted
in advance but I'm hoping fifty
I would hope a hundred every
class would do it but but I
don't think that that it would
do it right away.
Mr chair and and if.
If that
that wish was granted and you
did have a hundred percent
accepted it but let's assume
those are those are the facts
were operating under then what
percentage of incoming students
would with this fun.
This.
Would fund all the students that
would be to tuition request that
I mean that would be all up and
it would and it would fund their
tuition and their fees.
Thank you Mr and so.
I I understood the previous
discussion to about there being
similar provisions of the law
for say nurses are but they're
structured like a loan
forgiveness program.
But there are there is an
incentive to take a scholarship
versus loan forgiveness approach
because if I receive loan
forgiveness whether it's from a
financial institution or whether
it's from and institution of
higher learning that's a taxable
event that that now I have you
know the tax liability at the
end of that tax year
so I'm wondering because I know
we have a need to for nurses and
nurse practitioners throughout
the state can you explain the
the the thought process behind
this Mr chair
why we're letting us to only
medical doctors.
I would say that this is a start
Mr chair sorry Mr chair and
representative I would say that
this is a start for a program
that I would like to see
expanded to nurse practitioners
and and other medical
professionals
but we need to begin somewhere.
Thank you Mr and I appreciate
the the the answers
incorporated that's helpful in
deciding how to vote on the bill
And my last point Mr chair just
it it.
This appropriation would cover
every incoming.
Of students then my fear is from
a roll perspective we don't ever
get down to the preferential our
criteria of someone saying look
I'm willing to go to the rural
underserved part of the state
the incentive to do that is no
longer there because the reality
is is whether they stay on going
to match Faulconer whether going
roller there's enough money on
everyone so I don't think we you
never get down to the Rep Rachel
criteria so thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative in self please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Senator of my questions were
answered by the other
representatives.
Representative best to miss more
group when we're talking about
medical doctors I'm assuming
this will also include
ophthalmologist.
And with Mr chairman and
Representative Basha miss
Margaret miss McCurry with this
also pertain to oral.
Oral surgeons.
What we're trying to oral
surgeons as well.
Mr chair and representative is
L.
We don't graduate in this we
don't have a dental school here
and so if it this would only be
for the medical school we do
have a dental residency and I
don't think that is part of this
bill in terms of it's just the
medical school group
so.
You need in New Mexico on one
hundred percent agree with you
on that the.
Okay Mr chairman thank you very
much for that response agency
McGrady on page two the bill
under section G. starting on
line twenty one it is also it is
states agrees to practice
medicine in New Mexico for the
same number of years that the
individual received a
scholarship once the individual
has completed medical school
what is to stop these particular
students if they are not
residents of the United States
that they can just pack up and
go what the repercussions there.
The Mr chair and representative
these out we don't have it taken
students from out of the country
into the medical school it is
there is really a requirement
for residency in the.
Long term residency in the
state.
Okay let's say okay if that's
the case then what about a
student that does come in from
out of state.
What what happens in is that an
immediate repayment of that
loan.
No I would I would like to
answer that Mr chair this loan
repayment does not occur until
after residency and it some one
year of loan repayment for each
year of service so each position
would have to serve for years to
get a hundred percent of their
tuition re covered.
Okay Mr chair and representative
best whenever you say that
online on page four line
seventeen is states the
scholarship should be evidenced
by a contract has that contract
been drawn up by a legal team
that is supporting this bill or
is that going to come after this
bill is drafted or will it be a
legal and binding contract and
therefore giving the school the
opportunity to bring suit
against that particular
individual.
Mr Mr chair and representative
Easdale we do not have a
contract drawn up right now but
we have a legal claim that we
would work very closely with
federal that contractor
agreement up with I'm not an
attorney but we absolutely have
a legal claim that we would work
with regard okay.
I can see some problems there
Mr chair and representative bash
I do appreciate your responses
to all these questions and
everything but.
I attended.
New Mexico State University with
the pre vet majority and I could
not complete my veterinary
degree in the state of New
Mexico.
We do have more animals in the
state that we do people.
And.
I think it's.
The representative brought up
New Mexico tech there's also
eastern New Mexico university
and these are in our rural areas
as well so I I.
Senator hesitant to support this
cause.
I.
I just have.
Heartburn over that the
appropriation that you've set
forward here and we're leaving
other equally qualified students
that do offer various other
degrees this opportunity Mr
chairman thank you very much.
Mr chair may I respond.
Please briefly because we're
going pretty long in this bill
but briefly Representative I
would like to say that you
brought up eastern New Mexico
university and I would like to
say that eastern New Mexico
university was a model for this
bill in that they offer loan
forgiveness for teachers.
And so it's possible for
teachers to go to eastern New
Mexico university and get a
hundred percent of their tuition
for given.
Thank you representative so
Representative went that please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative best for this
this bill you know I wasn't
intending to make comment on
this bill but the the
discussions as far as is very
intriguing and so to the point
in regards to the urban aspect
that the rural aspect you know
it seems to me that if we're
looking to give six million
dollars away and people are yet
still ensure that the PS kids
want to take it I think that
brings to to live that in our
state we may have some other
much larger issues we can give
six million dollars a way to
students and I have been
retained themselves within our
own schooling entities but going
back then to.
Your section eighty eighty one
regarding preferences in how
you're going to provide the
scholarships you know I I think
there's a lot of discussion as
to how there is a true intent is
this year and ten by
Representative bashin and others
that have been discussing this
matter on this phone call today
that you know what we're we're
looking to engage and create an
up list our own
our own raise New Mexicans
within our own communities and
so I I it seems to me that I
would rather have someone that
was raised within one of those
small Hispanic communities in
northern New Mexico or one of
those small reservations in
western New Mexico applied for
these and receive these and not
have to compete with people that
had come into New Mexico and and
and their preference is that the
graduated from a post secondary
institution in New Mexico so it
would for me I'm undecided but I
think it would go a lot further
if we were to make a change to
the point where instead of
preference be given to a student
from that graduated from the New
Mexico post secondary
educational institution to one
that maybe graduated from a New
Mexico high school that way it
means for me and those
communities that I represent
that it's going to be someone
from Cuba high school it's going
to be some from Bernalillo high
school with their roots deep in
the soil in our own state that
would be
given that preferential
treatment S. to somebody who
maybe comes from
LA or or or from other the part
of the of the country so Mr Mr
chairman and and Representative
back to the end of Sanchez.
Mr chair and representative
Lente
that is an interesting point in
one that that I would be willing
to consider
and Dr McGrew may have a
response also.
Missed Mr chair and
Representative like it yet yes
our criteria is New Mexico
Hospital I was just thinking
about the wording there but it
is a New Mexico high school as
is really what the intention is
in in fact with the amount of
money you gave us last year
which was around two hundred
thousand dollars this three
students that we accept for the
scholarship for all from high
schools in New Mexico and so I
think that's an important point.
So the Mr chairman and
Representative bash with that be
a friendly amendment then if if
I was to suggest that under
section eight eighty one that we
strike
New Mexico post secondary
education institute to graduated
from a New Mexico high school.
Yes I would consider that a
friendly amendment.
And representative so I mean for
the committee is that this will.
Change the bell and I think
we've heard several other
concerns from the committee you
all I appreciate the
friendliness of that amendment
that is something that that we
will consider whether it's
excluding postsecondary as one
of those preferential criteria
or and replacing it with high
school or keeping it in there
also as a as a preference so I
think that if if the sponsors
willing we can certainly have
that and I would prefer that we
have that amendment drawn up if
that's the route that we choose
to take and then we can put it
on the agenda
at a later date as soon as
possible and when we get that
amendment ready to go but I
think there are there are
several other concerns on that
may or may not be able to be
remedied by this committee I
think you bring up a good
specific one
that is obviously friendly to to
the sponsor but that is what I
would request so that we can
take a look at exactly what that
preferences and what that looks
like.
Thank you Mr chair.
All right was that it
Representative but that it Mr
chairman called respect
Representative bash and and the
need for is that this is not
intended to derail your bill or
or to a holding in any way shape
or form but really I was having
a tough time due to support the
intent of the bill and so I
think with these changes and I
see a lot of nodding heads on on
the zoom call that if we are
able to come to a point where
we're supporting our own
homegrown of bright stars within
our own state I feel much better
about it so that being said
thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative.
Thank you all right so I've
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative and just I wasn't
intending to bring this up but
since representative Lente made
reference to it and I think it's
important to note that in the
high school.
there is already an in the
public schools and
Pathway.
That is our creative.
For the various fields and I see
Mr chair and committee that this
pathway works really well with
this bill because as we're
identifying high school students
it throughout our state want to
present to you the medical field
then the.
From high school.
Identifying those students who
have already been listed as
pursuing a medical field.
To this scholarship.
potential.
Is wonderful way to connect the
two and be able to create that
recruitment opportunity to
solidify what everyone has been
saying Mr chair.
That is important and that is
that if we're creating and
investing.
In this fund in order to be able
to recruit restraint retain
training retain.
Those in the medical profession
in our state.
By far the best investment we
can make and I say that because
I participate in these multiple
pathways that we've created in
high school even in middle
schools now.
And.
Track.
Into the universities if that
applicables if they pursue
training opportunities for
skills in other areas than they
are trapped into those feels so
this is just yet another way in
which we can.
Solidify our commitment Mr chair
based on what everyone has been
saying and be able to create a
viable on long term response to
what we all have received.
In our reports throughout the
interim and that is that we have
a severe medical shortage in the
state of New Mexico.
And we also have not been able
to Mr chair and committee been
able to even after we graduate
be able to retain positions one
of the principal reasons is Mr
chair is because they're not
from New Mexico.
There's not a of a reason to
retain and this scholarship
opportunity is geared
specifically.
For the recruitment of our own
home grown students around the
state of New Mexico Mr chair I'd
like to point out one major gap
that is incredibly critical for
our population especially our
aging population in our state
and that is just the example a
podiatrist.
In the state in the public
health system and this is what
we're talking about and thank
you Representative and Gareth
for emphasizing that this is a
public institution.
It.
Our public health system right
now there is a severe shortage
of podiatrists.
And who sees podiatrists the
most if not.
Persons with diabetes.
And guess what we have one of
the highest numbers.
Persons with diabetes in the
state of New Mexico so this is
just one example of how this
investment that we're making.
Through this scholarship.
Would help in that field but I
also know because I am the
recipient of not just the public
health but of the Indian health
service.
And S. H. I wanted to ask the
question Mr chair and committee.
Is there a plan already in place
or do you envision one in which
you can work directly with the
Indian health service throughout
our state in order to be able to
help them.
Read recruit and retain because
I know for a fact that we have
students throughout our tribal
communities that want to pursue
to feels that they've identified
the medical field in the legal
field.
And so
can you can you tell us a little
bit real S. S. a clean clean
quickly as you can about how you
envision that thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chair and representative have
your vote if I may respond I am
very excited to tell you that we
are starting a residency program
in family medicine at the
northern New Mexico Medical
Center and we accept a site
visit and so that is moving on
and so we know that if we can
get our native learners to
choose to go there that that
will automatically begin to
increase that the family
medicine program also has a site
for our residents to train at
the Indian health next door to
the University of New Mexico
school of medicine and we are
one of the top three medical
schools in the nation for
admitting native students is it
I'm not a hundred percent no but
the work of Cena Dr Passey
Parker is really helping us to
increase those representative.
Thank you I'm thank you very
much that this type of Mr chair
coordination and filling the gap
and filling the voids on has to
be part of how we make our
decisions about whether we're
going to make these types of
investments and the reason Mr
chair I bring that up is because
six million dollars to say six
million dollars in that manner
does give us you know anxiety
however when we look at what
we're investing in.
And how many pathways we're
using in order to invest this
then that's what we need to be I
thank Mr chair looking at and
not necessarily picking apart or
relating the scholarship and the
intent and purposes of this bill
with.
Others such as the loan
forgiveness which there really
isn't in my view
that's a that's a whole other
way of of things that we need to
do so I wanted to ask just that
and also just if you could
Mr chair representative and and
Dr
do you know right off the bat
what that shortage looks like of
of physicians not in the family
medicine field.
The family medicine field
As it relates to our current
population in need.
Mr chair and representative have
your I don't have those numbers
in front of me but it is the
highest need in our state for
primary care family medicine
general internal medicine
general pediatrics I mean it's a
relative value you know we have
half of the dermatologist that
we need by numbers in the state
and so that's one but if you
look at overall but particularly
in rural areas it is primary
care that that is one of the
hottest needs so thank you and
so in closing
Mr chair and members of the
committee L. use again myself as
an example two years waiting for
but the high interest.
Nine months I have to wait to
schedule maybe up to twelve
months scheduled for primary
care.
During the Tyler just.
I'm now waiting this is the
eighth month that I'm waiting
for dermatology and this is all
through the public health system
which where are majority of our
population is being served
through the public health system
in the state of New Mexico if
I'm having to wait Mr chair
does.
Times and others I hear they're
sitting in waiting rooms when I
have been there that they've
waited two three years then Mr
chair and members of the
committee I would just encourage
you to relate all of these
points that have been discussed
here and tied in to what we know
and that is.
This is a public institution
public health is the highest it
is how we receive most of our
care in the state of New Mexico
and so six million dollars I
believe is a very worthy
investment in order to clear the
pathway thank you Mr chair and
thank you representative
Representative we mean this
board.
What.
Thank you Representative
Williams Stapleton I saw your
hand up for a second time you
would briefly yes Mr yes Mr
chairman and and Representative
bash on Mr chairman I I really
apologize for having to come
back at this link the time but
Mr chair and representative bash
basically listening to the
discussion here today
Representative lab made a very
critical point and I didn't
really understand up the concept
of of whether or not this bill
applies to individuals going
back into the the rural
communities and so on section at
since representative Lente have
brought about some possibly
amendments and and section eight
number two and number three line
seven and line ten with a talks
about preference in making a
wide shall be given fall to what
we to practice in
specializations in which have
profession vacancies a difficult
to fail specifically rural
communities and then on line
twelve it should say we part
with the.
This is making a what should be
given to individuals who agree
to practice in geographic
locations we have vacancies
difficult to fail maybe not the
term specifically but somewhere
in that it should add something
about rural communities and our
rural areas and and and we are
Representative that day talked
about
School students I agree with the
high school but also we should
keep the New Mexico post
secondary educational
institution when we do that we
make it New Mexican how we make
it home grown.
So I'm that's only what I'm
asking Mr chairman and
Representative bash since you're
gonna have to be doing
amendments possibly that the
rule concept be somewhere
specifically included in this
piece of legislation and I want
to do and I strongly support
your bill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative bash.
Great so thank you
representative so we have quite
a few things to consider and I
thought Representative Williams
Stapleton was going to go to the
issue that I was going to bring
up as far as amendments and it's
in the same section as she
referenced on page four
and line seven
Preference to making those
awards so including rural areas
or us sorry my tent
Is including.
New Mexico rural areas so not
just you know rural areas in
general but keeping these these
graduates in these recipients
with the in the state of New
Mexico so that they're not
serving a rural area that's you
know in Colorado or Wyoming but
they're serving New Mexico rural
or tribal communities within the
state as well I think would be
would also be my request but I
would those of you especially
Representative went there
Representative Williams
Stapleton Representative lot of
that had suggested some of these
things as well is is
Representative bash if you if
you would reach out to us and
and we can connect about on what
the language look like for this
amendment because I understand
maybe things were not entirely
articulated either as to why
they're in there currently but
so that we're all kind of on the
same page as far as potential
amendments when we bring these
this forward again okay
So with that I don't know if you
have a quick reply
just but I'm willing to work on
this and will work on it with Dr
McGrew and others in the medical
school and see what we can do
and I would point out to your
point that it already specifies
that these doctors must live and
practice in New Mexico.
Chair chair and I.
I certainly appreciate that in
in this is under that the
contract terms and to make sure
that it aligns with where else
in the bill it it may states out
so so if it's true that it's
already in there and covered in
that base than awesome but I
would appreciate a double check
on that and if it does need to
because it is under the contract
terms and if that's something to
come later I think that's
something that we as the
Legislature need to approve and
make sure that we have a
oversight into that it's all
part of the contract I'm sorry
Dr Margaret.
Mr chair and members of the
committee at this would like to
suggest and play like this is
gestion that we include high
schools on the Navajo Nation
even if it expands into Arizona
and goes back and practices on
the Navajo Nation I don't know
that there's a great reluctance
for that that is one of the
things that I would ask us to
consider.
Great awesome so we'll be in
touch about this and as soon as
we get those amendments in we
can definitely put them up
discuss the amendment and then
taken up or down vote on on on
this but I think it's a for our
only public medical school is a
great step forward it can do a
great service to to the state we
just want to make sure that it's
doing at great for for our
students here both in terms of
their profession as well as the
care that it's received by those
who stand to benefit from it
Representative Chatfield please
quickly.
Thank you Mr chairman are are
really you still require a lot
of work I really appreciate the
input from Representative the
representative Lara and
Representative Stapleton and
what well we're talking about
then that's not.
I just heard.
Leave that we expect fifty
percent participation so that we
were going to have three billion
dollars a year leftovers that is
not true in Indiana it so it
seems like a there's a lot of
money going to be left on the
table.
Mr chair and representative
Chatfield that that brief non
scientific survey was done a
couple years ago just asking the
students that were there the and
I think right now we would have
to get you more accurate numbers
as well within the as well as
since the COVID crisis you know
applications in medical school
are up overall fifteen percent
in the country this year which
is sort of shocking and up eight
percent here but I think it's
that commitment to serve that
really is driving those
applications up so it may be
different than a couple of years
ago and would be happy to survey
and get that information for
you.
So Mr chairman I support the
idea I think it's a wonderful
idea it's a lot of work.
Thank you and we'll see what the
Sanchez come up with and and we
all may not be satisfied but if
the majority are then we'll see
but thank you all thank you I
appreciate it so roll this
overall this over will be in
touch and then please let me
know as soon as you have those
amendment Mr chairman.
Representative.
Mr chair representative bash
since you are not physically
located at the roundhouse and
you're trying to make this
happen working with you and then
people would you call my office
and asked for my cheap with
chief of staff chairman mock dog
will to help you move.
Everything forward for you up to
council service and get it done
please.
Every L. Sharon dot grail.
And you all can coordinate that
off line.
President thank you all.
Thank you.
All right so we'll move on to
House Bill twenty three.
Still.
Three.
I know.
Representative K. goes had
mentioned that she may or may
not be able to.
I've had to go up.
We'll give it a second the
attendees list since house bill
twenty three Representative
Trujillo I understand
if Representative status is not
here you are standin to put on
the bill
is a Mister Harris John Harris
the expert.
What we are muted Christine.
Representative Trujillo.
Okay now your microphones not
working.
I don't think it's a muted
issue.
I don't know if there's a mute
button on your on your
microphone itself.
Now.
Nope.
Okay okay yep we are no with
that buttons for.
Okay thank you Mr chairman is it
is it I'm sorry Representative
is it John Harris is that John
Harris and Alex Casteel Smith
and there is also Mrs
P. lad Falkiner John Hummer and
bill pre yet are available but
Pete Ladd Faulkner is the main
the the witness.
And so I have or.
One moment so we have John
Harris.
Alex conspicuous and our
Faulkner and there was one more
I thank you madam John Hummer
and bill pre at P. R. I. E. T.
T. E..
Chair if I could this is to our
Faulkner if you if you would
please give give I'm sorry did
you have an update on somebody
coming in yes yes the expert
witnesses are bill correct and
myself
the HSD and the hospital
association and the medical
society are also available but
they were going to hold in tell
the audience.
Comments.
I hope that clarifies.
I'm I'm sorry it really doesn't
but if we can have short
presentations from those of you
that are actually going to be
part of the panel I think I've
let most in is that correct I'm
just
Ask you for some wait time.
And was there somebody else
Representative Trujillo.
If the three should have been
and it was my fault Mr chairman
god Falkiner John hi and build
Preet.
Okay so Alex Castillo Smith can
go back to the attendees is that
correct is that what you were
misspoke there is that what
you're indicating yes and John
Hummer is unable to attend.
Okay awesome okay that's clear
I'm sorry I'm and I'm
shepherding people in and out of
the the attendees source so I
appreciate patients so I think
it looks like we got everybody
in Representative Trujillo if
you what.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I H. B. twenty three sets
standards for medical schools
doing business in the state of
New Mexico the standard stated
in this bill will assist to
protect New Mexico hospitals and
healthcare facilities who
provide residency education
programs from big coming
overwhelmed and incapable of
meeting the demand for GME
program slots the standards are
reflective of the bare minimum
requirements necessary to be a
New Mexico lost medical school
and our practice to the powered
by both you and them and B. C.
O. M. this bill will ultimately
ensure the sustainable
development and expansion of
high quality GME programs in the
state the this legislation has
been endorsed by the interim
health and Human Services
Committee and the Indian Affairs
committees as well The New
Mexico associate the New Mexico
Medical Society and Mr chairman
I'd like to introduce an
amendment to HB twenty three
when it's time.
so if we can hold off on that we
have we have the primary sponsor
on that thank you for
potentiating that Representative
Trujillo all good but
Representative guiding us has
entered the chat.
Representative.
Thank you I can't seem to turn
my camera but that doesn't
matter I appreciate Mr chair
thank you I am a had a doctor's
appointment and I am so sorry
I'm running late thank you
representative of for for
pitching for me and
I think you you went to the
opening and I appreciate that
and there's also an amendment
and so I want to make sure I'm
not really quite sure we are
because I just literally got on
so it if there's
if this is a place where I
should move that amendment great
just let me know what what point
we're at.
Yeah yeah we're we're we just
started the introduction so we
have your three experts here so
what we'll do is to allow for
your expert to briefly address
the committee on the bill
overall and then we'll move to
the amendment get that in order
review the amendment in context
with your presentation and then
hopefully adopt the amendment or
see what we do with the
amendment and then proceed to
the rest of the L..
Thank you okay give me a minute
to catch my breath and I. E.
once again I appreciate your
patience thank you.
If we can start with our a.
With our
I guess we'll start with bill
correct.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative guy a ghosts my
name is bill Parratt internal
medicine physician by training
and currently serves as the dean
and chief academic officer at
Burrell college of osteopathic
medicine so we appreciate the
Representative got your screen
this bill forward and to to help
put it in terms of Mr chair of
the bill is intended to help
establish guidelines so that.
Medical schools that that wish
to train students in New Mexico
going forward in the New Mexico
in the new medical school would
have guidelines to ensure that
we have adequate teaching
resources for their students and
that we have adequate GMB
positions available for the
students to match into
residencies after graduation and
and with that I'll be happy to
stand and away questions thank
you Mr chair.
Right thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr Harris
would you like to say anything
at this time.
Yes thanks very much it's great
to be with all of you this
morning I'm John here's the
chairman of the board.
For the New Mexico hospital
association and I am testifying
in support of house bill twenty
three as amended house bill
twenty three is written is about
maintaining the delicate
balance.
Training and residency programs
in New Mexico.
This is a key to the provision
of quality education Associated
training and ultimately
retaining doctors in the state
not a lot of discussion in the
prior bill about that very
subject and for that reason we
support house bill twenty three.
It's important we think that we
guard against hospitals and
doctors getting overwhelmed.
With demand for these programs
where we will be unable to
maintain the quality of
education for medical students
and graduates it is important
that anyone considering.
The establishment of a medical
school in New Mexico be aware
that we were all very supportive
establishing medical schools in
in our wonderful state.
We think this legislation
protects our health care system
by ensuring that those who
participate will contribute to
the system and the building of
these vital training programs
that I referred to earlier.
So for someone considering
putting a medical school in this
state we think it's beneficial
when the schools have the
resources the partnerships and
the knowledge base to help
create the residency programs in
addition to filling the G. and
and residency positions that it
is beneficial when the school
has the support of existing
hospitals and healthcare
providers to train students
during their third and fourth
year of medical school and
finally it is beneficial that
that this when they support the
state has that the GME of the
residency program capacity to
maintain existing and future
demand and without all conclude
my comments thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
and thank you for your service
to the state.
Thank you.
Mr chairman that is it that I
think is a real good
introduction to the bill and at
this time Invid please is the
chair and the committee I would
sure like to do the introduction
of the amendment to house bill
twenty three.
Sure can you read Representative
can you read the two oh two
number for us so that we can get
everybody on that.
Yes Mr chair is two one nine
three three seven point four.
All right so it should be on top
of the file for House Bill
twenty three in our share file.
So give it a second so see
everybody adjusting pulling
things up waiting for their
computer.
Okay Representative if you would
please explain okay can I can I
have a motion for discussion.
Thank you all second that
representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chair so
the amendment it does.
Three things it lowers the bed
capacity and agreements required
to facilitate the creation of
comprehensive medical education
programs in New Mexico and
emphasizes the need to secure
those agreements in urban rural
and frontier communities.
It requires that medical school
applicants.
Is.
Is a recurring because of the
creation of at least one first
year resident position in New
Mexico for every ten students in
the approves class size when
possible preference should be
given to primary care programs
as defined by the state.
And it and lastly it provides
definitions for the following
terms clinical affiliate
comprehensive training and
prevent procuring because.
and so.
You know when we presented in
health we had a lengthy
discussion with the department
of health and how we we it was
able to the bill was able to
pass out of health and
afterwards we had a side bar and
several several meetings
with them the several of the
people that would be affected by
this and so with that with
consultation with Dr Scrase
department of health and we came
up with these amendments that
we're we're very palatable to
everybody to make sure it was a
bill that that we can
That met the needs of the
community and basically what it
came down to is the the number
of bets and making sure that we
have enough doctors to be able
to supervise those budget but to
still be able to look at rural
and urban facilities to make
sure that that the students it
comes after the students being
able to get the quality of care
and so with that Mr chairman I
would stand for questions.
Excellent so committee members
are there questions comments
about the amendment.
We're just on the amendment.
Representative Sweetser plate.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative that goes I just
lost what the second thing the
amendment does is and I was
reading through by the still so
it lowers the bed capacity that
it requires applicants to do
something and I just lost the
the concept there.
It requires that the medical
school applicants.
Is the procuring cause for the
creation of at least one first
year resident position in New
Mexico for every ten students
and I think that that the.
Mr Pratt will be able to explain
that way better than me say if
you if if that would please the
the chairman of the committee
could you it further explained
that for them please.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
representative Sweetser what
what this does in addition to
insuring that of of a medical
school has a proper affiliation
agreement with hospitals and and
physicians to do to teach its
medical students this actually
also motivates the applying to
medical school to help create
graduate medical education or
read your residency Education
positions in the state of New
Mexico so that we as a state
have a better chance of
retaining those physician
graduates from medical school to
to keep them in state to train
in residency and so this just
requires or compels the the
medical school to help with GME
expansion.
Along that line thank you.
Thank you for that
Representative and.
Thank you Mr chair that that
makes more sense I appreciate
it.
And Mr chair Representative I
think it's because I don't say
procurement very well and for
whatever reason I've never.
So I apologize.
Mr.
There discussed.
all except that the minute was
there further discussion or
questions on the amendment.
Okay so we have a motion to
adopt the amendment all second
the motion is their opposition
to the adoption of the
amendment.
All right C. line you have been
amended bill so we're on house
bill twenty three as amended so
before we go to committee for
questions about well we'll go to
the attendees list is there
support for house bill twenty
three and what.
All right so you have up to two
minutes.
Very good morning.
A good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
will usually see me related to
school work in this committee
but I am also the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
Medical Society the New Mexico
Medical Society does support
house bill twenty three as
amended the doctors we represent
or the individuals who act as
the mentors in the preceptors
for residents throughout the
state of New Mexico and we
really feel that this bill is
about ensuring the viability of
the healthcare ecosystem that we
have created within the state we
need strong medical schools that
have created clear pathways to
residencies so that once a
student graduates from medical
school there is a place for them
to complete their residency in
the state of New Mexico we know
students to do their residency
in New Mexico are more likely to
stay here for the long term and
we are very proud of the work
that we do to ensure that when
we have residents who are well
trained and they choose to stay
in and open their practices are
practice medicine within the
state of New Mexico we are
ensuring that there is high
quality access to health care in
every in every corner of our
state.
We see the sponsor we appreciate
the work that was done on the
amendment and we urge the
committee to vote yes on this
legislation thank you so much.
Great thank you so we'll go to
Alex.
Warning Alex you have up to two
minutes.
Good morning chairperson Romero
and members of the committee my
name is Alex cast year Smith and
I work in the secretary's office
of the Human Services department
on behalf of Secretary David
Scrase who expresses his regrets
for not being able.
With you on this morning the
Human Services department wants
to express its support for house
bill twenty three as amended I
want to extend my appreciation
to bill sponsor representative
guy egos as she mentioned she
met with secretary Scrase and my
colleagues several weeks ago
after the bill was first heard
and we appreciate the amendments
to the bill as you all are as
you all well know there are
physician shortages of all
specialties throughout the state
of New Mexico and the Human
Services Department and priority
for us is health care workforce
expansion particularly in the
fields of primary care and so
the focus on this bill in
particular to
focus on the creation
residency positions in to have a
medical schools prioritized
your health care access in rural
and frontier areas is really
important and as well as focus
on primary care I think with
that I will and my comments and.
Thank you all very much.
Great thank you.
All right so we'll go to share
and.
Morning two minutes.
Morning thank you Mr chairman
committee members and thank you
to Representative guy it goes
for introducing the bill and the
amendments.
I spoke earlier and I am sharing
Berman I'm the civic engagement
and policy manager at New Mexico
First and register lobbyist for
New Mexico First.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in favor of Senate bill
twenty three.
This bill is in keeping with
recommendations from our health
body mind and spirit town hall
that New Mexico first combined
convened last summer.
Over three hundred people from
twenty four of our thirty three
counties participated in our
cross partisan discussions both
at the town hall which was
remote and at the community
conversations we convened around
the state prior to and during
the pandemic.
I'm New Mexicans from all over
the state emphasize the
importance over and over of
increasing the number of
physicians and all locations
around New Mexico especially in
rural communities.
Creating affiliations and
agreements between medical
schools and hospitals statewide.
Is critical and we support house
bill twenty three I'm spreading
myself short because there's
music in the background thanks
so much Mr chair committee
committee members for this
opportunity.
Thank you.
All right so go to Dan.
Morning you have a two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Dan weeks of Representative
Mexico hospital association will
be very brief we appreciate the
fact that the Representative guy
goes brought forth this
legislation it's a now a very
good piece of legislation as a
result of some of the
collaborative efforts we've had
with the Human Services
Department and making it
mandatory language
I I think that the Mr John
Harris from memorial who's also
the chair of the hospital
association board spoke very
well in support of this
legislation so all you say is
that the association as a whole
also supports this bill thank
you very much.
Great thank you.
So we'll go to oppositions are
opposition to house bill twenty
three.
All right seeing none welcome to
committee committee members
questions comments concerns.
All jump at once.
Mr chair I moved here I have
moved I move the amended bill.
Are you moving in to pass on the
bill a move that do pass Mr
chairman to the bill.
All right so we have a motion by
Representative you're here our
second by Representative
Stapleton we have Representative
Figueroa so hold on to that
motion Representative Figueroa
please.
Thank you Mr chair.
We apologize for the delay in
raising that hand.
Thank you sponsor for bringing
this bill forward I had a couple
of questions to be sure I
understand it Mr chair on page
one of the bill in line
eighteen.
first to renewing a license for
medical school and I am
unfamiliar how often do medical
schools need to renew their
license.
Thank you Mr chairman I can ask
one of my witnesses it's in that
feel to please answer the
question.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Figueroa as as
far as licensing of a medical
school.
I I will defer to our our
experts as far as licensing by
the state our medical school and
and medical schools basically
are accredited by a a national
accrediting body and that
accreditation period will vary
depending on the results of an
accreditation visit typically
anywhere between four and eight
years so so that is how we
demonstrate that we are meeting
our standards and and educating
our students appropriately as as
far as state licensing within
New Mexico I will defer to other
of experts on licensing.
Mr chair thank you no sponsor
and thank you Mr hearing.
I think it is a different
process than licensing what I'm
trying to get at here is is this
bill going to affect any either
of our current medical schools
or is only going to affect any
new medical school that wants to
be created so that that's the
question or is one of the
analyses pointed out that the
public institutions medical
school you amendment does not
need to to be licensed by the
higher education department so
only real is so I think my
question is the next time around
needs to renew their license are
they going to have this
requirement to create more
residency slots placed upon them
or is this truly is limited to
only any new medical school in
the state.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Figaro I
apologize if I misunderstood the
question to to be clear this
legislation would not impact
Burrell College or university of
New Mexico school of medicine.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
that was a primary concern I
guess that my next question is.
Was someone thinking about
starting a new medical school in
New Mexico that engendered the
need for this bill and you all
other states have similar bills
to protect the balance between
medical schools and residency
slots so to point to the next
question with somebody looking
at opening a medical school
other states have a similar bill
to this to maintain the balance
and I guess the third and last
question might be
if we know that residency slots.
Encourage people to stay.
People are much more likely to
stay in New Mexico if they do
their residency in New Mexico.
Why are we not trying to grow
residency slots for our current
medical schools so three
questions thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Figueroa if I if
I shuffle questions or lose
track please feel free to re
direct me
so I'll start in reverse.
We this bill really is
addressing outside entities that
may or or a an entity that may
wish to.
Starting new medical school
within the state to our
knowledge no one is currently
seeking a presence in the state
as a new of newly licensed
school
so so at this time we are so we
are trying to establish
guidelines as was previously
commented to to to simply set
standards to protect what is a
relatively fragile eco system of
medical education and training
a second to your question about
creating GME.
This this bill of is is intended
to require any new medical
school to assist with GME
expansion while other efforts to
continue expanding GMA are
ongoing so this does not replace
or conflict with any of those
efforts it's simply
it is it would be complementary
and and directed at any new
entity considering of beginning
a medical school in the state
and if there was a third
question I apologize I've lost
track thank you.
Thank you Mr chair that's
alright it was in there I
appreciate you answering my
questions thank you Mr chair.
Right thank you representative
is out.
I.
Mr chairman members thank you
all very much
I I guess I'm very concerned
that I may be is just missing
out of my packet I don't have
any sort of response.
Well but then we turn this off.
Sorry about that.
Is there an analysis from higher
ed.
And.
Go ahead and and Representative
guy a goes I'm not seeing one of
my packet of stuff.
Mr chair and and Representative
there is there is an analysis.
Okay it's just not my staff and
so therefore okay I'm gonna let
that will give
whenever Mr chair and
representative guy yeah I guess
whenever you're talking about
we're these.
The hospitals that are going to
be chosen are the for now but
key to in Los crucis and won a
temperament in Santa Fe and
Russell why did to hold it to
these hospitals and more had
more than one hundred fifty
budget.
Can I address that Mr chair.
Please.
So I'm.
We what we did is that was one
of the things that came from the
amendment is we took out the
hundred fifty bed.
And we just said to that the
hospitals just have to be able
to do quality training in that
because we wanted to ensure that
rural hospitals.
Were asked to enter into these
agreements as well and the
hundred fifty capacity could
have been prohibited towards
that end exactly.
We need to fight that and that's
one of the things we worked on
with HSD that we're really still
has a lot of value to the
legislation okay thank you for
clarifying that for me one of
the things that has concern for
me is in one of the analysis is
has a.
Who is going to enforce this
issue.
Which agency will it be because
we all know from prior
experience several bills getting
drafted never think that there
will be a fiscal impact on that
agency that's been charged with
the state.
Mr chair representative is out
it will be the higher education
department and I made sure that
it would not have a huge impact
in the pre PreSession work HSD
did rights and FY are that FY
are they said that this was a
viable peace legislation and
that they could handle the the
workload all it is is putting
three three more items on a
checklist.
The.
So that all that is is it's not
it's not a cumbersome amada work
its nominal.
Mr chair and representative and
miss Faulkner
has any have any other boxer
solutions come up to solve this
medical deficiency in our state.
Mr chair representative actually
in twenty nineteen
representative guy goes Senator
Paypen carries legislation.
It is a board of stakeholders in
the health and Human Services.
Primary casket is is old
residency programs throughout
the state of New Mexico and in
creating that board we also
created a pipeline for state
money to go to hospitals in
rural New Mexico as well to help
build residencies all over the
state of New Mexico and that did
also have preference given to
primary health care and to roll
hospitals and so right now the
hospital association the medical
society UNM be calm and the
primary care association in the
primary care consortium also sit
on a board that
boats a lot of energy and
thoughts to helping to expand
residency programs in New Mexico
specifically at their charge.
Thank you for that response Mr
chairman Mr Wagner yes I do
remember that bill that was
carried by Representative guy
Ecosse and Senator Paypen of yes
there is a doctor shortage in
our state we do need to keep our
young they're studying automatic
medicine to be able to
establish a business in our
state but whenever we have
legislation that is pushing our
doctors out of state to me
that's very did too detrimental
to the overall well being of our
citizens of the state of New
Mexico thank you very much for
your response.
Thank you representative.
So is there further discussion.
All right so we had a need to
pass motion
Madam secretary called the roll
on a do pass on house bill
twenty three as amended yes he
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative help.
Representative Dow all.
Yes.
Representative is that right.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative rain yes.
Representative Ladda.
Yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative maturing.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative said.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative Garrett.
Representative care.
She's presenting a bill and
another okay Representative
Chair.
Yes.
Thirteen.
Two one.
All right out of thirteen twenty
having to pass on house bill
twenty three is amended thank
you Representative thank you all
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
Right so with that that
concludes our business for today
remember we will have our first
weekend Committee AA tomorrow
the time is eleven A. M. because
we have some conflict with House
Appropriations and are
appropriation members so to be
as accommodating as possible
we'll have eleven A. M. we're
going to hear represents are not
as bill should be bring it back
with those amendments as
promised this is been sent out
and then we will hear my bill
for
a hold harmless for schools in
the next school year
Representative Dow.
Mr chairman thank you very much
has the public been notified
that this.
Meeting tomorrow will take place
at eleven instead of the time
that has been advertised over
the.
Website that has that has that
gone up yet.
That was what we were working at
yesterday.
Yes it has Representative
itself.
Thank you very much it's in the
and that's all part of the
golden rock.
So be sure to check everything
eleven a and to Morrow.
All right any other further
questions business.
All right well I appreciate the
good work today thank you
everybody have a nice rest of
your day we'll see you tomorrow
all right so everybody thank
you.
Eleven eleven eleven.
Thank.
When you all.
It
was so late.
I I just.
As we have financing
appropriations medical
writing we can't okay we have a
lot of members that are on the
part of both so we want to have
it at seven we can do that.
Seven we are doing that so maybe
next time I'll put it down so
also I'm I'm down for an early
morning meeting I'm up early
every morning so we to.
The day.
We'll see if.
All right.
