Yeah
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Representative Vincent.
Chair er here.
We have a corum.
Thank you. And with that, we'll
start with our first bill, House
Bill 537 homeless student
lion with Representative Laura
and Representative Chavez Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I do have a an
expert witness.
Yeah
Rodmons.
Can you let us know who he is.
Thank you and welcome to the
house.
OK. Beer Hospital 537 proposes
that uh our higher education as
we know of.
Many of our students uh
experiencing homelessness in K
through 12.
Really want to advance someone
to advance their education and
one of the uh supporting the
homeless education liaisons at
the K-12 schools to coordinate
with halt with these potential
homeless lieiisons in order to
ease, ease more easily trans uh
transition the student from K-12
into higher ed, uh, the
position, um, obviously would
have to work very closely with
K-12 and no resources in the
community and within the
universities and themselves and
uh.
The goal of this bill is just to
make sure or to.
Thank you.
Um, we'll start with public
comment.
Is there anybody online who
would like to support House Bill
537.
OK. Uh, is there anybody in the
room who would like to speak in
favor of House Bill 537.
Please line up behind um
Representative. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Clayton Abbey in
New Mexico State University. I
want to thank Representative
Blatter for bringing this
forward. We recognize, uh, that.
There is a significant need in
the state right now to provide
basic needs for students,
including shelter.
And uh the legislature for the
past 3 years has provided
funding uh exactly for that
purpose, and we believe that
With some of our existing funds,
we can.
this liaison service and look
out for those students, and we
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward and we
encourage them.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is
Patricia Trujillo. I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
Higher Education Department, we
stand in technical support of
this bill, uh, uh, we would be
able to work as a liaison to the
New Mexico Basic needs
Consortium, who is named in the
bill, uh, who would help to
provide the homelessness
training to faculty and staff
across New Mexico. The basic
needs consortium, um, represents
has um uh student support, um,
and student wellness
professionals from all 29.
institutions, and we would be
able to coordinate with them to
be able to get that training,
um, uh.
and also out to the
institutions. Thank you. Thank
you, and we will go online, uh,
Barbara Medina, uh, you, uh, and
Good morning. Um,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you,
Representative Lauda for
bringing this to our attention.
My name is uh Barbara Medina. I
am the executive director of New
Mexico Association for Community
Colleges represent 9
institutions across the state of
New Mexico. We stand in, I stand
in support of this bill and
applaud the um
Originator of the bill for
bringing this concern to your
attention. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Is there anybody online who
would like to speak against
House Bill 536.
Is there anybody in the room who
would like to speak against
House bill by 7. See, no one
will go to members, um,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
thank you, Representative.
This is a great film.
Oh
I wanted to just ask one
clarifying question from the FIR
and um relevant to the bill on
the bill on page 3 under section
2, the appropriation. It
indicates $500,000.
In the FIR it says that um you
and them is estimating it to be
For the 7.
would be 700,000.
Um, is
Is this in a uh will this
and representative um I
Initially, I believe it would
be.
Uh, it just, it, it really
depends on the coordination and
with the coordination with the
basic needs consortium, so I
think that we can find some
creative ways to fund these
positions and the, the, even
though in the bill it states it
would be, you know.
I, I believe that uh that you
you'd be able to
Um
Give this duty to someone who's
already there in that place.
Thank you, madam, and um thank
you Representative. Yeah, I
think we're gonna need to get
creative because the other thing
is that um the students have to
pay very high student fees.
And somehow we need to have the
institutions re-evaluate.
Um, how these fees are
distributed, perhaps, and um
look at ways to leverage, as you
mentioned, and I do wanna just
close by saying that um
This is absolutely need it. Uh,
the first few years that I was
pursuing my master's and as a
state representative,
Um, as many of you notice, my
husband is always supportive.
So he started making burritos.
Um
Or other kinds of meals because
we noticed
That, um, not only was there a
homeless.
problem, but there was a food
and security problem and a
health problem on campus.
students and I was sitting in
the classroom with, um, we're,
we're hungry.
Um, and appealed to me and asked
me how, Madam Chair, we could
also help get health.
into the health system because
as you know, we have to pay a
students um a certain amount in
order to receive student health
insurance as well, and they did
not have the capacity to do
either. So this is um firsthand
experience, a very needed, um,
liaison position, and one that I
hope the institutions will take
quite seriously, because on the
surface, Madame chair looks
like.
Doing fine.
But that's not the case, in
every classroom, I would venture
to say that there
Is a certain percentage of
students who are facing um
homeless issues, unsheltered
issues, uh, food related and
health related. So thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
Repented very much for bringing
this bill up.
And Mr. Mons, he wanted to, our
expert witness, he wanted to
make a comment.
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to address you this
morning. My name is Rob Mons.
I'm the director of state policy
for schoolhouse Connection. Uh,
we're a national non-partisan
nonprofit that works to address
youth homelessness through
education, uh, from pre-K
through higher education. Uh,
we've helped to pass bills in 28
states including New Mexico, and
we support HB 537 we believe
this legislation will create a
vital system of support for
youth experiencing homelessness
as the representative uh
referenced earlier, students are
supported in K through 12, but
the support isn't the same once
they go into higher education,
so this um bill would absolutely
provide support that students
need to make sure that they're
able to access higher education
and our supported, um, so that
they are able to graduate and
avoid homelessness later as
adults. Um, you all may be
familiar with some of the
challenges, examined in the New
Mexico higher education student
basic needs report.
Um, that found 60%, 62% of
students surveyed were housing
insecure 14 were homeless over
the past 12 months, 58 were.
Food insecure and 39 were very
low in terms of food security,
so it's important that this bill
get passed to help create a
system to address these needs,
um, specifically because many of
these students who struggle,
struggle with multiple
insecurities, for example,
students who report being food
insecure are also housing
insecure, so these issues
negatively impact educational
outcomes, but also
mental health issues and
increase the likelihood that
students might withdraw from
classes or drop out altogether.
Um, HB 57 would allow New Mexico
to join with 9 other states
across the country that have
passed similar laws, and the
committee should also know there
are 4 other states currently
considering similar legislation
in these states span the
political spectrum. Um and so
finally, I'll, I'll just add
that having worked on
Similar legislation in other
states. We've heard arguments
both for and against. We realize
that most campuses have some
system in place to help their
students experiencing
homelessness. However, I can
tell you from experience we've
heard from homeless liaisons in
states that have passed similar
laws that having dedicated staff
who were trained in identifying
and serving homeless students in
establishing relationships with
service providers, um, including
those off campus, um.
And assisting with financial aid
and training other staff members
to do the same has really
improved retention and
graduation rates and for all
these reasons, we urge the
committee to pass.
HB 537. Thank you so much for
your time this morning.
Thank you, sir.
OK, um, our next member is
Representative Vincent, and then
Representative Cullen, and then
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lotto.
So, just to clarifying question,
this works for um K through 12
and higher ed.
Or just one or the other.
Representative Vincent, it, it's
It's aim, the aim is for for
higher up, so K-12 already has
the system in place. Uh, I was
the homeless liaison for my
school district, so I would, I
would.
Once in, once in a while to be
able to coordinate with somebody
at the university or miss you,
but only if the students, uh,
seek out the help.
Uh, this way, um, Mearian
representative.
There would be someone at the at
the at the at the institution
that would help look for and
coordinate with the local school
districts to see who was coming
in into higher red, uh, Madam
Chan and representative, uh.
I, in my experience, you know,
there are, are, there are youth
who have experienced
homelessness or or our own house
and they are very
They're good students.
And they want to continue their
support should, should continue,
uh, that just keep told also in
higher education,
uh, representatives and uh one
of the things that I would like
to mention is that uh I did work
with uh Doctor Trujillo on on
some, yeah, it wasn't, uh, it's
something that, you know, I, I'm
open to collaborating and we're
working because the goal uh
ultimately representative of the
Madam Chas just to, to get these
young people educated.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representatives.
What is a what is a homeless
liaison do?
If I'm a student and I go into
school, do I seek them out? Do
they seek me out?
I was at work.
Be representative, it would be
a, it would be a probably a
combination of both, I would
suggest, uh, both the students
seeking the services and the
services and the person
designated to do that also, you
know, looking for, for, for
those students and and
collaborating with uh, with the
K2 schools. Uh, this person
would connect the students with
a support services within the
institution, as well as support
services outside of the.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Lo. I
appreciate that. And
I know there has to be a reason
for this to come.
You know, where you're, you're
making legislation on this is,
has there been a study? Do we
know how many students in higher
ed from uh all the cover
community colleges as well as
four-year colleges. How does,
how does that work?
Mearian representatives, so, uh,
initially, uh, I want to cover
the, our higher institutions in
the state and and I'd like to
expand it to the community
colleges and to the, the branch
campuses if possible. Um.
I was approached by uh, there's
a, there's a homeless.
Consortium or group.
Um
It has members of the school
districts, members of uh
nonprofits, uh, there's on this
committee, and they, they meet
on a regular basis and they
bring up ideas or they come up
with
Um, solutions for help with.
And uh the, the whole impetus of
this Madam Chair representative
came from the students
themselves that were that were
telling of the advocates and
originated from.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, so I have a
couple of questions, um.
So I'm looking at the bill and
as well as the hierarch. So the
appropriation is actually only
for training. It's not for the
salaries for the liaison is how
I read it.
Is that correct?
Map representative, I'm sorry,
could you repeat that, please?
So it looks like of $500,000 is
actually appropriated from the
general fund to the higher
education department for the
expenditure, um, to provide
training to higher education
liaisons, but not for hiring,
educational liaisons, is that
correct?
term representative. Yes, that's
correct. So and that goes and
that doubles it so if the
university of the institution
already has someone who already
working with students doing
this, they can easily just
incorporate that.
OK. Thank you, man, because that
was where I was wondering when
you and I are, yeah, I think it
was you and I said that the
annual cost would be 700,000. I
think that
They were thinking that's part
of the salary, which is is not
the 500,000 best for training.
Meter representative yes,
training and collaboration. OK,
right, and then, so my question
is, is that, um,
So student support services, do
they provide these services at
the universities.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
I'm sure that that they provided
given that um.
There are many students here.
And so there's already that
process in place, uh, if, um, if
Mr. Mons.
Uh, Moos.
Of anything my my expert witness
if he, if he knows of any
specific situations I'd like for
him to.
Uh, yeah, can you please repeat
the question?
Um, and I think that you kind of
covered that a little bit when
you initial when you were
initially talking about, but
this is um does the universities
already provide these services
through the student support
services.
Typically, there are some uh
services that are provided by
universities through various
departments. Sometimes it's
supportive services. Sometimes
it's through financial aid
offices, um, the challenge is
that it doesn't happen
consistently from campus to
campus, um, and what we have
Uh, discovered in our research
is that when you have that
dedicated office with a point
person responsible for making
sure that all the various
departments are coordinating
services so that they can better
identify and then provide the
appropriate support students
need, the better your outcomes
are going to be.
came man chair and represent. So
my question is, um, so when
these students fill out their
FAFSA, um,
Before they enter college and
throughout the years. Uh, there
is a place to identify if you
are homeless on there and then
they receive Pell grants.
Um, typically, if they are
identified as homeless.
So are we trying to identify
some other funding for them as
well, or kind of walk me through
that, um, with the homeless
students because FASFA does
cover that within their
application, and then they're
usually distributed, um,
Grants.
A venture and representative of
if it's uh yeah, Doctor Tree
Hill can answer.
Madam Chair.
Representative, um, from what I
understand, uh, when you fill
out the FASFA and you identify
as being homeless and received
the Pell Grant. It just meets
unmet needs. So oftentimes, even
if you receive the Pell Grant,
it's still not adequate, um, to
cover your housing, food, to um,
transportation, um, etc. it's
the full cost of college for the
year.
Madam Chair, representative, so
where would the additional
funding come Madam Chair
Representative, what I
understand is that homelessness
coordinator would help um to
find resources that exist in the
community and also on campus to
see how we can start to address
that. What we're finding with
basic needs work is that it
takes rated funding, right, um,
so we do have some state funding
that is coming in. We have
institutional funding, um, but
we're also seeing that a lot of
foundations are getting involved
and also working with.
nonprofits in community
representatives. So, um,
that was within that. So I'll
just tell.
Just a concern that I have with
universities in general, Madam
Chair, representative, is that
like UNM requires freshmen to
live at the dorms, if you live
unless you live within pretty
much the city limits. Problem
is, is now all those dorms are
filled up and there's a wait
list for dorms typically.
And so this has caused an issue
with other people that probably
are becoming homeless because
they are unable to get housing
needs. Madam Chair, uh represent
and also the cost is
significantly rising at these
universities. I mean, it's not
even, I mean, way above
inflation levels is how they've
been, um, so I think that.
This is a responsibility of
higher ed that we really need to
be taking a look at because of
how high that they're going way
above.
You know, the rates for many,
many years that I've seen, and
we're going to be having
shortages of housing for those
students, um, so that's
something that we need to look
at as well. But, um, so, Madam
Chair, represented what it looks
like is this is for the 500,000
for training. So are you gonna
go have that? Are we gonna be
looking at another appropriation
for higher education to be able
to hire these.
liaisons
representative, so that's, that,
that would be an ongoing
process, uh, so my coordination
with Doctor Trujillo and the
higher department would look
towards finding funding or or
not or not necessarily funding
but finding Doctor Tujil had
mentioned that we can break that
funding that would be able to
help us.
of that you represent.
Representative Baer.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Representative for
bringing this forward.
Um, so my questions are gonna be
very
kind of direct and very
hopefully easy to answer.
we're not gonna talk in circles,
you're right.
Um, Mr. Madam Chan and
Representative.
What is the percentage of
students in New Mexico. I know
that we have 28 states, and then
we tend to
Kind of bring all the numbers
together. I want to know right
now.
In New Mexico, what is the
percentage of students that are
facing both homeless.
And then and food insecurity.
Madam Chair Representative Baca,
according to the 2023, 24, um,
uh, higher education department
basic needs report, 14% of
students who took that survey
reported being homeless in the
last year and that was in the
2023 um academic year, um, uh,
during the, um, an outcome of
that same survey was that across
the state of New Mexico, 33% of
our college students face food
insecurity and another 33% face
housing insecurity, so that.
precarious place before becoming
homeless.
And thank you, um, Madam Chair,
thank you for that.
My other question.
I
For this 500,000.
Is there going to be FTEs at the
higher end department.
out of that 500,000.
Me chair and representative uh
notwards uh training and
outreach for the, for the higher
end.
So
Madam chair, and
Representatives, so I, I guess,
you know, we're talking about,
we already have student
financial aid at each
institution is kind of a
requirement.
Um, and so my question is, I
mean, if we're, if we're talking
about
Training and professional
development. My question would
be is, what does this go that
goes beyond what people have
already been doing for years.
financially. Now, I will say
this.
That I know that when I was an
undergrad and going for my
bachelor's poorest I've ever
been in my life and I was an
athletic scholarship, right? So
I understand the need, but I
just need to understand is
Where or what does this do
different than what we're
already.
Because I think, Madam Cha and
representative.
The needs these kids are
transitioning from high school.
I think that's where we, as
we're talking about a continuous
Basically cradle to work or to
college.
Then I think that maybe this
Those, these activities.
Ma
Being in collaboration with your
McKinney Vento folks in your
school site.
As these guys because after
we've made that decision, and
they're already in school, it
makes it much more challenging.
So I think that, you know, that
You know, in this,
We probably need to work with
our schools to transition.
It's different, Madam Chair and
representative for.
A student that is just
completing high school or a high
school equivalency that's going
to be answered this.
And gonna be entering now, you
know, when I went back for my
Um, secondary or post-secondary
my master's, I mean at that
point I already had a
bachelor's.
I should have, you know, be, I
should have a better opportunity
to not experience this, so.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Madam Chair and representative.
Has there been collaboration
with, you know, or is that part
of this to do or work with the
PED or not with your, with your
school sites and to help provide
the support, whether it be
FASFA.
Um
Filling out the password are
also scholarships, right? Most
scholarships.
that we're talking about
actually start in your junior
year is when people start
working at scholarships. I mean,
if somebody who's we've
identified as McKenny Vento.
That I think that this fund
Isn't necessarily at the higher
end. It's actually working with
your school counselors so that
these guys can begin stacking
their scholarships, filling out
the fast one and any other
financial aid.
Prior to them leaving the door
at high school, we should have a
seamless transition there, so,
um, Madam Chair, my next, um,
My next question with this, and
again, we talk about food
insecurity and it's a real
thing.
I believe it. OK.
So I, you know, as I said
before, I met with some
students, Madam chair and
representative that.
From you and I actually, I'm
gonna give you and them a shout
out to students over there, they
talked about two things, and one
of the biggest things they
talked to me about was food
insecurity.
So I recognize the need for
this.
But I, I don't know that it's
already not happening in, and if
it's
You know, with our schools and
with our colleges, is it, is it
a funding issue?
For secondary institutions cause
I don't know what $500,000.
Worth the training really would
do.
beyond what's been done, um.
Madam Chair and represented in
my last question is, is this in
the budget already?
Mr. Charing and Representative,
uh, so to, to, to work on the
K-12, so that
Uh, in my experience, I would
have and you know, fill out the
form and, and with those
students that were coming from
from K-12, but this also would
also cover students who weren't.
Uh, identified as makingnavento
eligible in K-12.
who may be in the on the person
who otherwise wouldn't have
been. So this, this, this, this
position or this uh this the
intent of this is to be able to
cover those students as well.
And to answer your second
question, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, you
know, as, as we talked about it
is we have more opport
opportunity, right? When we have
the legislative lottery
scholarship or the opportunity
as you.
Students are transition from
K-12.
And that's why I'm kind of
saying is, are these funds?
What is, would we be getting
more bang for our buck.
I actually our focus being on
the K-12 side of things.
And preparing them and giving
them so once because, you know,
they meet certain criteria, we
already have tuition fees that
are gonna be paid with one of
these scholarships, and that way
the
other funds that may be acquired
through the fast food process
within cover.
The other cost of attendance
type items, so.
You know, if you ask about, you
know, from, from, from my
thoughts to this, I think that's
an area that maybe we need to
kind of take a look at that.
It's, it's not necessarily in my
opinion, it's just my humble
opinion. It's not necessarily
the secondary folks.
I want these guys transitioning
from either the high school
equivalency.
Or from the K-12 school setting.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative.
I care.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of
all, thank you for bringing this
up because the more discussion
there is, the more solutions we
can find. I'm concerned about
what's actually in the bill.
Because the bill says on page
one.
Um, line 22, that shall
designate one full-time
equivalent staff member to act
as the higher education liaison
for current and incoming
students experiencing
homelessness. Although we talked
and I understand it could be a
person with multiple
responsibilities.
Somebody could say, well, we're
supposed to do this. So, can you
just respond to that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
yeah, thank you for asking that.
You know, it gets.
Uh
The, the original idea of the
design.
But after a conversations with
others, you know, I, I
discovered that it was that
there are positions currently at
the higher institutions.
That cover multiple aspects of,
of, of, and so this, this person
that is to absorb some of that
work or incorporate some of that
work into what they currently
do. So if the original intent
was yes to do that, but after
several conversations
that could easily adopt this.
Thank you. And then my second
question, actually, I kind of
disagree with the representative
Barker because
As somebody who returned to
school at the age of 34 to get
my college degree.
And who, as I observe in
Albuquerque, people returning to
school, there's so many adults
who are in this precarious
place, if already left high
school many years before, many
of them are single parents.
And um, these are real issues,
not just to the transitioning.
Homeless students, but it's
You know, with
Our whole economic system and
everything else, I can see that.
Um, and I bring it up because
that's where they go. They go to
junior colleges, they go to
community colleges or two-year
branches.
And so
To me, um,
even if it's an initial thing
just for the four-year campuses.
Your success in going into a
four-year.
Thatcher's program depends.
On what happens during that 2
years. So I felt that that
should be included.
In the bill.
Um
Is that something that you would
field should be
change or mended.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, I, I agree. I, you know,
there, there are, we're dealing
with the spectrums the spectrum,
and I think, uh, uh, the more
inclusive we are with these
things and.
Thank you, and then I'm um
Currently, let's see.
Um, do we, um, maybe doctor
Trujil can answer this.
On page 3,
lines 4 to 6.
Um
The higher education department
shall administer an annual
survey regarding students
experiencing homelessness.
Is that
I know that, is that already
being done with the basic needs
serving Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett not consistently at this
point, um, having this
appropriation would make that
feasible.
OK, uh, thank you, and I, I
guess I shared.
in a Bacchus, um, concerned
about.
The actual appropriation
situation.
Thank you. We don't have anybody
else on my list. Um, I did want
to ask, and I'm sorry for, for
coming in late is with
UNM suggests modifying basic
needs liaison and you talked
about how that could be
incorporated. Would you see this
as
Part of those initiatives or
completely separate.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I would see
that as, as part of him.
Mr. Chair, um, if I may, the
basic needs consortium is really
taking off right now, um, and
they're establishing themselves
as a 501c3, Doctor Serita Cargas
from UNM is the director, and I
just mentioned this because uh
they're organizing around 4
pillars, and one is housing
insecurity and homelessness, uh,
and so in regard to uh your
question is yes, it's absolutely
seen as the greater, as part of
the greater work of the basic
needs work, in addition to.
you know, um,
uh.
Food and nutrition security, um,
how we're utilizing federal, you
know, SNAP and other supports,
um, as mentioned, getting
students to apply for the FASFA
and also education.
So, I guess I'm thinking about
this in terms of the K-12 world
because school that I teach at
several other schools have both.
Somebody that's doing the
function of um
Basic needs coordinator, but
then somebody to handle um
McKinney Bento.
And issues around homelessness
because they haven't been
necessarily the same thing and
they're different programs all
over the place that cater to to
other students. So I mean,
that's what kind of piqued my
interest about about having your
bill because I think it is
something that's very much
needed, um, in, in our higher
education world, obviously it's
something that um it's been
raised there isn't money in the
budget for currently, um,
unfortunately, but, um, like you
mentioned is is seeing.
secondary, or sorry, the
two-year colleges included in
this, um, that work with so many
different students, so if I may.
We roll this, look into those
two year colleges, see what it
might take, maybe have a
conversation with the Senate
Finance folks to see if there's
possibility of getting this
appropriation in.
Um, on the other side, cause I
understand they're they're
working on that this week.
Mr. Chair, of course I would be,
you know, uh, he polishes up,
make it better and make it more,
more, more, more of the things
that have.
Oh no, it's certainly
appreciated and again talk with
the Senate side to see if we can
get this actually into the
budget.
But with that, we'll roll it
out, we're roll it, yes, ma'am.
All right, thank you.
All right
So
send it late as men do.
Senator Woods.
No, that represented Vincent
substitute teacher. I was gonna
go with baseball pinch hitter.
Oh, OK. Oh, wow.
Unfortunately, will determine
the length of the fence,
apparently in the committee.
Christian
represent
Christian
out there, senator with that.
I want to create a sense of
drama.
Oh, you're good.
Senator, is your microphone
repayment loan bill.
And I've got really smart people
with me.
I've got to hire it and I've got
the state veterinary with me,
and they can tell you the
mechanics of the bill.
But just let me give you a
little introduction. Senate Bill
8.
There are a few veterinaries
that are involved in the care of
help producing animals across
the entire country.
and sends to provide this kind
of care are limited.
And it's a difficult lifestyle
choice for veterinarians to do
extreme work conditions and
physical providing an economic
incentive will help place in the
Mexicans at the forefront of the
market. Veterinarians who
provide care to food producing
animals become a trusted
resource in their community.
They serve as a front line of
detection of animal disease that
can impact the security of our
food supply.
Security of our food supply is
critical to maintain the
infrastructure of our state,
nation, and world.
This bill emphasizes the need
for veterinary care for
food-producing animals, but it
does not prevent a veterinarian
from providing care to other
species.
These veterinarians also have to
provide care for many species to
maintain a stable income for
their, in their rural community.
Veterinary practices in the hair
there.
Centered on the care of
livestock and including the food
producing species. These
practices are often
singer-doctor practice and a
limited relief or support.
Thus, resulting from burnout
chair.
We're just trying to attract
vets in the underserved rural
areas.
was a loan repayment.
Here it's $15,000.
For the 1st 2 years.
Adding up to a total of 80,000
over a we believe.
that this will help bring more
vets into the state.
I think with that, I'll stand
for questions.
Alright. Thank you all for being
here. So,
would you like to say something?
I'm sorry.
Please representative.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, community
members for all those reasons,
stated, we have, we have been
hearing this issue for many
years. It's a huge concern, it
affects, um, so many of our
communities in so many ways and
so many levels that this is,
this is a well effort that I
hope we can all come to
agreement on and understand the
the vital need for this. Thank
you.
Right.
Our higher end department will
be admitted, you need to hear
anything from them.
The state veterinary is will
give you details.
So other than that, I'll
understand the question. All
right. Thank you all for being
here. We appreciate it. So we'll
go to our audience, folks on
Zoom, if you're here in
supporting Senate Bill 8, would
you please be indicate by
raising your hand, please?
Folks in the room. Is there
anybody here in support of the
Senate Bill 8.
All right, we've got a number of
folks, so if you would, please
be brief. You'll have up to 2
minutes.
Morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Committee members. My name is
Tom Patterson, McCatchen County
cattle rancher, I served as
President-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
Cattle growers supports Senate
Bill 8.
At the ranch level, we want to
produce our beef safely and
humanely. The same goes for
sheep and goat producers.
You and other consumers across
the state expect nothing less
from us, but to do that, we have
to have access to large food
animal veterinarians who can
help us provide responsible,
prompt care for our livestock.
At the beginning of this year,
we had 1,280,000 head of cattle
in New Mexico. 75,000 head of
sheep and 6000 head of goats.
Currently, however,
The estimate is we have fewer
than 40 veterinarians in New
Mexico who provide some material
measure of large food animal
services.
Many are reproaching retirement.
That's not enough.
They're not evenly distributed
across the state. The situation
is getting worse. We need more
and we need them in underserved
areas. We need them for our
livestock when they're sick,
when they're injured, when
they're in labor, or when we
need health papers, preventative
screenings or evaluation or
antibiotics. This program is
part of an answer to an acute
problem. SB 8 is modeled after
programs in other states that
have proven successful in
attracting and keeping large
food animal veterinarians.
An underserved areas of the
state.
Keep them there for 4 years, and
the evidence shows they'll
stick.
cattle growers urges you to
support Senate Bill 8. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Please have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today in
support of Senate Bill 8.
My name is Jillian Joyce, and
I'm here representing Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union and our
members across the state.
Our rural communities are
experiencing a critical erosion
of agricultural support
services, negatively impacting
the vitality of New Mexico's
rural agricultural communities.
The shortage of large animal
veterinarians is particularly
concerning, as it doesn't just
negatively impact the function
of one of our most important
rural industries. It impacts
animal welfare, disaster
response, and our food safety
systems as veterinarians are
crucial for disease
surveillance, emergency
preparedness and ensuring
compliance with state and
federal regulations.
This program would help rebuild
vital infrastructure in our
agricultural communities while
protecting animal welfare, food
system resilience, and public
health. I urge you to support
Senate Bill 8.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
you have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Howard Hutchinson,
I'm registered lobbyist for the
coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
And we look at this as part of
the economic development in our
rural areas.
As we move towards meat
processing in the state.
And delivery of that product to
our school systems.
Ah, we are looking at a
tremendous need and development
of veterinary services.
For the meat producers in our.
In our counties.
So we
Strongly support
So the light
Or some
own bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Please.
Thank you, Chairman members of
the committee. I'm Kelly Fajardo
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Farm Bureau. We want to thank
the sponsors for this
legislation. We have a shortage
of veterinarians, especially in
our rural communities. This
builds focus on veterinarians is
crucial for the Mexico's
economy, which relies heavily on
agricultural and livestock
veterinarians declare vital in
agricultural and farming and
ranching by ensuring the health
and productivity of our
livestock, and which safeguards
our public health. This leads to
ensuring the safety of our food
supply chain.
by addressing the shortage of
veterinarians in rural areas and
providing financial incentives,
SB 8 will track skilled
professions, professionals,
especially to our underserved
areas. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee, Clayton Abbey
and the Mexico State University,
we two stand in full support of
this bill. Uh, many New Mexico
State universities.
Students from the College of
Agriculture, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences, uh,
benefit from this program
currently and will continue to
benefit from uh the loan
repayment program.
Um, also, I think as many others
have already said, this is
important to our state, to our
rural and agricultural way of
life, which we need to preserve.
So for these reasons, I, I do
want to thank our sponsor,
Senator Woods for bringing this
forward and Representative Ter
Luhan and again the Mexico State
University in full support.
Thank you.
Yeah, please.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Belinda
Garland. I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Livestock Board. This really
links back to food security for
all of the nation. So, as many
of you know, but many of you
don't know, any livestock that
crosses the state line has to
have a certificate of health.
That comes from an animal
veterinarian that's involved in
the rural communities. So that
is um part of our food security
across the nation. Our state
veterinarian is housed with us.
She works very closely with you.
SDA and trying to ensure that
all animals that start on the
ground that they are uh safe and
secure for consumption. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Jeff,
what he, uh, with the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. I
serve as your Secretary of
Agriculture. This bill, you've
heard from the producers, you've
heard from others how important
this is. Let me add one more
thing.
At at NMDA.
With
Work with the state vet. We run
the New Mexico Alert Program.
It's the agricultural livestock
Incident Response Team.
Right now, we've got about 26
private veterinarians that are
part of that program. Well, the
state vet's office only has
what, 3 veterinarians? When we
have an animal disease outbreak,
we rely on these 26 private vets
from across the state were
trained in foreign animal
disease diagnostic work and, and
others to respond and help
respond to that.
Think about the size of New
Mexico, 77.9 million acres or
so. 26 bats is really thin.
This bill is a result of a lot
of conversations over several
years about the right vehicle,
and I want to compliment the
higher ed department because
they found the solution to bring
this forward. We need this and
it'll help our state address any
animal disease issues that come
up. Thank you.
OK. Thank you. Anybody else wish
to speak in sport?
Right, so we'll go to
opposition. Is there any
opposition on Zoom to send Bill.
This is indicated by raising
your hand, folks in the
audience, is there any
opposition to be like, all
right, not seeing any, we'll
come to committee represent
Baker.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward forward. I'm gonna
ask just a couple of quick
questions and these are very
closed questions.
Um
How many
Veterinary schools, do we have
across the country? Do we know?
Uh, Mr. Chair.
I, I was looking and I
apologize, uh, I, I didn't catch
your name,
my name is Samantha Hollick. I'm
state veterinarian in Mexico
lives.org. Um, the, the number
of veterinary schools is
currently on the rise at one
point there were, I think only
27, um, about 20 years ago, I
think we're we're up closer to
the low 30s now, um, and many of
those veterinary school programs
have expanded their class size.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
I and Senator, what I, I'm, it's
a selfish plug. I'd like to see
a veterinary school here in New
Mexico.
Because of the, the amount of
cattle and livestock that were
producing as we now have taken
great stas, uh, stakes to
actually process our, our meats
and our food here locally. It
fits in what we, I like to make
connections.
Um, we talked about as far as
addressing the hunger, we talked
about food at the table, we
talked about working with our
schools.
Now, I, I, it would be great at
some point in time if we took a
bold thing and uh bold move and
these spots and create something
like that. So that's just a
selfish plug-in, I think to
Mexico State or Eastern or
someplace like that would be
perfect for it, you and him,
there's no land around UNM, but,
um, Mr. Chairman, um,
Can you
Can you uh go over as far as how
many with the food processing
that's going to be taking place.
How many vets will that require?
Um, to, to make sure that we can
uh accomplish that.
The task.
Oh, Mr. Cha and uh
Representative Baca that so are
you referring to the meat
inspection program that, that,
that is correct. That's exactly
what I'm talking about. Yeah, I
know that I've talked to folks
from cattle growers and stuff
like that, so yeah, and there
definitely has to be
veterinarian involvement, um,
through that program both in a
state and federal level, our
state inspection program will
meet or exceed the federal
requirements, but those
inspectors do not necessarily
have to be at the the slaughter
plants. They do have to be on
site and if there are um
significant issues found in
veterinarian would have to be
consulted and brought in.
Thank you, Mr. Charman, and
thank you.
Ivanka.
Uh, an inspector.
Not only looks at an animal as
he comes in.
Determine
Whether well or not, but he also
when they uh
Pro food is safe to go into the
food supply, so.
There's, it's a big training
that they go through.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator Do the the
other big question is I, I think
that I saw on the bill here,
we're looking at a possible.
A loan repayment, is it up to
10?
folks that would be, is that
correct? Did I say that
correctly, Mr. Turman?
Senator.
Mr.
Chairman Representative Baca,
that is correct. So, um, the,
the way the bill represented is
they're gonna be 10 individuals
who selected each year to
participate in the loan
repayment program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you so the other question
that I asked earlier with the
Representative A lot of this in
the budget currently.
Currently there's $2 million in
the budget.
I asked for 5 million.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, it hadn't
got away from here.
Well, yeah, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, Senator.
Well you guys, like you said on
the Senate, you guys got some
money out there, you can put
some money in that too, but
again, I do think that as we,
you know, like I said,
I'm gonna selfish, shameless
plug again for you large cattle
ranchers up there as New Mexico
does take up a huge part in
Uh, feeding in the country, I
mean, these are some of the
hardest working people. I think
that at some point we're gonna
have to establish some kind of
veterinary school here, um.
To, to address some of that
other here just like I
I think we need to double or,
you know, increase the number of
med students that we're
producing at UNM. I think at
some point we need to have a, a
vet school here in New Mexico.
That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Hevino Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, would this be a year for a
year? How, how does that go?
Yeah, they have to, they have
to.
Worked for a year before they
can.
Received the repayment and that
loan repayment. So if they, if
they're gonna pay off their
The school, how long would they
work in New Mexico
and it won't be
pay back, uh, I wish I could do
much with.
trouble getting what I got. If
you all wouldn't mind keeping
the conversation.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, you need to talk
to some of them senators. I hear
that.
I hear the budget's over in the
Senate, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think this is a
awesome opportunity to uh
replace some of our
veterinarians that have gotten
older, passed away or gone away,
Mr. Chair, in my area alone,
there used to be many, many
people that practiced large vet
uh veterinarian and uh Mr.
Chair.
Today
Many of those are gone.
Uh, Mr. Chair, some of them are
replaced by
folks that just work on your
cats and dogs and, and my cats
and, well, my dogs, uh, go see
him every once in a while, Mr.
Chair, but
I need somebody to look after my
cows. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Uh, I don't have anybody.
Literature,
right, so we have a do pass
motion on the Senate Bill 8 to 2
by representative Chatfield,
Madam Secretary, if you call the
roll on the due pass.
Represented Chatfield.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Gonzalez,
represented Guola.
Representative Florida.
Yes.
Representative Mirabel Moya.
Represents Royal Caballero.
Represent Cohen. Yes.
Represent Torres Velasquez.
Represent Vincent.
Vice Chair Garrett.
Yes.
Chair Romero.
Looks like you have a unanimous
due pass. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for hearing my bill today. Sorry
that I had to step out and come
back. Oh no, you're good.
builds up the drama.
All right.
I sent about 133, so our own
vice chair Garrett presenting.
And then we'll have that coming
around, folk.
Right, got it.
Please, when you all are ready,
welcome.
So, uh, good morning, Mr. Chair
and everybody.
Senate Bill 133 proposes changes
to the New Mexican educational
retirement Act.
By increasing the salary cap.
A retired member may earn while
returning to work without having
retirement benefits suspended.
The bill amends section 22,
1125.1 NMSA 1978, raising the
limit from 15,000 to 25,000 per
year.
It maintains existing
provisions.
Allowing retired members to
return to work under certain
conditions without losing their
benefits.
Provided they conform with the
specified time restrictions.
An employment duration
limitations.
Um
It doesn't have an
appropriation, this is through
the retirement system.
Other things to consider is that
the bill would encourage
experienced educators to return
to the workforce, helping with
the teacher shortages.
Retired employees returning to
work will continue making
non-refundable retirement fund
and the retiree healthcare fund,
ensuring the financial inflow,
the employer must continue to
contribute to the fun. They both
must make contributions to the
retiree healthcare fund.
The provision allowing a return
to work for up to 36 months
without suspending benefits
might lead to concerns about
workforce planning and.
And that ERB will continue to
update policies and procedures
for return to work members.
With that, I'll stand for
questions. My expert witness is
David Archuleta, the executive
director of the ERB.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee, I
believe that Vice Chair Garrett
summarized the bill, uh.
Pretty well, uh, just, just to
add a couple of
You know, currently we
administer 3 return to work
programs, one of which allows a
person to basically not have a
layout and return to work and a
0.25 capacity, basically, we
measure that as being about 10
hours per classroom to help
substitute. It's mostly taken
advantage by the folks in the
higher education institutions.
We also have a return to work
program that allows the member
to earn up to $15,000 per year,
where they're not making any
additional contributions into
the fund. Obviously they're not
earning any additional service
credit, but this, this, uh,
This bill would propose that we
move that from $15,000 to
$25,000. In addition to that, we
currently allow folks to return
to work after 90 days for up to
36 consecutive or
non-consecutive months. This
bill would extend that period up
to 60 months and allow for those
and uh with that, Mr. Chairman,
members of committee. All right,
thank you all so much. So we'll
go to folks on Zoom if you're
here in support of the Senate
Bill 133, please indicate by
raising your hand.
folks in our audience, everybody
here in support of Senate Bill
133, right, if you line up
behind our presenters.
you speak, you'll have up to 2
minutes.
Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name's John
Disch with the American
Federation of Teachers New
Mexico, um, we support this
bill, uh, for two reasons. One,
we were supporting the effort by
Representative Mirabel Moa to do
exactly the extension of the
extra time for return to work,
um, for folks, so this is in
line with that after the Senate
amendment, and certainly we are
also supportive of the increase
in what an ERB participant can
earn coming back into the
schools, we all see the
vacancy reports and we've been
making progress on those vacancy
reports, however, we're sort of
starting to see a plateau. When
we look at both of these efforts
as a way to uh attract
experienced educators back into
our schools. Um, one important
note is that with the earnings
increase, I really see this as
an opportunity to get our
classified employees back into
the schools when you think of
bus drivers were have a shortage
there, we have a shortage of
educational assistance, front
office staff, all of those folks
are on the lower end.
Pascale. So with this increase,
we can see them um coming back
and wanting to take advantage
of, of that benefit. So we do
urge you to support, um, Cel
1:33 today. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee stand rounds for the
school superintendents and the
coalition of Educational
Leaders, we asked for this bill.
I won't summarize what John just
summarized, which is the 15 to
25, we concur with all of those
comments. I want to focus on the
60 months instead of 36 months.
When we brought this in about 3
years ago.
We had a number of teachers step
up and come out of retirement to
solve our teacher shortage in
many of our districts.
What this now does is allow them
to continue for another 2 years,
up to 5 years, it's actually 60
consecutive or non-consecutive
months. We want to thank uh
Director Archuleta for his work
with the educational retirement
Board. We want to thank the
sponsor also, uh, Mr. Chairman,
we urge that you pass this.
Great. Thank you. So we'll go to
opposition online if you're here
in opposition to Senate Bill
133, please indicate by raising
your hand, hosting the audience.
Is there any opposition to
right?
Anybody?
Committing question.
It's not a hand. There's a
finger like Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I was
trying not to ask a question,
but I have to ask this question
anyway.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrett, thank you for bringing
this. I'm a big fan of people
returning to work.
And
The caps that you put on, was
that negotiated through unions.
too.
Mr. Chair and representative.
Uh, this process was negotiated,
uh, there's 3 different things,
as the director said, that cap.
was something negotiated several
years ago, it involved the
directors of the ERB at that
time.
Um, existing teachers, possibly
unions, I don't know, but that
was done several years ago.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
Representative.
So when we were in a crisis.
Was it
Fair to say that we was it 3
years that we gave them? Was it
a bridge for 3 years to get us
back on track?
And now we're extending that.
Uh
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
actually was a sponsor of the
bill that allowed them to come
back after 90 days, uh, at that
time, we chose the 36 months.
Remember that those people in
that category.
have to the retirement, but they
don't get any benefit. It's not
increased.
So they have to pay, but years
are not added to the 36 months,
or if this bill passes the 60
months.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So there is
going to be a limit that, that
the our return to work, folks.
They can only be there for so
long.
And how long is that?
With this spill, it goes up to,
I would just add that, you know,
this bill passed back in 2022,
we're bumping up against that 36
month limit now or we will be, I
believe in April, so we'll have
some folks that are bumping up
against that, that it would no
longer be able to do that. You
can obviously suspend your
retirement and return to work
and increase, you know, your
earnings and the contributions
to the program, but in order to
both draw your pension as well
as in and we need to suspend our
deal,
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Why do we put a cat? What, not a
cap on their pay. Why do we put
a time frame on people that want
to come back to work.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, that's a, that's a
really good question. And one of
the reasons we have is because,
you know, it's a retirement and
if we incentivize people to work
that minimum time frame and then
return to work even with the
non-refundable contributions
being made to the program, it
still has a negative fiscal
impact, meaning that everything
that you've been paying or
everything you've paid into the
program over the course of your
career is paid back to you
within the 1st 2.5 years of your
retirement. After that, we're
basically living off of the
investment earnings.
So that places additional
pressure on those investment
earnings. So we don't want, you
know, someone to retire after
25, knowing that they're going
to work an additional 10 years
to come back to the program and
say, you know, we're basically
doing this for an unlimited
period of time, because prior to
that, there was a return to work
program that allowed you to
return to work without an income
limit.
For no time without.
Uh, how, uh, a time cap on it or
no sunset date after laying out
for one year. Now we still have
about 1500 of those retirees
that are in that program, um,
but ultimately, it was scheduled
to sunset wanting to say, OK, we
need to extend it another 2.
That is now gone. There are no
new entrants in order to offset
any negative fiscal impact.
Thank you. And last question,
Mr. Chair and Representative.
I know we put a cat, I know we
put a time frame, the 60 months
that they can stay. Is there
anything tied to what if we have
a teacher shortage and that
teachers in that area.
Could we hold on to them until
we can get that position filled
or
him position field or 20
positions filled, however,
whatever, whatever that is, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Vincent, I would suggest that I
believe this will be a challenge
that the legislature will
continue to have to address
probably.
Every year, uh, you know, as we
look forward and, you know, in 2
years we'll be looking at the
end of this 60-month cycle or
the the folks that have been
working for an additional 60
months, and I think at that
point in time, there could be
some determination as to whether
or not Mr. Chair, just for the
record, I would put, I would put
Representative Garrett back to
work tomorrow if I thought I
could get if I was a principal.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I don't think you can force
anybody to do anything,
represent baca. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for
bringing this forward.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
and I know you probably don't
have this teacher vacancies do
we have right now in New Mexico?
759.
Mr. Chair and thank you, um.
Representative for that. So we,
there's a need that when we look
at legislation, look, is there a
need, right? Is there funding
available?
Um
So Mister Chairman and uh Mr.
Archuleta.
So, a a teacher making $75,000
retires.
They sit out for the 90 days.
So the cat would be that they
could make $25,000 or can you
just, because I think that's,
that's the, that's the point
that I think I just want to
And I kind of know the answer I
wanted to highlight it, please,
if you would.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
that is so right now they can
enter one of 3 programs, and
that's either in a 0.25
capacity. Basically, there's no
income limit with that 0.25%
capacity. It's just the employer
certify that they're only
working part-time, which we
generally kind of define as
being about 10 hours per week.
So you can take that as being a
part-time substitute teacher.
The other alternative that they
have is they can come into the
program and earn up to $15,000.
What's that $15,000 limit is
reached, then they would either
need to apply for a different
return to work program or
suspend the retirement and
return full time.
Or alternatively, the 3rd
program that we have in place
allows you after 90 days to come
back without any income limit.
And worked for that period of up
to 36 months.
But with this bill, Mr.
Chairman, and uh Representative
Garrett. So now with this bill
would be 60 months, it would be
an additional to years. Is that
correct, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chair
Representative Baca, that would
be correct. So it moves at 36
month date to 60 months, and it
moves to $15,000 cap to $25,000.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My last
question is,
And this is a big
is this
Is it similar? Does it parallel
what is currently in place for
Perra.
Mr. Chairman and
And I know that's not in this
bill.
But, you know, when we talk
about the
the differences between ERB and
Pa. That's kind of a big pet
peeve of mine. So if a pair of
folks.
retires
Is there a limit on the amount
of time they can come back to
work, Mr. Chair Representative
Baca, uh, there is not currently
a return to work program for uh
a pair of retirees. Uh, there
was one in place many years ago.
I don't know I recall that when
basically at sunset, but it's
been many years. So right now,
in order to return to work,
you'll return to work as a
contractor, you can't return to
work as a full-time or any
additional service credit. I
mean, you can suspend your
retirement and go back to work,
but you can't earn that. Uh, I,
I know that there's a variety of
proposals being considered by
the legislature this year that
would allow, I think, er.
Occupant Mr. Chairman and thank
you for bringing this forward.
I, I fully support your bill. It
addresses the need and it brings
back his Representative Vincent
says,
Not just teachers.
But also other
Critical, um, positions to our
school district, so I, I
appreciate it. Thank you, madam.
Mr. Ja but
Representative Garrett.
And like.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
director, you know.
Uh, it's more of a comment that
I have in this, you know, um, I
called the director with a few
months, several months ago, told
me I need help with this. Uh, I
had a very respected member of
our community who uh
who came back to work after
retirement.
And he was concerned about the,
the length of time that he had.
And so, uh, uh, I wanna, I just
wanna acknowledge it and thank
you for, for your hard work and
your expertise in this, and I
think this is an excellent
opportunity. Um,
Uh, I already have people
reaching out to me and asking me
well maybe maybe I'll consider
coming back.
So one of the things, uh no, I
do have a question, Mr. Chair
and Representative.
And so, and you mentioned uh you
mentioned substitutes. So, let's
just say if uh if a a teacher.
Who retired, but not necessarily
wants to come back to the
classroom.
And they want to work at the
front office. They want to do
something else in, in, in
another capacity within the
school district, would they be
able to take advantage of that
as well.
Mr. Representative lotta they
Thank you for that
clarification. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um.
So I did have one question
because um the educational
retirement Board talks about a
potential hit.
Um, as a result of this, could
you talk about that a little
bit?
Sure, uh, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, so in, in
general, um, return to work
programs sort of rub against the
grain of.
The overall fiduciary authority
and the reason that that happens
is one, the small financial hit
is going to be, we're no longer
taking contributions, employer,
employer, when we move from the
15 to the 25. So, you know,
we're missing out on the, the
basically 20.
Actually, I'm underestimating
here, about 30% of the
contributions that we would
receive for that additional
$10,000 will now go away. And I
think that's the smaller part.
The other part is incentivizing
folks to again in the situation
that I described where if you
know you're going to hit your 25
years, get out of the system as
soon as possible and work an
additional 10 years, there's a
slight negative hit there that
our actuaries have, you know,
obviously brought to our
attention that we, we know in
the fiscal impact report that we
provided to folks.
Great. Thank you for that. Um.
Entertain emotion right we have
a motion by representative
Colin, the second by
Representative Chatfield. Is
there any opposition to the Du
Passmo, right, no, you have a do
pass Senate Bill 133. Senator
Stewart. Thank you. um.
Representative, would you mind
staying there for the last one
just so we don't.
We don't have senators.
All right, if we could get that
passed down.
Oops.
Yeah, we'll get that to you
representative if we could get
one to the presenter too.
Probably first.
Aware of an expert.
Right, so Stan, are you the
official expert on this.
Or
OK.
I'm hearing unofficial.
But now it's official. OK
we certainly appreciate its
But now it's official. OK
we certainly appreciate it
Representative, Mr. Chair, today
I'm here to present Senate Bill
343, teacher salary rates
changes, and this pertains to
vocational teachers, so
declare
It ensures that equal minimum
salaries for all teachers at
each licensure level.
By removing exceptions currently
in statute for vocational
teachers and replacing an
outdated reference to K5+.
And
Making it K-12 plus.
Uh, this stems from 2023 of
Senate Bill 417, which created a
pathway for vocational teachers
to fall under the regular
educator three-tiered licensured
system that allowed industry
experience to count in place of
traditional education
requirements.
And um I
Executive director of the
Legislative Education Study
Committee who may uh John San
technical assistance.
that would stand for questions
for our expert.
All right, so we'll go to our
audience. So folks on Zoom, if
you're here in support of Senate
Bill 343. Can you please
indicate by raising your hand.
Right, I'll let that populate of
folks in committee, if you're
here in support and send 3.
Please indicate by raising your
hand.
So we do have one person on
Kirsty.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Kirsty Tyson. I'm the
director of K-12 Education
Programs at the Lanel
Foundation.
The largest foundation in New
Mexico focused on education.
We support Senate Bill 343. We
hear from many schools across
the state that they have
challenges recruiting and
retaining CTE teachers.
This bill will help with, with
this by ensuring an equal
minimum salary for CTE teachers
at each licensure level by
removing exceptions currently in
statute for vocational teachers.
This will signal a commitment to
CTE programs and make teaching
more attractive to industry
experts. We urge you to do a do
pass committee members and
chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, so we'll go to
opposition folks on Zoom.
Is there anybody in opposition
to Senate Bill 4 343, please
indicate by raising your hand.
folks in the room? Is there any
opposition to Senate Bill 343?
Anybody committee comments,
but doing here Mr. Chairman, I
make a motion for due pass.
was there a question?
Sorry anyway.
Have a second.
OK. Gonzalez, thank you. Oh.
Any opposition?
apathy.
OK.
then
Senate bill 343.
Thank you.
Thank you 2 official expert,
right?
That concludes our business for
today. We'll see you on the
floor. Thank you, folks.
