Test, test.
OK
Morning, folks. I'm going to
call the House Education
Committee to order. Madam
Secretary, if you call the roll,
please.
vicinity
Here.
Represent Chatfield.
Representative Gonzalez.
Yes, I do. Yes.
Representative Kona, here.
Representative Lara.
Representative Maribal Moya.
Representative or bulk Cafiero.
Representative Collins, Collins.
Representative
Torres Valdez Vales here.
Representative.
Vincent
Madam Vice Chair Garrett.
Chairman.
We do have a quorum. All right.
Welcome folks. Happy Monday.
Representative Kate.
House Bill 27, please. Uh, thank
you, chair, and
Committee members, um, I'm here
to present House Bill 27.
Um, House Bill 27
at his uh a bill very simple
bill saying.
We want you to continue to do
what you're already doing public
libraries, and we're making sure
that you do not befall or break
what is already written in
process, so librarians continue
to be attacked and threatened
throughout our state to remove
or to place books on their
library.
In their library
This bill, we, they all have
written all the public libraries
have written processes for
review on how to be able to
review and determine what books
should be on the shelves based
on uh the community support all
the librarians have been trained
and educated to serve their
community that way and all the
written processes, although they
may be slightly different from
community to community, they're
all based on the national
library's Bill of Rights. This
bill just says please.
continued to do that, or if you
decide to go around your own
written processes, you will lose
your state funding. We believe
that this allows librarians to
continue to.
Serve their community in a
nonpartisan way and not get
involved in partisan arguments.
Um, I, uh,
have an expert witness today. I
like you, uh, I like her to
introduce herself.
And, um, and although we are
here today presenting from the
education committee, this has
nothing to do with school
libraries, um, this is for
public libraries only, which is
our academic and our libraries
open for public and public state
funding.
Thank you very much. Please
welcome.
Romero and the House committee
members, thank you.
My name is Valerie Nyi, and I'm
the library director at Santa Fe
Community College.
I was born and raised in
Albuquerque, and for over 30
years, I've worked in libraries
throughout my career, I've been
dedicated to providing access to
information and resources that
serve diverse communities in our
state.
For this reason, I strongly
support House Bill 27, which
safeguards the essential roles
that libraries have in
providing.
Free and open access to
information.
libraries serve everyone in a
community. Librarians work to
ensure collections reflect the
diverse perspectives and
experiences of their community
members.
Libraries have established
collection development policies
and reconsideration policies,
and these policies balance
community input with the
professional standards that we
have.
House Bill 27 reinforces these
policies by protecting a
transparent review process and
upholding the library Bill of
Rights, which affirms the right
to access information free of
censorship or political
influence.
About 10 years ago, I was
working as a librarian in a
small library in New Mexico and
a patron came into my office and
demanded that we remove a
documentary film.
From the library collection
because she felt it
misrepresented her community.
And her culture.
Later that day, another patron
came in to tell me how important
the film was, and that it was an
accurate reflection of her
experience.
She said it represented the
voice of her community and her
lived experience.
Instead of removing the film, we
followed our policies.
Eventually
community came together and
watched the film together.
And we engaged in meaningful
discussion around the film.
was a moment of growth and
understanding for everyone, and
this is just the kind of things
libraries and the material held
in libraries are meant to do.
Recently we've seen efforts to
remove books from New Mexico
libraries and nationally.
We've seen funding cuts over
collection development issues.
These cuts have destroyed
libraries and communities, that
desperately need them.
with
Out House Bill 27, New Mexico
libraries are in danger of being
led by ideology rather than
community needs and professional
guidance.
Communities, libraries in your
districts should not be punished
for
work that librarians are doing.
By passing this legislation, you
will affirm that libraries
remain.
Faces of inquiry, education and
lifelong learning, so I urge you
to support House Bill 27, so
that we can provide access to
information.
And the freedom to read to all
New Mexico.
Thank you Chair and members, we
rest for questions.
All right, thank you all for the
presentation. So we'll go to our
audience, so the folks on Zoom
that wish to speak in support of
House Bill 27, please indicate
by raising your hand.
want to let that all populate,
um, folks in the audience, if
you're here to speak in support
of House Bill 27, please
indicate by raising your hand.
All right, so we have quite a
bit of people. So in-house
education, we have up to 2
minutes if you can be more
brief, please, because we have a
full agenda item that we want to
get through, as well as having
to get to the floor and all of
the folks who wish to speak on
Zoom, please do not be
repetitive. All right.
So if you would, if you're in
the audience here, if you would
line up behind our presenters.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Good morning, chair,
Vice Chair and committee
members. My name is Bernadette
Hardy, and we're here with Nim
Native Vote. I'm one of many
urban natives in the
international district and live
in Albuquerque. Um, so, in
District 19, we recently
advocated for a beautiful brand
new library, I think if people
who came to see that. It's
called the International
District Library. When we opened
it, we have like
All these beautiful language
books and um beautiful rooms for
children, movie spaces, and but
the kids were excited about was
the youth section for teens, um,
it's become a hub of resources,
but also a place for people to
do food distributions, um,
people to sign up for benefits.
Um, it's just a place where
Sorry to say, when the city of
Albuquerque just sweeps in a lot
of our homeless people, they
lose their info. It's become a
place for people to try to get
that info back. So, we, we know
that this library is, is an
essential resource for our
community and we, our kids
deserve a, a choice in our
families deserve a choice, and
even what language they can read
in. So, thank you. Please
support.
Thank you.
So, you have up to 2 minutes.
Welcome.
I'm Marinetti, the president of
the Public Advisory Board of the
Santa Fe Public Library.
I commend the sponsors and
supporters of HB 27. This bill
will help protect New Mexico
libraries from the attacks that
we've seen in other states.
There remains more to be done.
Library staff need legal
protection.
Public library workers in Idaho
can face criminal prosecution
simply for helping a minor find
a book that someone has deemed
harmful.
Also, the protections provided
in HB 27 should be extended to
public school libraries.
Florida has banned more than
4000 books from public school
libraries, even removing the
Merriam Webster Elementary
Dictionary and a book whose
author's name happens to be gay.
A Florida teacher allowing a
student access to a banned book
can be charged with a felony.
In Utah, a book that is banned
by only 3 school districts is
automatically banned for the
entire state, making a mockery
of parental choice.
Furthermore, the book's banned
in Utah cannot be donated or
sold.
They must be destroyed.
I urge all legislators to vote
for HB 27 and soon to broaden
its vital protections for all
libraries, all library workers
and all library patrons in New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, next. Welcome. You
have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
Distinguished Committee members.
I'm Osa Chavez, ED for Nimative
vote. We thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward. We are in
deep support of HB 27 because we
believe in the beauty and
diversity of learning that these
libraries support. This is the
first place students have the
opportunity to explore and
learn. This is the first place I
learned to really sit with a
bunch of different books and
explore all the diversity in the
world.
We need to support our
librarians. We need the
diversity and to protect our
rights to learn under this
federal administration in
particular. This is not the time
to ban or burn books, please
vote to do pass HB 27. Thank
you.
Thank you. Welcome. You have 2
minutes. Good morning. My name
is Aurora Vitton. I'm a member
at large for the library
advisory board for the city of
Santa Fe. I'm also a longtime
teacher. I've been a teacher for
15 years. Um, I urged the
support of House Bill 27,
library should not be subject to
partisan politics and should
remain a resource center for
everyone. I'm a longtime patron,
a board member, a parent, a
teacher, and a concerned
citizen, and I support.
this bill, which supports
libraries to function as they
intended, which supports our
greater community and remains a
stable source for everyone in
New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome. You have 2
minutes.
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Kar
and I'm speaking on behalf of
the Quality New Mexico in
support of House Bill 27.
Growing up as a queer person in
a very small town, all I knew
about queer people was uh we
would burn in hell. I had no
idea we could have happy and
healthy relationships, and I was
under the impression that I
would have to live in the
closet. I didn't have people who
understood and support my
identity. In this process,
libraries were my safe space. I
could read about strong women
doing interesting things, and I
discovered queer characters.
Reading other
characters that were in straight
helped me discovered that I
didn't have to hide who I was
and that I could be happy as a
queer person. Representation
matters and for many queer
people like myself, a queer
character in a book, maybe the
first time we know that we're
not alone, and we're deserving
and worthy of love. I believe
this is an important step to
fight censorship and ensure that
everybody in New Mexico has
access to the resources and
representation that they need to
thrive. I do urge you to support
this bill. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
We have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Arturo Castillo and I'm
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Voters
New Mexico.
As conservationists, we believe
that all people, especially
young people, must have access
to information, a selection of
theories, and known scientific
knowledge to understand the
world around them. We must
provide access to information
for all people, especially young
people, who can then develop
their own worldviews based on
all the information they have
obtained.
This legislation is fair. It
protects access to scientific
knowledge for the young people
who will be tasked with caring
for the world one day, and it
ensures no single ideology can
control what our communities
learn. Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Chair Romero and
members of the committee.
I'm a Valerie broker, a 50-year
resident of Santa Fe and retired
librarian. I'm also a member of
the National Organization for
Women, which strongly supports
this bill.
Librarians have had to be
heroines and heroes in defending
the rights of their communities
to read.
I urge you to give us this tool
to keep our collections open to
all points of view and all
members of our community. Thank
you.
Thank you for being here.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome. Good morning,
everyone. My name is Elizabeth
Martinez, on the former
executive director of the
American Library Association,
and now I'm back to my family
home of New Mexico, but I want
to leave you with just a very
short message, because
Sometimes it's those.
Uh, connections that remind us
and advise us and help us stay
on course. Many librarians have
worked decades to make sure that
libraries had information and
books on all cultures, all
people, all languages, as much
as we could possibly achieve.
A friend of mine coined this
phrase a few years ago. I wish
it had been me. I wish I had
conned this, but please
remember.
That free people read freely.
Free people live and read
freely.
And that's what libraries are
about.
So, if you remember anything
that I've said,
It's that free people live and
read freely. Thank you. Thank
you. Welcome. You have up to 2
minutes.
Hello, thank you for having me.
Um, my name is Andrew Ryan. I am
an English teacher in Rio
Rancho, and I'm also here
representing the Rio Rancho
School Employees Union.
I, um, in the school employees
union is in strong favor of
House Bill 27. I am also a
patron of Rio Rancho Public
Libraries, Albuquerque Public
Libraries, Corrales Community
libraries, and Santa Fe Public
libraries. I collect each of
these library cards because each
of them represents a wealth of
information and resources.
And um,
Outside of being one of the last
standing institutions that will
allow you to spend your time
there without the expectation of
spending money. Each one of
these will represent access to
amazing stories and information,
and the question that I would
like to ask you today is if
there's a single decision in
your life, big or small, that
you would like to make with less
information at your disposal.
If there's any decision you
would like your children.
To make with less information at
their disposal.
Those of you here who are
educators.
If there's any decision you
would want your students to make
with less information at their
disposal.
Well, I know that this might be
a thinly veiled attempt to quiet
queer voices and voices of
color, the tangible difference
that this bill makes outside of
party lines is that without it,
we risk the loss of access to
information.
So
On behalf of your students, of
your children, and of the
communities that you represent.
Allow them to continue full and
free access to information.
Libraries are a place for all
community members and all
information should be freely
available to all community
members. Thank you.
You're welcome. You have up to 2
minutes. Good morning, Chair of
Vice Chair and Committee, my
name is Nanette and I own a
librarian from Rio Rancho. I
have over 10 years of library
experience, mostly in Texas, um,
and I'm incredibly strong
supporter of HB 27. According to
the ALA Library Bill of Rights,
every patron, no matter their
creed, income, background, have
the right and should have the
ability to access books,
information, and
research materials established
by our policies, we add voices
to our collections. We don't get
rid of them and being able to
represent our widely diverse
patron base is incredibly
important. We have had pushbacks
and attempts to censor our
collection and being able to
show that we have state-backed
policy to give our
reconsideration process will
give us the strength that we
need. Everyone deserves to read.
Everyone deserves to find
themselves on our shelves,
please support HB 27. Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Thank you, chair. Thank you,
members. My name is Garen
Hofstetler speaking for myself.
I support HB 27 because I've
worked as a public librarian in
small cities and large cities,
and I can tell you this bill
will help librarians and the
communities we serve.
I've personally known a small
city library director who was
pressured into moving a book
with LGBTQ representation out of
the children's area immediately
rather than using her library's
reconsideration procedure.
This, this, did this appease the
book banners? No. It encouraged
them to do more. If something
like HB 27 had been in place,
she could have said, Let's all
take a breath.
Our library's fundings at risk
if we don't follow our own
reconsideration procedure. I
support HB 27 because it's about
slowing down.
Giving books a fair shake. It's
about shielding librarians and
libraries, and their reading
communities from sudden personal
bullying.
Bullying that tends to remove
certain people's stories.
Libraries are for everyone.
Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Deborah Condit. I'm an, I own a
uh independent bookstore in
Albuquerque, New Mexico with
books on the Basque, and I stand
in strong support of this bill,
and I stand in a strong support
of my fellow book lovers out
there, uh, my brothers and
sisters and fellow librarians
and a personal note, I grew up
in a home where I was only
allowed to read the Bible and
Christian literature and that
kind of backfired on my parents
very badly.
But, um, um, the other part of
it was I was so behind. Other
kids who were able to read
freely and read the books that
they wanted, and it, I always
felt um behind in sciences,
behind in literature, and I was
struggling to get ahead of
banning books never fares well
on communities, on countries
where this uh this uh process
takes place, so, um, if there's
anything we could do to protect
our librarians, protect
our books. I'm here to support
that. So thank you. I, I stand
stand in strong support of this
bill. Thank you. All right.
Thank you so much. So it looks
like we're finished with in
person. We'll go to our folks on
Zoom if I mispronounce your
name, excuse me, just politely
correct me. I'll do better next
time.
So you'll have up to 2 minutes
once they call your name and
allow you to speak.
Give me a moment. Um, I don't
have the option to do that.
If I could, would you allow me
the option to call on folks and
It's not allowing me to.
Give me a moment. Oh, there we
go.
Now it's coming up.
Thank you.
Oh yeah.
Jumped all the way down the
list. All right, so go back, uh,
Rach.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes, please.
Good morning Cha and members of
the committee.
My name is Rachel Ray. I use
them pronouns, and I'm with both
futures and advocacy
organization by and for women
and people of color in New
Mexico. As a former health care
chaplain, I have experienced the
transformative power of stories
firsthand. Whether hearing
families share memories of their
loved ones at end of life, or
seeing youth bond over their
favorite novel in a behavioral
health spirituality group. I
have seen stories support
healing, growth, and belonging.
We know that book subject to ban
attempts were nearly 5 times
more likely to be written.
by authors of color. These
restrictions ultimately limit
freedom, intellectual curiosity
and representation in our
communities. All New Mexicans
deserve the right to craft our
own stories and learn from the
stories of others, and to find
solace in our public libraries.
A vote for HB 27 is a vote in
support of free speech,
belonging, and respect in New
Mexico. We ask that you vote
yes.
Great. Thank you so much.
an ' s iPad.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning, Chair and
committee. Diane McCash. I
strongly support HB 27. It may
be one of the most impactful
things we get done this session
to me, libraries are like
shrines to the collective
wisdom, creativity, and breadth
of human experience and belief.
They are a sacred embodiment of
our treasured First Amendment to
the US Constitution. I don't
expect nor do I want materials
that espouse what I consider
falsehoods or view contrary to
mine to be removed from public
libraries. The reality of the
world is
we do not all hold the same
beliefs or have the same
preferences. Sometimes our
differences spark heated and
passionate disagreements, but I
still strongly, strongly believe
in the freedom of speech
enshrined in our First
Amendment. Thank you for your
support.
Alright, thank you so much. So
Judith, good morning, Judith.
You have 2 minutes.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Judy
Williams. I'm past president of
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and I'm representing
them today. We speak in strong
support of HB 27. We believe
that public libraries are
essential institutions for
strong, viable, and sustainable
democracies and access to
materials, resources, and
program provided programming
provided by public libraries as
a civil right which should be
enjoyed by all and distributed
equitably in our communities.
Thank you, Representative Cates
for bringing
go forward, we hope you vote
yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, Roberta, good
morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Sorry for the unmute.
Yes, I'm Roberta Price. I'm a uh
lifelong reader and educator, a
teacher in law school, and I'm
very happy that New Mexico is
considering this bill.
The
I grew up in the east, but my
experience in the West is there
is a freedom.
Uh, donated by the geography of
the place and the limitations on
freedom are constitutionally and
um just naturally in opposition
to the way we live in New
Mexico. We've lived with 3 very
major cultures, uh, trying to
live together and this bill
protects the long uh stan
tradition of New Mexico, of
tolerance and understanding of
other people's views. I strongly
support this pill.
Thank you.
Linda, good morning. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Hi, I am Linda Saint Clair.
I am the president of the
Friends of Thomas Brannigan
Memorial Library in Las Cruces,
New Mexico, and I strongly
support this bill.
One thing that I haven't heard
mention so far is the fact that
there are many, many people with
many different views, who might
like certain books to be removed
from the library or not.
Um, have their children read
them. I understand that, and I
think that parents have the
right to um help guide their
children with respect to books,
but I think the story of the
benefit of having people talk
about why they don't want for
certain books in the library,
um, or don't want their
Children to read those books is
far more important than just
removing those books without any
discussion, um, and so I
strongly support keeping that
information available so that
anyone can um make their own
decisions and choices about what
it is they read and share with
their families. Thank you.
Good morning, Morgan. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Uh, good morning. I'd like to
thank everybody who is here to
listen to these um speeches in
support of this bill, I am a
resident of Albuquerque for 8
years, and I wanted to say that
I and my entire family strongly
support this bill for all the
reasons that people have put
forth here, um, and that we
would also support expanding it
to protect the school libraries
and librarians. Thank you so
much.
Thank you. Uh, Sharon.
Morning, Sharon. You have up to
2 minutes.
Yes, good morning, chair, and
members of the committee.
Thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward. HB
27.
My, um, I'm a nurse, uh, nurse
educator, a parent, a
grandparent, the home of one of
my parents was occupied by Nazi
forces in Holland in 1946. We
stopped fascism then. We are at
a crucial precipice right now.
We don't want to go back to
blocking healthy and necessary
growing and learning materials.
Please support H.
27. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Danielle.
Good morning, Danielle. You have
up to 2 minutes.
All right, thank you very much.
My name is Doctor Danielle Morii
Pollock. I'm a librarian who's
worked in many types of
libraries, and I've been an
educator and a library and
information science graduate
program. I'm here today as a New
Mexico citizen and as the spouse
of a public librarian in support
of HB 27. Librarians tasks with
selecting materials for their
library collections typically do
so to according to approved
collection development policies
that were informed by
professional judgment,
professional values, and
graduate level training and were
written with community needs in
the mission of the particular
library in mind.
As someone who's participated in
writing collection development
policies, as well as in
selecting physical and digital
resources, I know firsthand some
of the work and careful thought
that goes into each.
The ALA's Library Bill of Rights
provides guidance that informs
these professional decisions and
ensures that libraries remain
forums for information and ideas
for all of the people the
library serves. However,
librarians' ability to exercise
their professional judgment has
come under attack, and 2023, the
last full year for which numbers
are available. Ailey's Office of
Intellectual Freedom documented
over 1200 demands for
censorship targeting over 4000
unique book titles. 47% of books
targeted were by and about LGBTQ
plus or people of color. No
librarian should
sustained harassment for doing
their job. No library collection
should be shaped and stripped of
ideas or viewpoints based on the
disapproval of a few rather than
the needs of the community as a
whole.
HB 27 would require a public
libraries to have and follow
written collection development
policies informed by the Library
Bill of Rights. It would leave
in place appropriate procedures
for reconsideration of library
materials based on those
policies, and it would provide
protections for librarians in
New Mexico to to exercise their
informed professional judgment
without fear. Thank you.
Thank you.
Arthur
Morning, Arthur. You have up to
2 minutes. Welcome.
Hello, my name is Arthur Marici
Pollock. I'm a New Mexico
citizen and a professional
librarian. I'm here speaking in
support of HB 27 and its support
of librarians in the face of
book bans and challenges that we
have seen across the nation. The
American Library Association
tracks book bans and challenges,
providing the public with
important data regarding
challenges to the freedom of
information that is such a
crucial part of the public
library's work and their
preliminary data for 2024
between January 1st and August
31st, the ALA Office for
Intellectual Freedom tracked 40.
14 attempts at censorship across
1,128 unique titles. Well, the
office notes that the number of
reports declined in 2024. They
emphasized that the number of
documented attempts continues to
far exceed the numbers prior to
2020.
And they highlight issues of
soft censorship, such as
purchasing materials and placing
them in restricted areas.
The group Unite Against Book
Bans data indicates that the
majority of voters oppose
efforts to remove materials from
both public and school
libraries, but pressure groups
such as Moms for Liberty, Push
for bands often of hundreds of
titles at once, driving the
surge of book bans and
challenges that we've seen. It's
clear that a minority of voices
are being as loud as possible in
the hopes of implementing
censorship quickly and messily,
with no regard for the
importance of intellectual
freedom or respect for the care
and professionalism that
librarians already utilize to
curate library collections.
Libraries have clearly labeled
sections to allow library
patrons to decide for themselves
and for their children, where to
look for materials most suitable
for them. Libraries are not
there to parent children, and no
one is responsible for parenting
anyone else's child.
I would also like to take a
moment to note.
That calling library materials
pornographic is more often than
not an anti queer buzzword, as
we've seen over and over again
with the challenges to Mayo
Bobby's graphic memoir, Gender
Queer, which was 2023's most
challenged book. Indeed, of the
books challenged in 2023, the
data indicates many were
materials from LGBTQ plus and or
iO voices and experiences.
Furthermore, many supposedly
sexually, thank you so much.
We will go to April.
Good morning, April. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Um, thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair Committee. My name is
April Kent and as an academic
librarian, I'm here to speak in
favor of House Bill 27. Public
libraries and the freedom to
read is essential for education
at all levels, including K
through 12, for dual credit
students, students in higher
education and for lifelong
learners. Public library staff
are professionals who know how
to best support their
communities and should be
trusted. Thank you.
Thank you so much, uh, Tatiana,
good morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Tatiana Prieto
here with the ACLU of New
Mexico, along with the many
advocates in this room, we stand
in strong support of this bill
over the past few years, over
3000 books have been banned in
schools and communities across
the country. Banned books
disproportionately feature
stories about LGBTQ plus
communities, people of color and
others who have been
historically marginalized. Book
bans are not only
discriminatory, but they are
also a violation of people's
First Amendment right to access
information
Public libraries and librarians
enable communities to exercise
this right, and we must ensure
that New Mexico remains a state
where this is true. Every New
Mexican deserves to see
themselves and their experiences
reflected in the books they
read. Book bans not only
threaten our civil liberties,
but they are also harmful to the
pillars of education,
independence, and democracy, and
we strongly encourage you to
vote yes on this bill. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you so much. All
right, so we will go to folks
very lowers hands. All right,
we'll go to the folks that are
in opposition on Zoom.
So folks that are in opposition
to House Bill 27, please
indicate by raising your hand.
We let that populate, folks in
the room that are in opposition
to House Bill 27, please don't
keep your in your hand. All
right, so we'll go, sir, please.
You have up to 2 minutes. Yes,
sir, you.
You have up to 2 minutes, the
microphones here.
Welcome. Joseph McKenzie library
director, uh, Bernal Leo Mars
Libert Public Library, winner of
the New Mexico Library
Associationun Achievement Award.
Um, HB section C is vague. It
does not specify at a time to
find the term approved in the
phrase approved library
collection development policy
approved by whom? Nor does it
specify in the same section the
phrase established library
materials.
Challenge procedure established
by whom?
HB 27 gives legal weight to the
ALA's library Bill of Rights,
which is merely a statement put
forth by a professional
organization based in Chicago.
Passage of the bill as written
with co-opt New Mexico
legislative authority to an
unelected and therefore
unaccountable NGO 1200 miles
away from Santa Fe. The fiscal
impact statement attached to the
bill admits that the ALA itself
has tracked only 2 challenges in
New Mexico.
In 2023.
We don't have a censorship
problem, never did, and because
of how we are traditionally act
as librarians, never will.
HP is not consistent with the
recent decision of President
Biden's own Department of
Education, which announced on
January 24th that its Office for
Civil Rights dismissed 11
complaints related to so-called
book bans. In other words, the
Department of Education doesn't
believe that challenges of books
are book bans. It doesn't define
them as such. And therefore, why
should this Department of
Education define them as such.
Um
Indeed, uh, the, by the way, uh,
the impact statement also gives
you a false idea of the Pico
case. Pico, why are there so
many book bands? Why are Sony
books removed? Because Pico
actually allows for.
gives you one idea of the case.
It, it's twofold. You can't
remove books for political
reasons, but you can remove them
because of persistent vulgarity
which since 1982 has been
defined as porno.
Um, so we will go to.
Jodie
Good morning, Jody. You have up
to 2 minutes, please.
Thank you, Chair and committee
members. I am Jody Hendricks
with New Mexico Family Action
Movement, you know, libraries
are incredible institutions.
They are gateways to knowledge,
discovery, and lifelong
learning. They provide access to
a wealth of information that
enriches our communities and
broadens our understanding of
the world. However, with that
great value comes the
responsibility to ensure that
local communities and parents
have a say in what materials are
accessible to.
children, rather than allowing
state mandates or national
organizations to dictate these
decisions. That's why I urge you
to vote no on House Bill 27, the
so-called librarian Protection
Act. This bill undermines
parental rights and strips local
communities of the ability to
decide what content is
appropriate for their public
libraries. It forces taxpayer
dollars to support materials
that may include explicit or
radical content without any say
from the people funding these.
institutions. House Bill 27
prioritizes a national
organization's agenda, the
American Library Association
over New Mexico families.
It mandates compliance with the
ALA's policies, which actively
oppose parental oversight and
promote controversial content.
So why should our libraries be
controlled by an unelected out
of state advocacy group. This
bill is not about protecting
intellectual freedom. It's about
enforcing a one-sided policy
that shields progressive
viewpoints while leading
conservative and faith-based
perspectives vulnerable to quiet
censorship. We need local
control. We need transparency.
And we need parental involvement
in our libraries, not government
mandates that override community
values. So please reject HB 27
and stand for New Mexico
families, parental rights and
free speech for all. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Right, so not seeing any other
opposition online or in the
room, we'll go to committee,
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Kates.
Presenter.
So I just need some
clarification.
Uh, page one.
Line 25.
And page 2.
Line 1 and 2.
Public library means a New
Mexico organization that offers
basic library services that are
not available or that are
available to the general public.
That's a fair statement.
Mr. Chair, members
representative, yes. Thank you.
Well, you know, I've been all
worked up all night long
thinking this, this was a uh uh
library for uh schools.
So, I, I'm thankful for that.
Um
Why is this bill?
Being heard in education, Mr.
Mr. Chair and representative.
Mr. Chair, members, I, I, I'm
not a part of that process, so
putting bills.
Where they're selected what
committee so I don't that's
fair.
So Mr. Mr. Chair and
representative, how old do you
have to be?
To get a library card.
I thank you, chair and members,
so every library has its own
processes and and that is why
you don't see that detail in
this bill. We want to make sure
our communities are being able
to serve in that individual
community area. I can speak
about my community per se. Is it
any child under the age of 18
requires a parent to get a a
library card in their written
processes and then every book
that that child uh checks out
that email of what they've been
checked out.
that is sent to the parent. Now
that is true for the city of Rio
Rancho's public library.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that answer.
My biggest gripe.
I
And you and I've got to know
each other for the last 3 years,
so you know I'm kind of old
school.
And
I just wanted to know.
Should there be limits on books
with explicit content, sexual
content.
Violence or themes that may not
be age appropriate.
And what I just heard you say
is.
Yes
Mr. Chair
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Representative, um.
That would be the short answer,
a little longer answer is that
we rely on our professionals,
which is our librarian staff,
and the written process that
they have, they usually have
library boards as well as the
answers to the city, city
council. So there are a lot of
uh authority members that uh but
they rely on the professionalism
and the education and the
process of that librarian, that
selects the books for it. And
then there's always a process of
review.
Don't like this book, or I don't
sure that this book is
appropriate, then you can
usually fill out a form and then
that is reviewed. You can also
have public comment as well and
that there's a there's a written
process for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. Is there a
chance?
That someone under 18 could go
into a public library.
And get a book of their choice
without parental.
Control.
Mr. Chair
Uh, thank you, uh, so, um, if
they steal the book, um, uh, I
mean, there there's a chance of
them being able to get.
Written materials from the
bookstore as well.
In fact there's more of a chance
from a bookstore than a library
because the library has so many.
Processes in place with the
scanning and the and and that
sort of thing so um.
I mean, uh, is there a chance of
anything? Yes, but, but I don't
think that it's a very, uh very
big percentage, and I think it
is less than in a public
bookstore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me,
let me redirect my question.
If a kid wants to steal a book
they want it bad and they can, I
guess they'll they'll get it any
way possible. Is there a chance?
Through the library policy.
That they could go into a
library.
Take the book of their choice,
go and check it out.
And and everything be legit.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you members. Um, I am not aware
of every single policy and
process, um, uh, for all the
public libraries in New Mexico,
but there are written processes,
librarians are about process
and.
And not, not politics. They're
all about process, so there is
written processes that are
publicly reviewed, have boards,
have city councilors that ensure
that checks and balances, if you
can find a library that does not
have that, I would communicate
to the community to make sure
that they have that. But what we
know is that there is a public
library with a written policy
based on the national.
library Bill of Rights, as there
is in every state across the
country.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative, so are you
telling me that that there is
local control, or does it have
to be the national organization,
the ALA's library Bill of
Rights. Thank you, uh, Chair and
members, there's no control over
the national library Bill of
Rights. What it is is that every
public library writes a process.
Based on that bill of rights,
but that process is different
based on community input, so
they have their own library
board of directors who may.
Most of them, but not all report
to their own city council and so
there and then they have public
meetings that that are have to
go by the public, um, uh.
At the and um and so all those
processes are community driven,
yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative, when
I go to a library.
And the library provides.
Computers.
Can I look up sexual content on
that computer.
Mr. Chair.
And sir, if you could identify
yourself, please. Yes.
Mr. Chair, thank you, uh,
members of the committee. I'm
Eli G, the state librarian.
Uh, thank you for the question,
representative. The question was
whether or not
Um, member of the public can
look up sexual content.
Um
Most libraries uh fall under
the, uh, Children's Internet
Protection Act. So generally
pornography is filtered out of
computers.
But just like um policies for
checking out books, um,
Uh
Policies for what patrons can
look up on the internet is also
a part of the library's
policies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that answer. So you're
saying that there is a policy,
um, let's just say a
pornographic policy for for
state.
Or local libraries.
Thank you, Chair and thank you
Representative. I believe our
state librarian was saying
there's not just a policy, but
there is actually geo fencing
required by law to filter out
those typical websites, um, as
we all know like uh uh
technology is an ever changing,
um, uh, event, but we there that
is a uh something they are
tasked with that is a top
priority in all public spaces.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So if I go
to the library and I buy and I
get a book, I check a book out.
And that book has sexual
content.
Is that
Is that go against that policy?
Mr. Chair, thank you, uh, chair,
and thank you, Representatives.
The policy and the law is based
on technology, the access to
sexual content, the children's
code for for the technology per
se.
And um.
Uh
Are
Our libraries are full of.
Uh
Different cultures and science
and sex is a part of that, so
there will be sexual content in
some books, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I just, I wanted to make one
more comment.
So we don't want censorship.
Is that correct, Mr. Chair?
I thank you, chair, and thank
you, Representative, we do as a
society do create um a uh.
Let's say guard rails on what we
want to offer as in there is a
federal law.
Um, prohibiting public access
through computers of sexually
graphic or pornographic
information. Um, and as a
community, you will decide as a
community in your community,
what you would like to have in
your public library. I often
talk about I I lived in North
Carolina for a while. The public
libraries have a lot of
information about pirates, you
know, because it's North
Carolina. I lived on a farm as
an adolescent.
There the public libraries had a
lot of information about
agriculture on the science of
growing and on on uh on on an
information that was relevant to
our culture. That's what
librarians have been educated
and communicate to being able to
do community surveys and make
sure that their library is is
very diverse and expansive to
learn about other cultures, but
also reflect its culture itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, would you tell
me how books are purchased in
Libraries
How are they purchased? Who pays
for them? How? Where's the money
come from?
Thank
you. Chair and representative.
Librarians rely on a book
reviews that are put together by
organizations that we respect,
um, these maybe library
organizations, teachers
organizations, um, we have to
read a review on a book in order
to purchase it. We don't.
Often purchase a book without
having more information about
it. So we use reliable sources
to read reviews, um, and then
purchase the book through
vendors um.
As as we feel that that they fit
our community needs. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Any, would there be
taxpayer money included in those
buying those books.
Thank you, representative, thank
you, uh, uh, thank you, chair
and representative so a public
library is funded through public
dollars.
So taxpayer money.
Chair and and and representative
taxpayer money is one of those
things that are public dollars
as well as the revenues we
generate and um this particular
bill relates to those public
libraries receiving state funds.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative.
So I just want to give you some
food for thought before I close.
Isn't threatening public
libraries with financial and
economic consequences for
expressing dissent against the
ALA, a form of censorship.
Thank you, chat chair and um in
committee.
We are threatening.
Uh, to pull, we are not
threatening. This bill will say
we will poll state funds.
It's a library.
Does not follow its own
processes.
If
Individuals.
Do not want a particular book,
they should follow their
process. If they don't like
their process, they have library
boards, they have li city
counselors, they have
opportunities to be able to
write that processes. What we
don't want.
Is people to make individual
choices for my children.
I get to make the choice for my
children, not the government and
not another group and not
another community. And so this
is a way to make sure that
librarians are able to follow
the process instead of an
individual or a a group, no
matter what.
If they're conservative or
progressive, it doesn't matter.
We want them to make sure they
follow their processes. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
you're, so you're saying that
local libraries do have their
own autonomy and they can run
things through their local city
councils or county commissions.
Etc. Thank you, Chair and
Representative. What I'm saying
is all public libraries have
their own written processes and
report to either their own
library board, and some of them,
the library board has to report
to their city council. It does
not that um that structure is
not true when you have a 3
person library in a in a 100
square foot room, right? You may
not, you board may be just a
of the city council, but there
is a checks and balances, as we
all know, we're here uh for
public funded programs and we
are public representatives and
so everything has a process of
checks and balances with the
public.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate
the time.
Barca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for your
presentation.
I'm gonna, I, I to.
Kind of concerned.
About bringing this to this
committee.
Um
Not just
Or what it does.
But what it doesn't do.
When we talk about
Local control.
And we talk about decision
making.
Adopting this policy would
actually
Take away
The local control.
From your
library boards.
From your counselors.
Because to comply with this.
If it were challenging, if I
were the librarian.
And I disagreed.
The, the
Library could.
Lose funding for that.
We've sat here and many of us in
many different situations.
have talked about.
That a community, you guys
talked about families.
Have
The right to make
Decisions
That represent
The values
Of the community this.
Gives the
Authority
And the guidance
to an outside agency outside of
the outside of New Mexico.
And what bothers me is that it
gives governments and it ties to
funding.
School libraries are also
publicly funded with money as
well. This.
Act
Which in
On the usurpus talks about
freedom of speech, which I
respect.
But I think the, the concerning
part about it is the
implications that it may have.
On individual schools and
communities.
Um, in some of the analysis it
does reference.
Public schools.
It also references concerns from
the Attorney General and the
Mexico Department of Justice
that gave warnings.
That the House Bill 27 could
trigger.
First Amendment challenges.
Mr. Chairman, Representative.
For these libraries.
Is there any requirement?
About
Having sections.
age appropriate material.
Or is all material
Spread throughout the library.
Thank you chair and thank you
members of this bill does not
give anything that is not
already in place. This bill
every library in the state of
New Mexico has a written process
based on
The National Library Bill of
Rights that has been in place
and has been in place.
For many years, for many
decades.
So it doesn't do anything
different than we already have.
It does not give any national
organization, any sort of
authority.
At all
It says continue your process.
Or you will lose state funding.
That's what this bill does.
Um, there is no reference in the
spill. I'm not sure about the
analysis that you're reading,
but there is no reference in
this bill about public schools.
As, as well. And um and I'm so
sorry representative chair.
Um
Clarify your question again, so
I make sure that I can answer
it. Thank you.
When we talk about.
Public schools we talk about.
And even for communities, the
local control, and we talked
about
That in a public library.
Are there sections or is
explicit material.
Is there a requirement that it
be
Either designated or that it be
um
In some way
Not have accessible to to
younger children. That is really
And, and I, I'll be honest, and
that's why I'm asking Mr.
Chairman and representative.
I don't know if that is
currently a requirement.
That if I'm 10 years old and I
wanted to read a book that were
You know, probably older than my
um.
Lovell
Is that, is that a requirement?
So thank you, uh, chair and
members. So once again this book
does not this book, this bill
does not have uh the processes
from your individual library.
But I will tell you my
individual library has a teen
room and children's section and
movie section and a book
section. You do not card, um,
your age before you walk into
that section, um, and a board, a
library board.
a City council review the books
that are in all sections that
have been approved for access to
the public.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
One of the
concerns that I have.
As when we talk about.
Giving
And following guidelines from an
agency.
That isn't here.
In New Mexico.
And tied it to funding.
When we talk about
Governance and we talk about
local control.
I think that by doing this,
What this ensures.
Is that our local and our, our
current
Processes
Could be challenged and funding
could be done.
So it could actually have the
opposite effect.
Of protecting which I is again I
do about freedom of speech, and
also I do understand about
intellectual material.
My mother worked in a library.
I spent most of my time after
schools.
In libraries
So please understand that it's
not about that.
It is more about
My concern
Implications, future
implications.
For our local governance and
local control.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm so sorry, Jeremiah respond
quickly.
Briefly, I, I just like to say
once again, this bill does not
give authority to an outside
agency, this bill says we will
continue to have our public
library right processes based on
the national library, Bill of
Rights, which we as a country
have allowed all our public
libraries to do since 1939.
Thank you.
I move a do pass for House Bill
27?
Right.
motion, a second. I did see
Representative. Is that OK? OK.
So,
Have a do pass motion on House
Bill 27. I'm so sure if you call
a rule, please.
No.
suburbs in Chatfield.
representative Gonzalez, yes.
Representative Gurola. Yes.
Representative Ladder.
Representative Marribal Moya.
No.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Collins.
Representative
F
Torres Valesca.
Yes
Representative Vincent. No.
Madam
Vice Chair Garrett. Yes.
German
Yes, so before I read the vote,
I just want to remind the
audience, our audience that we
do not have public displays of
approval or disapproval once I
read the vote out, but by a vote
of 7 to 4, you have to pass
House Bill 27.
Thank you.
All right, thank you.
Great. So we'll move to House
Bill 32.
Electric school buses represent
aarana.
It was.
Joining
Oh.
So.
All right, Representatives,
please. House Bill 32.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
I am Representative Sarah and
I'm here with my co-chair, um,
Representative Guola.
Do you have your microphone on
representatives is it on right,
maybe move it a little bit
closer.
Oh, is it stuck there? Oh, it's
permanent. OK. I'll talk loud.
OK
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Representative Sarah.
We're picking it up. Good.
Thank you with my co-sponsor
representative Guola has Bill
32. The Electric school bus
bill. My expert witness is
Charles Goodmacher who's been in
this, doing this for quite a
while.
32 would amend the public school
Finance Act and adds a new
section to the public school
code to allow school districts
to replace current school buses
with 0 or electric or zero
emissions alternative fuel
buses. The bill would also
provide for the use of electric
school buses as energy storage
systems or grid services or
emergency power needs, um,
subject to the agreement
negotiated by superintendents. I
just want to
point you to page 2, line 2, it
says the department shall
provide districts the option.
To play school buses with an
electric or zero emission
alternative school bus. Keyword
is option. You do not have to do
this, but if you'd like to, this
is part of, this is why we
brought the bill.
You, Mr. Chair, um, it's really.
In order for me to be
co-sponsoring this bill since we
have work in electric cars in
the past, this bill is aims to
help communities to provide a
healthy environment right to
choose to do that.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Charles Goodmaker, I would just
add, um, the bill also has a
second section that allows for a
vehicle to grid agreements
between districts and the
utility providers so that
districts can earn anywhere up
to 20,000 a year is the
estimate.
From selling back, uh, power to
the grid when the grid most
needs it, especially during the
summer when school buses are
mostly sitting idle.
Thank you.
You stand for questions, Mr.
Chairman.
Alright, thank you all. So we'll
go to our audience, folks on
Zoom, if you're here and wish to
speak in support of House Bill
32 if you didn't keep by raising
your hand, please.
Oh.
I hadn't even said it.
Folks that are here in support
of House Bill 32, please
indicate by raising your hand,
right? So we have a microphone
if you would please, you have up
to 2 minutes, but briefer is
better, as I always say.
Please do not be repetitive. Let
me grab my timer. All right.
But please, you have 2 minutes.
OK. Good morning, and people of
the committee. My name is
Santiago Hardy.
I'm a 19 year old youth intern
with animative vote.
I'm Spanish, he and, born and
raised in Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
Today I'm here asking for
support for HB 32, the Electric
school bus transition. I
graduated from a Native American
community academy.
Where I and many other students
had to ride the school bus to
and from school.
And from firsthand experience,
taking the school bus was no
fun. It was loud on the bus, so
you had to shout to even talk to
somebody. The smell of the
exhausts are awful.
And would often seep into the
bus, making you feel nauseous,
would affect which would affect
my um ability to do school work.
Electric school buses would help
fix these problems.
And pushes one step closer to
creating a safe and sustainable
environment for everyone.
Studies show that diesel powers
more than 90% of school buses,
and exit and it's exhaust is
linked to serious health and
development problems,
transitioning to electric school
buses would benefit my younger
siblings and other generations
of our youth.
With that being said, please
vote yes for HB 32 for a
brighter future for New Mexico
and our youth. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello committee members and
chair and vice-chair. My name is
Bernadette Hardy here and I made
a vote, but also co-chair of the
International District Healthy
Communities Coalition, we are in
full support of HB 32, um, we
know that these idling buses,
uh, do have a lot of exhaust
that is a known carcinogen, um,
so with it has with proven links
to serious health impacts in our
communities, especially the
International District. We moved
to.
Please for you to support HB 32.
Great. Thank you so much.
Welcome. You have 2 minutes.
Good morning. uh, Mr. Chair,
Vice Chair and committee
members. My name is Karen Carl
and I am here with NMA to vote
in support of HB 32.
School systems from around New
Mexico are bringing on electric
sco buses from Dulcie to Lake
Arthur. These buses are quieter
and they're indoor air quality
is 100% better for our kids.
This is the common sense bill to
help school districts find the
matching funds for these buses.
The bill will also allow these
buses to serve as backup
batteries for the grid. These
support HB 32.
Great. Thank you so much.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Desjardin. I'm the
executive director of the
renewable Energy Industries
Association of New Mexico. We
have about 60 members and we've
been around since 2004 when in
the early stages of a transition
to electric zero emission
vehicles for many reasons.
As an owner of an EV for over 6
years, I can tell you there's
many advantages, including they
are quiet and do not admit any
toxic emissions. These
attributes make them ideal for
use as school buses. This bill
provides schools an option to
replace school buses with
electric zero emission school
buses if the school district has
received grants of over 50%.
And not from state funds.
Then, they can apply some of
this to charging infrastructure.
This leads to another benefit
since school buses have fairly
predictable routes and time of
usage.
This enables the large batteries
can be dispatched energy to the
grid in times of need. Think of
an early evening when the bus
route is finished and when
there's a high demand for
electricity and AC and other
uses. They can also provide for
energy during an emergency
backup situation, please pass
House Bill 32 out of this
committee. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning. You
have up to 2 minutes.
Edward Webster, government
relations director with NEA in
New Mexico. Uh, we stand in
strong support of HB 32, um, NEA
New Mexico members last year
voted to add carbon neutral
schools and transportation to
our legislative platform, HB 32
meets that criteria. Um, we
wanna have good, healthy
environment for our kids to grow
up in. So we strongly encourage
you to support HB 32. Thank you.
Thank you. Please, you have up
to 2. Good morning, Mr. Chair,
Deborah Condenham, the
registered lobbyist for Voices
for Children Action Fund, and we
stand in strong support of this
bill. We've always been
supportive as uh a group of
children and um and their
environment, and this would help
with their environment having uh
buses with zero emissions. So we
stand in strong support of House
Bill 32. Thank you. Thank you.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes. Welcome. Good morning,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Chris.
Graziano I'm a family physician,
public health professional from
Arroyo Seco, New Mexico. I'm
also a board member of Healthy
Climate New Mexico, um, I'm
excited about this bill and
thankful to the sponsor for
bringing it forward because I
know as a family doc.
That diesel fuels and toxic air
pollutants are not healthy for
our kids. So I want to emphasize
those health impacts, um, and I
strongly urge you to support
House Bill 32. Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Arturo
Castillo, Conservation Voterss
New Mexico, for all the reasons
previously stated, we also
support this bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. All right, so
we'll go to our folks online.
Joanna, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Joanna Strother and I
serve as the senior advocacy
director for the American Lung
Association as a leading public
health organization, we are in
support of House Bill 32. The
Lung Association is a strong
proponent of shifting the
transportation sector to zero
emission technologies, diesel
exhaust is a known carcinogen
and one of the most dangerous
pollutants, we come in contact
with our daily lives. Electric
school buses are pollution free,
which can reduce asthma and
other respiratory problems for
students and improve.
academic achievement. House Bill
32 makes electric school buses
available and affordable for
every New Mexico school
district, retiring diesel buses
in favor of electric buses has
huge benefits to New Mexico
students, teachers, school and
state budgets, bus drivers and
communities. We ask you to
support House Bill 32. Thank
you.
Great. Thank you so much.
Anita
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Annali, and I'm here speaking on
behalf of YEA. We strongly
support House Bill 32 because
transitioning to electric school
buses is a critical step in
protecting student health and
modeling real climate solutions
in our schools. For far too
long, students have been forced
to breathe in toxic fumes while
writing to and from school. We
know that this
disproportionately impacts low
income and indigenous
communities, and most
importantly, no child should
have to inhale toxic fuel.
to get an education by replacing
dirty diesel buses with electric
and zero emission alternatives.
This bill prioritizes students'
health, reduces greenhouse gas
emissions and takes an important
step towards climate justice.
Beyond the health benefits,
transitioning to electric school
buses shows students that
climate action is possible.
Schools should be places that
inspire hope and demonstrate
solutions and every young person
deserves to see their community
making of this investments in a
sustainable future. We also know
that this would create
opportunities for cost savings
on fuel and maintenance and
allow school districts to
redirect that funds into
classrooms and student support.
We strongly urge you to support
House Bill 32, because every
student deserves clean air, a
safe learning environment, and a
future where public investment
support sustainability and
justice. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Giovanna.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Giovanna Rossi and I'm
here as a mom and as uh
representing Mom's Clean Air
Force, an organization of over
1.5 million parents and
caregivers who are concerned
about the impacts of air
pollution and climate change on
children's health. And I'm
speaking today on behalf of the
over 20,000 Moms Clean Air Force
members right here in New
Mexico.
Parents across the state stand
in support of House Bill 32
because it's a crucial step
toward improving the health of
our kids. We're doing, reducing
harmful air pollution and
modernizing New Mexico's school
transportation system. Diesel
school buses expose our children
to dangerous pollutants like,
uh, linked to asthma,
respiratory illnesses, and other
long-term health issues.
The least we can do is give them
a clean ride to school by
transitioning to electric school
buses, we can significantly cut
tailpipe emissions, improve air
quality both inside and outside
the bus.
And this bill gives schools the
option to do that. Our children
deserve clean air and a safe
modern transportation system.
Mom's Clean Air Force urges you
to vote yes on House Bill 32 and
invest in the future of our kids
and communities. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, we'll go to
opposition. Is there any
opposition on our Zoom platform.
To House Bill 32, please
indicate by raising your hand.
In the room, is there any
opposition to House Bill 32.
Just raise your hand, picking up
any, so we'll come to committee,
committee questions.
Represent Mida Moya.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm, as I'm looking through
this, um,
If you can
clarify with uh with me on page
4.
Um, where it talks about the,
the two like the, um, in section
G 1 and 2. it talks about, uh,
that if uh you've secured, like
if a school district has secured
other funds for half that you'll
only pay up to what they would
replace a diesel with, and then
it goes into, if they haven't,
why have both if you're only
going to replace what the cost
of a diesel.
Uh, buses, like why
differentiate whether you have
the funding or not, you're only
gonna get this amount.
Or am I reading that wrong?
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the
question.
I read it is, OK, so we get
funding and an electric bus is
about 400,000. We get funding of
250,000. Well, the diesel bus is
about 183 or so, so we would
only give to what what what is
actually needed because you've
already got enough to pay for
it, correct?
Oh, OK, so yeah, OK, so I was
just, yes, Mr. Chair, I was, I
was mulling over. I was like,
why are we doing the different
things? Yes. And now, um,
question, does that also those
costs so um a, a
so bus doesn't require extra
stuff in there, an electric bus
is going to cost quite a bit for
the plug-ins, is that uh is that
all that cost in there, uh,
because I mean most schools,
unless they already have
electric buses don't have that
capability and that's expensive.
Mr. Chairman, I Representative,
you talking about the um
infrastructure, yeah, like, OK,
um, I'll go ahead and pass my.
Madam Representative, thank you
for that excellent question.
Yes, um.
The infrastructure does cost.
My significant money to install.
We are aware that while this
bill does not have any
appropriations in it.
Um, there is a bill also moving
through the legislature SB 49
Community Benefits fund, Section
8.
provide $60 million for
infrastructure and
Yeah, purchasing of the buses as
well.
Again, it's for districts that
might choose an electric bus
should both these bills pass,
they will have that funding
option and the availability of
earning income throughout.
The life of the bus from the
vehicle to grid.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
just.
It it just concerns me because
I'm, I'm looking at the FIR and.
Um
What it, what I read is that
it's not really gonna, it, it
shouldn't cost districts more
than what they, it cost them to
replace.
A diesel bus.
But when I'm looking at there
the FIR, it has, OK, you have a
diesel bus and then you have
electric bus and they're coming
out of different funds.
And, and there's extra costs, so
like what, so what is, and once
coming out of public school
capital outlay for the diesel
and the electric uh uh
replacements is coming out of
school districts operational
dollars.
That
Concerns me because our schools
don't have enough money already.
And, and, and now we're having
to fund this through operational
dollars. Is that how I'm reading
this correctly, cause that's how
they, they, they put it in the
FIR.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, sorry, uh.
Representative
Um
How a district chooses to fund
potential bill, you know, or bus
if if that SB 49, let's say it
doesn't pass and there isn't
that extra money available.
And if a district were to choose
to make.
assessment.
And then they might choose to
make that investment out of
their local capital outlay
funds, and since at Las Cruces
public schools when they first
received a federal grant that
covered most of the cost, but
not all of it.
They wound up at that point in
time they had to.
The only option was to use some
locally raised capital outlay
funds to make up the difference
for the chargers, and they,
they, they went ahead and did
that.
Now the PED since then, the
other buses that have been
received those grants, they've
been receiving the difference of
the money. So, um.
Um, but
You know, that's currently a
choice of the PED the reading of
the rules.
and so on. So this bill by
requiring the first section at
least getting the same amount of
money guarantees that schools
have a choice. So it's again,
it's up to as sponsors said
initially it's up to school
districts to make the choice.
Um,
I think
I think that's.
I'm good for now. Thank you.
That.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, our representatives
and Mr. Good Good mocker, um.
I, I heard in the testimony some
things about um improving
asthma, academic achievement.
And the community member from
the International District
talked about how this would be
better, um, this would, uh,
The toxins and the air
pollutants.
Um, things that might affect our
child's brains would be.
lessened, can you talk a little
bit, just a little bit about.
what this might do. Do you have
any data on how this might
affect our children's academic
achievement.
Mr. Chair Representative Torres
Velasquez, thank you for that
question. Um, yes, there have
been studies about uh showing
that where students move from.
30 diesel buses to cleaner
buses, clean fuel buses that
they're academic achievement
does increase. Part of that is
also more
Uh, like it cuts down on school
absenteeism because kids are not
getting uh asthma as much or if
they already had asthma, they're
not getting such bad attacks.
Um, so it does, there has been
studies comparing districts with
dirty buses versus districts
with cleaner buses.
Thank you.
I'd like to add on to that, Mr.
Chairman.
I'm sure you all remember field
trips and, and it is so um the
buses are so loud, the kids are
constantly yelling. It's just a
crazy place to be. That was the
hardest part about field trips
for me was just the bus ride,
um, and when you write on an
electric bus, I rode one in one
of Santa Fe buses, they're so
quiet you could talk to each
other, you could actually
whisper to each other, you don't
get that in here, you don't have
to inhale that diesel.
Exhaust when you first get in,
but the quiet and the the smooth
ride, I think as a teacher that
I appreciate it because I think
the kids would just get to
school, um.
OK, thank you.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
Representatives and presenter.
I
I followed you quite a bit, and
I know, I appreciate your
passion. I really do.
But there's always another view.
And I'm one of those guys that,
that has another view. And um
it's with all due respect to
both of us because I respect you
to the fullest.
I keep what is a dirty diesel
bus.
Never heard of that before, Mr.
Chair.
A dirty diesel bus. I've never
heard of that.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, Representative
Vincent, thank you for that
question. Yes, um, 30 diesel
buses have been referred to as
in, in, in uh various news
articles and studies, um.
dealing with the, the amount of
He's so exhausted, literally you
can see coming out of the out of
the buses.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't
know what buses we're all
looking at because a lot of the
buses now have DEF on them.
And when people are talking
about the, the horrible smoke
and everything that's coming up
I've got a DEF diesel pickup.
You can literally put your nose
down by my exhaust pipe and
you're not gonna get any kind of
fumes.
I'm not saying I like DEF,
Mister Chair.
But that's the rules. That's
what I have to do now to run my
very clean.
Diesel pick up as well as my
very clean.
Uh, heavy equipment, I'm in the
heavy equipment business and I
have to put DEF fluid in it all
the time. Don't really let it
breathe, kind of sucks it down.
Don't let it operate at its full
potential, but
You know, it's, it's good for
the environment and one thing
that I wanted to just put out
there is Mister Chair and
Representatives.
Electric vehicles.
Can they be bad for the
environment?
Representative.
Well, they don't emit, Mr.
Chairman and representative,
they don't emit us, they're
clean, um, if you look at the
batteries and where we're doing
it right now, they're looking at
um different.
Um, recyclable, cycling
recyclable industries, so
anything could be bad for the
environment, but yes, they can
be. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and one thing I
appreciate you saying is an
option. Either you want to run
an electric bus or you don't
want to run an electric bus, but
what I want to tell you is, uh,
they can be bad for the
environment, and I don't want
everybody thinking that we're
just gonna have these beautiful
electric vehicles that are not
going to cause.
to the environment because they
are.
And we're we're lying to people
if we say that that they're not.
There is gonna be the mining
side of things.
And it is very labor intensive.
There is lots of heavy, dirty
diesel equipment.
You know, mining this, this, uh,
uh, these metals like lithium,
cobalt, nickel, all that stuff
has to be mined.
And then the energy portion of
it, um, as far as uh
manufacturing batteries is
energy intensive and some
factories use coal fired plants.
To run this, the emissions.
What are the tires made out of,
and I, I'm not trying to beat
your your program up. I just
want people to know because I
heard some of the, the people
that were for this bill, it
makes it sound like we're in
this blue world with all these
trees and all the air is good,
it's never gonna be that way.
We live in a world we don't, you
know, the stuff that's coming
over for 3 from third world
countries is still the stuff
that we're breathing. Matter of
fact, ladies and gentlemen, I'm
more I'm more concerned, I quit
watching social media at all
because every time I look at it,
they're like, hey, don't eat
this, it's got this in it, and
don't eat that because it's got
this in it, so the only thing
that I eat now is
Really meat and vegetables and
they're telling me the
vegetables aren't even good for
you depending on if they're GMO
or whatever. So everything is
trying to kill us. I get that.
Um
But the weight, like a lot of
the weight in these vehicles. I
don't know if anybody has driven
from Albuquerque to Truth or
Consequences, but I have an RV.
And I like to go up to the lake
and I like to, uh, you know,
take a trip up there and the,
the right lane literally beats
my rig to death. I have to get
over in the hammer lane in the
left lane, so it's a little bit
smoother. What are these buses
gonna do to our roads? And do we
have a plan for that? I'm not
against electric vehicles, but I
don't want to get rid of all.
Clean diesel vehicles. I want to
change that from dirty to clean
because there's not that many
dirties out there anymore.
Um
As far as the toxic metals in
the batteries and then just
because of my background, I'm a
firefighter.
And I did it for 25 years.
Batteries in vehicles if you've
seen those vehicles, vehicles
catch on fire.
They have a
They have a thermal runaway.
That means if you're a
firefighter and you pull up on
the scene and you put those
batteries out.
They can reignite up to one day.
And what a lot of people are
doing is trying to submerge
these vehicles to get the
batteries to cool off. So,
We have lots of there's
You said there's options. I
appreciate that, Mr. Chair. I
really do. Uh, but I, I, I do
want to paint a picture that
you're gonna get some clean
diesel.
You're gonna get some clean
electric, but they're not either
one of them, none of them are
perfect.
Thank you, mister. 01 more thing
I have one more rural areas.
Uh, and I know this gets brought
up a lot.
What is, what is the miles that
you can go in a because I
haven't seen one of the new
school buses. What's the miles
you can go on a bus on one
charge.
Mr. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Harlem
or Vincent, sorry.
Yes, the miles on the buses are
estimated for up to 120 miles at
a time, uh, different districts,
Santa Fe District I know they,
they were the first because they
got a earlier than other people,
so they, they started running
their buses on routes that were.
Shorter, under 80 miles.
This year they have now started
running them on the longer
routes on purpose because for
every 1 mile driven they're
saving more money.
Um, so they, you know, in
between, they could fully
recharge in between each run, so
they can do 3 long runs a day,
and they're, and they are doing
that successfully.
Uh, also, I would add,
Last committee we heard
testimony from Mr. Herbster, uh,
with the Dulce schools, which we
see two of the buses, uh,
completely rural area, so I
think you know, uh, mountainous
cold, they love their buses,
they have no complaints.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And how
many batteries is one of those
buses have on it?
Mr. Chair.
And I, it's not a deal breaker.
I'm just, I, I was wondering how
many how many batteries goes on
one of those buses. I'm not
technically sure about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
how long does it take to
recharge one of them?
Um, I understand like in the
Santa Fe case that in between
you could go through the chair
for discussion.
Committee
Uh
Understand that they are able to
fully recharge in between
cycles. I don't know how long
that is exactly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
the ones that do have the rapid
chargers, would you say that
that's harder on the batteries,
easier on the batteries. If you,
if you charge batteries really
rapid, is that, is that hard on
the batteries, Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
uh, unsure about that. I have
not heard of any complaints or
problems so far from the
schools.
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and is all
chargers set up the same or the
are are there different
chargers?
Just one charge like a trickle
charge, just one charge
overnight? Is there a rapid
charger?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
that would probably be up to the
school district. But uh
something you said earlier that
a lot of buses aren't are back
or DEH I think he said, but I,
I.
You
School districts change buses
about every 8 to 10 years, and I
know I substituted at Monzano by
by the band where all the buses
would go, and there are a lot of
school buses that are emitting
some toxic exhaust.
And, and again, this is an
option if you're, if you are a
school district like Gallup, you
have a lot of rain and snow and
and a normal school bus can't
get through. This is not going
to get through.
There's there's a lot of things
that it's just optional. We're
just trying to save the world
and our kids at the same time
from from pollution.
Um
This is
representative.
And, and this is just part of
it. This is just one of the
little things we're doing to
make sure we have clean air out
there for our kids and a clean
environment and everything we
can for the kids cause there are
counties, districts that have so
much pollution and that no
matter what we do, it will not
help the kids, so that that.
That's why we're doing it, and
it is an option, you can do it
if you want, but if you don't
want to, you don't have to.
Thank you. And thank you, Mr.
Chair, my final just little
comment, sorry about that.
My final comment is, please
don't forget about those 35 and
40 year old diesel mechanics
that's been huffing that stuff
for that many years, and they
literally use diesel as cologne.
They like to put it on after
they shave. So, and they're
still doing pretty good, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
The final, final time for real
for real this time, OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. I was
gonna ask you about your new
cologne, sir. So, uh, I was
gonna say where you got it from,
we'll just go down to the shop
and get some. Um, Mr. Chairman
and Representative, um,
So what is the life?
Expectancy of one of these
buses, um, because Mr. Chairman,
I, I do know that for the
Other gas buses. It, it, there's
a certain time that they have to
be retired. So what is that life
expectancy expectancy of a
Electric bus.
Mr. Chair, I'm so sorry.
Uh, Representative Baca, the
expected lifetime of the school
buses themselves would be about
the same, uh, perhaps longer
than diesel buses since there's
fewer moving parts. Now there's
questions I'm sure lingering
there about the batteries, uh,
the batteries, uh, most of the
bus manufacturers in every bus
manufacturer that makes buses is
making electric buses. They're
they're guaranteeing them for 8
to 10 years. So there may be a
need for a replacement on a
battery. You may see in the one
of the
fact sheets we handed out the
total cost of ownership.
Figure that in that even with a
replacement of a battery, the
total cost of ownership over the
lifetime of the bus may be about
the same as a diesel bus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you. You probably know my
next question is, what are those
batteries cost? And who pays for
it?
a chair.
for this information,
the maintenance cost of the of
the buses in the long run is
less than the other buses, so it
will balance a little bit what
is the cost in the long run too,
but um let's see if we have that
information the batteries too.
Mr. Chair,
Representative Baca, understand
the cost of a battery
replacement. It's estimated
about $30,000.
Thank you, Mr. Chen, then we so
it's 11 battery per bus.
Or is there multiple batteries
on those big buses.
Mr. Chair Representative one.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, we talked about charging,
and we, we kind of weren't quite
sure about the
The, um, amount of time, which
again, I'm not gonna get into,
but
If I was to have a bus yard.
Would there be certain
requirements that I would have
to do as far as
Um, in the yard.
To make sure that they can
charge these buses they're their
current infrastructures that
would be an additional cost to
the district.
And if so, where does that come
from?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, yes, that would
be additional cost and um.
The cost would be paid for under
SB 49 passes, it's still paid
for the same way as currently
the buses.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um.
I've actually never been in an
electric vehicle, so if you guys
are out there and want to, I
don't think I fit in many of
them, but I, I guess there's
some drugs, but Mister, Mr.
Chairman, I, I had heard some
players and we're looking at
charging stations for a home was
somewhere it would cost an
additional
I don't know, several $1000 800
dollars to $10,000 in a home.
I don't know, that's why I'm,
I'm asking, so.
Thank you, for sure.
Determine and representative. I
have a I charge it was a couple
1000
only because they had to upgrade
my grid because I have an older
house, but if they don't have to
upgrade your, your panel, it
doesn't cost as much. I mean,
you can get it for 80.
I've heard.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you. Um,
The other question that I have
is regarding cold weather.
Is there
A um a connection or do, how do
they function in the cold
weather as opposed to
Um, other gas-powered buses.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, another great
question because the buses do
they're.
efficiency is reduced up to 80,
you know, to about 80% from 100%
during freezing weather, um, the
buses again is like I said in
Dulce, they found that they
still have plenty of charge to
get the bus routes completed and
uh these buses also have been
running in places like Alaska
and far northern Colorado
mountain districts and so on.
without any major complaint,
they just filled that into the
distance. I also note sometimes
there are problems with internal
combustion engines as well
during
Deep freezes
Uh, thank you. Um,
My other question, Mister
Tremont, is really about, cause
I don't know, I know that an
electric vehicle will probably
take off faster than my gas
vehicle, but as far as, you
know, when we're talking about
going uphill, do we lose? Is
there, is there, are they able
to maintain that power.
Uh, as far as working on the,
uh, as far as working on hills,
mountains, which many of our
State um has.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
yes, they do maintain the power,
and when they're going downhill,
they actually regenerate and and
gain um miles, I can go from
when I'm coming to Santa Fe, I
can go freeway or go down by
Sandia, and I can gain 10 miles
just going down that hill. It's
great.
That actually, you know what,
we'll have to give me a ride. I
I see you going out there, but
um, Mr. Chairman, the other
question, I've got two more
questions, and again, these are
just so I that I, I know, and,
and the reason I'm asking for
this because I, I talk about
local control.
And so I, I mean, this is if
it's local, but I do have some
questions. So, uh, Mr. Chairman,
when we talk about
The certifications needed to
work on these buses.
Is there additional
certifications.
Or and requirements.
That would be an additional
cost.
And in uh for to run these
buses.
Mr. Chair,
representative, thank you for
that question too. uh, yes, some
additional training is needed.
Uh, I would say it's not, um,
But also on the flip side a lot
and so much less maintenance is
needed as well. Um,
There there is somewhat some.
Sorry my watch is talking.
Uh
sorry about my watch. Um,
Anyway,
Maintenance can be an issue,
especially in rural areas, um.
As we said from the beginning,
it's not a choice for everybody,
um.
The main maintenance is done by
the bus companies right now as
districts upgrade their
capabilities.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. My
last question, but it's in 3
parts.
OK
Sorry about the roll. Last time
I got accused of, you know,
interviewing or uh for a radio
station with my voices is more,
cause I don't know. OK, Mr.
Chairman, um, Representative.
We, I, I, I'm in charge of
transportation for my district,
OK?
So they have school buses are
replaced at a twelve-year cycle.
OK.
So they tell me, uh, Mr. Chair
and uh Representative.
Which buses are due for
replacement.
Mr. Chair
How as a district would I
communicate or what is the
process to communicate that I
want.
To
Replace it with an electric bus,
and then if I, as you said,
replacement for it would be
grant funded.
Are we gonna be making those
payments back the other way to
the transportation department?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I understand that
the process is essentially the
same for replacing a diesel bus
as an electric bus through the
public.
Education department that as you
said every 12 years they're
automatically like they have to
be retired, so I understand the
process is essentially the same
and
and maybe I didn't do a good job
of clarifying Mr. Chairman and
uh committee, um.
We talked about that the bus
paying 100, 400,000 for an
electric bus.
We talked about the um.
costs of a diesel bus.
Between 135,000 is what we have
in our FIR.
I, I guess the question is,
How then
So the, the, the money from the
transportation.
They give us money to the bus
and then the school district
gives the manufacturer.
With whatever funds they have,
the, the additional cost?
I don't, I don't understand that
process, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um,
Yeah, the, the buses, if the
district applied for an electric
school bus and if
Sine
949 rather passes, so they're
sufficient funds in the PED can.
can pay the full freight, so to
speak.
Then it's covered.
if the money isn't there in the
local district is choosing to
buy electric buses on its own,
and that would be a choice. They
would have to contribute the
difference between the cost of a
diesel and
Mr. Chairman, can I add also
remember they're electric, so
they don't pay gas or any of
those fuels, so we're saving a
lot of money in that area also.
No thank you, Mr. I guess the
question is,
When we're talking about where
this money we're talking about
money coming and funds.
From the school district or from
the transportation department to
the school district.
And then the cost of the
additional cost, the gap between
the 400,000, 135,000.
How does that money go? And then
where's the accountability back
to the department that manages
our
Um, our, our fleet for the
state.
So Mr. Chairman, you know,
that's
Those are questions I will tell
you.
I like this because I'd like
local control, and I can't say
that I do in one and don't in
the other.
I think that the process of
this.
I think could be challenging and
I, I, I think that there
probably needs to be some
thought as to
How this actually fits in.
is that we don't have money
changing hands 2 or 3 times, so
thank you, Mr. Chair,
just one last thing, um, we have
buses in Las Cruces, we have
them in Santa Fe, we have them
in Dulce, we have them like
Arthur. I mean, they somebody
has figured out this problem, so
we can get back to you on, on
that answer, right? Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and sorry
I'm gonna be
in and out.
I'll be, but um in
Representative Vaka asked a lot
of the questions, so I'll kind
of keep this uh short, um.
So we will have to have and and
might have missed this. We'll
have to have to basically two
different types of mechanics.
Um, we have our own
transportation department, our
own mechanics. We'll have to
have one that's certified in EV
and then one is certified in
diesel.
Madam Representative, Mr. Chair,
um,
I'm not certain actually that
there is a sort of specifics
different certification required
for mechanics.
I can't answer that with.
And Mr. Charity.
My concerns are, you know, with
EB. I, I do like, let me first
just stay, I do like the local
control part where they can make
the decision.
Of this and it's not being said
you have.
So, um, I do like that portion,
um, my concerns with EVs are um.
You know, we've seen
Uh, with bad weather conditions,
getting cold, some people charge
their vehicles in the states we
saw that last couple years, so I
don't works with.
When it gets freezing, we don't
get that level.
But I just don't know what level
causes that to where it would
become problematic.
Um
And then
The cost of battery replacement.
Um, we know that I've seen with
EV vehicles.
batteries go out and it's very
expensive to replace, so those
are type of uh costs that school
districts are really.
Budget 4
If um they do purchase. I do
like the, the choices my um
concern.
Mr. Chair, and then this is R.
The difference is going to
either come out from school
district friends or capital
funds or as they get a branch.
For that difference.
Um, federally right now we
probably won't see any grants
for that.
Um, but
My concern, and this is just my
own personal experience with our
district and we're looking at
going to EV vehicles.
Making a lot of changes.
We are, we steel operate on a
four-tier and rearrange a public
schools. We can't even get the
amount of buses that we need.
So for our district alone, and
those are just diesel buses.
We've had issues with
transportation for years. We
were dipping into our general.
And I know this isn't part of
this, but I think there's a lot
of things to fix before we start
jumping into EV buses.
Within our school districts for
our transportation and our
buses. We need probably at least
another 20 or so buses just to
go to 3 tier.
And it drives our schedules or
our class um for our kiddos, and
so it's very problematic so for
me, this would be um the soft
note just because of the fact
that we have a lot of other
issues to be fixing when it
comes to transportation and to
be focusing on the EV right now,
um.
And again, it's an option, but
we're looking at.
School districts paying for
capital out out of their capital
outlay funds to be able to
purchase.
make up that difference. It's
concerning to me when we have a
lot of other issues that has to
do with transportation. Thank
you.
Um
uh
The chair and representative,
yes, um, I think there is plenty
of things to solve in the
schools, and again, this bill is
just getting us ready for
whenever it's whenever the
district is ready to move this,
so we are not changing anything
is getting ready for when the
district bills and have the
funds to do it. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
um, we have a bigger bigger
problem, climate change, and
this is just another little
help.
to solve that, to help with
that, thank you.
Sure, and I appreciate that.
Thank you.
It was in Sheffield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sure, I just want to start by
saying that.
I think saving the world is an
honorable endeavor, OK?
Sometimes there's bumps in the
road to get into it.
Uh
Um
First question about electric
vehicles, electric buses. It's
well below zero outside.
And I turned the heater on.
There's no motor there to make
heat, so it's got to come from
that battery.
You must have an electric heater
in there.
How much does it reduce my
mileage if I'm
Kind of a cold-natured person, I
ran that heater up.
Oh
reduced the mileage quite a bit
or just a little bit or
unnoticeably?
Mr. Chairman, and
Representative, it will reduce
some, it will reduce the
mileage, um, depends on where
you're going. I didn't have any
problems here in Santa Fe when I
was driving last winter, not
this year, a little bit of
climate change happening here,
um, but it will definitely
reduce it.
I can't tell you exactly how
much depends on what you have,
how, how you drive, if you
speed, if you.
Ra Baca, then it will be
different, but, but I can't tell
you.
So, I, I can think this some
instances it reduce that mileage
quite a bit.
A little heater that goes in
your.
Wellhouse uses a lot of
electricity to
Make it
It'll crank your electric bill
up.
Uh, also, I sit on the
the board of Southwestern
Electric.
Um
When people, when people, if, if
a person puts in a uh.
They, their batteries get full,
they can sail back to some of
the different electrical.
Association things.
Uh
You were saying that the, the
bus could do that and it could
earn money.
The bus
So
If you buy electricity, they
sell it to you for.
X number of dollars.
You sell back to the grid.
You sell back at them.
Minimal
A much reduced.
What you buy it.
So
You know, just
Make it easy, say if you buy it
for $1.
Sell it back for 25 cents.
So if my boss is sitting there
charging.
I'm buying it for $1.
And then
Well, the grid goes active.
At the end of the day, and then
start selling it back to the
grid because my battery on my
bus is full, and I sell it for
25 cents and then my boss starts
charging again, and I buy it for
$1 then I start.
Selling it back for 25 cents.
I don't think I'm gonna be
earning you.
Mr. Chairman and and
Representative, it depends on
when you sell it back during
peak times, you will earn more
than 25 cents if it's on a
dollar. So peak times are
important and that's where this
would be great. It's just like
energy storage on your home you
wanna use it.
Charge at night, peak times is
when you want to use it when all
the kids are there on all their
electrical devices, that's when
you use it to save your electric
bill.
So it depends on when you're
selling it back and for how
much?
And again, this is optional if
you don't want to do it, you
don't have to do it. So, so.
my question is, is there a time?
During the day when I can sell.
Electrons to the grid.
Make a profit, as
My area
I don't think yes.
Maybe there is if there is.
Tell me about, tell me.
it
Mr. Chair Representative
Chaffield, thank you again for
that question. Yes, there, there
are differential rates now being
employed by most utilities, I
can't answer for the specific
one where you live, um, but most
so uh.
They encourage people to
download energy late at night.
1 or 2 in the morning, for
instance, and especially during
the summer peak times, um.
To when they're rebuying the
energy back during peak hours,
they're they're buying it back
at more money than they sold it
to you. Um.
Because it's worth more to them
to keep the grid reliable at
that time.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you, speakers, um, um,
when this, when this bill came
up, um, I do myself also
represent a rural district. um,
one of my school districts in
particular has employed, um, you
know, EV buses, um, and I did, I
did my due diligence and I went
through them and I've talked
about the merits, good and bad,
about their use of buses.
Um, and you know, you are right.
Everything that has been said,
um, in rural districts, the
distance isn't great. The, um,
you know, they have had, you
know, growing pains of
infrastructure, growing pains of
other things, yet they still
chose to employ that they got
this bus through a different
program. I've heard a lot of
discussion and I just want to
clarify this bill has.
Done a lot of debating over EV
but this bill does not address
anything regarding the
efficiency of an EB bus versus a
traditional bus. It does nothing
to challenge that. It does
nothing to solidify how great or
how not great in an EB bus is,
um, in my very clear that this
bill only addresses the option
for a school district to choose
to do it or not. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, that is correct.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
With that and not the
requirement to that, um, I will
say that with this program, this
district did put in, you know, a
considerable amount of
infrastructure development, um,
you know, granted through some
grants, but they only have a
single loan, you know, ED bus
with the hope of one day adding
to their fleet. Um, I see this
bill as an option. Should they
choose as a school district to
possibly use some funds
allocated to what would normally
go to to a traditional bus.
Should they choose to.
Expand their fleet since they
have already invested in the
infrastructure. Again, just kind
of clarification. Um, does this
bill in the future, should they
choose to replace traditional
buses with EB buses. That's
really all it is going to is
just giving them the option to
add to their fleet should they
choose. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, that's correct. OK, thank
you. Those are all my questions.
And can I add on, you know, um,
Lake Arthur has uh one.
Right? And they have where they,
they have a charging station
that they can, the bus can use
and also anybody else can use.
So there are revenue generating
ways to do it if you come up,
you know, with some.
Great little area.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm going
do pass.
All right, so we have a motion
on House Bill 32, a second by
Representative Garrett.
Secretary of role on a do pass
motion, please.
No.
Berson Chatfield.
Representative Gonzalez. Yes.
Representative Corola, yes.
Representative Lata.
Yes.
Representative Maripal Moya.
No.
Representative for Balcaballero.
Representative Collins. Yeah.
Representative Torres Valesquez.
Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Know with an explanation.
Representative Madam Chair Vice
Vice.
Garrett. Yes.
Truman
Yes, right? So Representative
Vincent, explain this. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you
representatives. You're warming
me up.
Yeah
Because you gave, you gave them
an option, and I appreciate
that.
The only thing I was gonna add
is
For the replacement, I think I
read in the bill 12 years to
replace it.
Shouldn't, couldn't you go even
further because there's not as
many moving parts. Couldn't we
replace it and maybe double it?
Alright,
are over. That's comment,
yeah, yeah, you had your time
finally, finally, finally. All
right, so by a vote of 6 to 5,
you have a due pass House Bill
3.
Thank you.
All right, so.
We're supposed to be on the
floor, so he has has built 89.
So please.
They
Right
89, please.
Please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, you know we
have to be back on the floor, so
hopefully this won't take too
long cause it's such a great
bill.
Um, we're talking about house
bill 89, which makes changes to
the graduate scholarship app. It
requires recipients to be New
Mexico residents.
It requires that priority be
given to New Mexican residents
with the greatest financial need
and residents in need from
underrepresented groups in
higher education.
Um, it requires that, uh,
applicants with an earned BA
have an earned BA and maintain a
3.0 or higher.
Or hold a paid position
supporting faculty teaching or
researching.
It requires uh the applicant be
enrolled in at least 6 credit
hours of graduate study.
The scholarship may be
re-awarded to recipients from a
previous year requires that they
maintain a 3. 3.0 or higher and
are in good standing to uh
maintain.
the scholarship or to keep
applying for the scholarship.
Um, and it may be rewarded until
a recipient receives receives a
degree or has received 8
semesters of the scholarship.
And the amount rewarded awarded
shall not exceed 100% of the
tuition and fees for the
graduate program for an academic
year, provided it is given when
one semester at a time and shall
not fund the second semester if
the student does not enroll, or
otherwise maintain eligibility.
That is the bill, Mister
Chairman, or, uh, I want to
introduce Victor Reyes to my
right. He is my expert. Um, he
is also.
region, I always did that wrong,
but still very important person
sitting to my uh, right, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and with that we will
stand for questions. All right.
Thank you so much. So for folks
on Zoom, if you're here in
opposition. I'm starting out
with opposition.
To house Bill 89, please
indicate by raising your hand.
With that populate folks in the
room if you're opposed to House
Bill 89, would you please
indicate by raising your hand?
Give it a moment. OK, not seeing
anybody. We'll go to sport on
our Zoom if you're here in
support of House Bill 8 name,
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Right, folks in the room, those
of you in sport, house lady your
name, please indicate her
raising your hand, right?
Liz, if you all would line up
behind our presenters.
And have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chairman, honorable members
of this committee. My name is
Michelle Rivera Ramirez, and I
am president of the graduate and
Professional Student
Association, which is the
graduate uhtern government at
the university in New Mexico and
I would like to voice my support
for this bill.
Uh
So I would like to let you guys
know that I come from a low
income household and, you know,
through a miracle, I'm not here
studying, um, in law school in
my 3rd year and I know how
important it is to
Get funding for education when
it comes to higher education,
uh, I know plenty of people who,
that's the only thing on their
mind is where am I gonna get the
money to fund my education,
especially in these graduate
fields like nursing, like law,
like education, these are um
programs that are desperately
needed in New Mexico, and I
think that
this bill really uh targets, uh,
the issues, uh, that phase a lot
of these jobs here in New
Mexico, uh, we have a shortage,
especially in rural areas, if,
you know, with lawyers, with uh
health professionals, anybody
with a master's or PhD, uh, we
see it in the state and you
know, this bill really targets
that in, you know, lifting up.
Students who struggle
financially, uh, in funding
their studies and it also
provides merit, um, to be shown
by these students in order to
get their scholarship. So, you
know, it's not just, um, oh, are
you in need, um, we're gonna
give you this scholarship. You
also have to show that you need
to
you.
Thank you.
All right, please, you have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Linnea Montoya,
associate director of government
relations at UNM. I just wanted
to stand in strong support of
this bill and thank the sponsors
as well as our student region,
Victor Reyes, and our GPSA folks
who have worked alongside the
higher education department and
other higher education
institutions across the state in
crafting this bill and we strong
we strongly urge you to vote.
Yes, thank you.
Great.
Thank you.
Yes, you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning. My name is Doctor
Carol Cloer.
When I was 18 years old, I
borrowed $500 from the federal
government.
To go to college.
The return
On that investment.
Has been huge. I have 4 degrees,
and I have paid income tax, my
entire working career.
So we'll get the money back.
I support this bill.
Thank you.
Great.
Thank you. All right, so we'll
go to our folks on Zoom Shaar.
Good morning. You have up to 2
minutes.
Shawar
You may need 10 mu.
did unmute for a brief moment.
Right.
Come back to you, Joseph. Good
morning, Joseph, you have up to
2 minutes. Welcome.
Yeah. Good morning, Mr. Chairman
and committee members. My name
is Joseph Conte. I'm a graduate
student at the University of New
Mexico. I currently serve as the
president of the African
Students Association and also
the grants director for the
graduate and professional
student association. I strongly
support HB 89, the graduate
scholarship Act changes. As a
graduate student, I know how
challenging it is to balance
academic goals with financial
pressures. This bill
is a vital step towards removing
those barriers. By increasing
scholarship amounts and
expanding the eligibility
criteria. HB 89 will not only
have current students like me
but also attract talented
individuals in New Mexico,
strengthening our state
research, innovation, and
workforce. Graduate students are
essential to New Mexico's
success. We conduct
groundbreaking research, teach
undergraduate.
and contribute to the economy,
but without adequate support,
many are forced to leave the
state or give up on your
education. HB 89 is an
investment in our future. A
future where New Mexico remains
a leader in education and
innovation. Please vote in
support of HB 89 and up graduate
students like me continue to
contribute to our state's
success. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Travis. Good morning, Travis.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Yeah, good morning, chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Travis Broadhurst. I'm
currently also a member of the
Graduate and Professional
Students Association at the
University of New Mexico. I'm a
3rd year PhD student in civil
engineering, um, and I'm
speaking in support of HP 89 and
would like the committee to
support it as well. When I was
growing up, my grandparents
taught me a lot of life lessons,
I'm sure everybody can relate to
one of the biggest ones that my
grandma told me was that the one
thing that people can't take
away from you, no matter what is
your education.
And that's what this bill, uh,
sports, and that's what the
scholarship Act supports. Um, I
grew up in North Carolina, you
know, I'm not a native New
Mexican by any means, but I did
my undergraduate work in North
Carolina, and one of the things
that drew drew me to New Mexico
for my graduate studies was the
importance that New Mexico puts
on education. This bill supports
that. This bill will help to uh
ensure that that stays for a
long, long time. And it'll help
other graduate students like
myself be able to come here and
study in New Mexico and stay in
New Mexico, you know, not
only does this bill help attract
people here, but it also keeps
New Mexicans studying here and
gives them a reliable quality
education at our amazing
universities where they can then
use that education in the
workforce in New Mexico. I think
that we have, uh, you know, a
known problem with brain drain
and folks having to leave the
state for their graduate
education and then stay in those
states outside of New Mexico
where they get educated, and
that could be strongly reversed
by just allowing folks that
already are here living their
whole life. They love this
state, they received their
bachelor's degree.
from the state, they can easily
go on to attain an MS, PhD, MD,
law degree, etc. etc. from New
Mexico. Stay here, working in
Mexico and contribute to this
great state. I mean, we're only,
we're one of only two states
that have two national labs, and
I would love to see that further
get strengthened by support of
this House bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh
Tom
Good morning, Tom. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning. Thank you,
Chairman and committee members.
Um, I come to you as the
president of a private
university college here in in
Santa Fe.
And even seeing that, well, this
is not a, a bill that would
support institutions like my
own. I want to speak
full-throatedly in support of
it, recognizing that in some of
the other bills that are coming
forward, especially the
behavioral Health Trust Fund,
for example. We need a New
Mexicans in our graduate
programs and coming into those
high demand fields across the
state, so I am very supportive
of this, and thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
We'll go back to Shawar.
Are you there, ho. Good morning.
Good morning.
wood and mute.
Hello, hello. You're there. We
can hear you. Good morning. You
have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, respected chair
and honorable committee members,
I'm Shaar Khan, and I'm enrolled
in the doctoral program for
linguistics at UNM.
I express my appreciation and
gratitude to the sponsors of the
act under current discussion.
I'm hoping for the graduate
scholarship Act to pass through
as the Act offers assistance to
graduate students who are
financially disadvantaged, but
fulfill all the merit
requirements of their program
and the university.
I believe this act and its
tangible impact would be needed
more so in times of any
potential withdrawals of the
federal funding, especially
those impacting international
students who have achieved spots
at UNM through a rigorous
competitive process and have
relocated to the United States
from their respective home
countries, but the duration of
their graduate degree programs,
undertaking a long term
commitment as proud residents of
New Mexico to seek top academic
and research training at the
state's flagship R one Category
university.
This act gives hope, especially
in the current uncertain times
for education, and I hope it
receives positive traction
today. Thank you all.
Great.
Thank you.
Right
come to committee for timely
represent me Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, and
thank you for your presentation,
um, there is so much about this
bill that I really like.
Um
And a couple of things I do not,
but I do, I do really like that
it is um for New Mexico
residents, um,
I do like that, um, what is it?
That it uh removes that
requirement for full-time
students, I know, especially in
the graduate, I mean.
I couldn't imagine, um.
Having to be completely full
time when I was getting my
graduate degree because I was a
teacher and I had.
two teenagers that played
separate sports and a coach and
all kinds of stuff.
It was crazy. So I couldn't
imagine it, um, but, uh, so it
definitely opens it up to those
that are not the the uh to the
older ones possibly going back.
Um.
I, I, I do like the removes the,
the requirement for an unpaid
internship.
Um, and, um, and all those
things. A quick question, this
is only for New Mexico schools,
uh, colleges, right?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, that's correct.
And then, um, Mr. Chair
Representative is um does this
include, uh, with this
scholarship include anyone
wanting to take online courses
in at these New Mexico schools
or do they have to go in person?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative, that's correct,
online courses are included.
Um, now, there's, there's just a
couple of things that I'm not
very um.
I that I that I don't like, uh,
why are we removing on page 2, a
line 25, a citizen of the United
States or um who has a permanent
or who has a permanent resident
uh visa. Why are we removing
that?
Um, Mr. Chap representative,
page 2 line 2.
No, 25, sorry, and then it goes
on into page 3 line 1.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
so this question came in, uh,
came into play in our previous
committee and essentially what
we're doing with this
legislation is adding in that
the um recipient be in New
Mexico resident and this
language in terms of a citizen
of the United States or a
permanent resident, that is
actually federal law, um, you
cannot have a, a scholarship
recipient who is not legally
allowed to study or be on a.
Visa that allows him to study
within the United States. So
what was important and necessary
for us to establish in state law
was the New Mexico residency
requirement and the um federal
immigration status is.
preempted by federal
requirements, so it wasn't
really did not need to be a part
of this bill, other than our
statement of the requirements
that the uh recipient be a New
Mexico resident.
OK, so, um, Mr. Chair, and, um,
Madam Representative, um.
So, so if there, if someone is a
state resident, New Mexico state
resident.
Then they're automatically, I
mean, so you, so you can't be a
state resident and and not a
citizen of the United States,
like, or can you be? can you be?
I'm if I'm, if I'm considered a
state resident, I can still not
be a citizen in the United
States, I can be one or either
or both like.
My, I'm probably not. No, you're
clear. Mr. Chairman
Representative, you absolutely
can be a resident of the state
of New Mexico and let's say on a
green card or an H-1B1 visa, so
you do not have to be a citizen
of the United States to be. OK.
Um, that's what I have issue
with.
Um, so, um,
Because we're, we're, we're.
Yeah, I'm not gonna go there,
but that's, that's one of I, I,
I definitely have issue with. I
also have, um, me personally,
and this is my personal thing,
um.
I have an issue with which,
which I don't mind uh taking
precedence over or or having um
um Mr. Chair.
Look at greatest financial need,
um.
I have an issue with
Someone like me
Who is a Hispanic female, and
let's say I'm a teacher wanting
to go back to get my, my back,
my graduate or or possibly PhD,
which there's, you couldn't pay
me enough to do that.
Um, but, OK, possibly do that,
and Representative Vinson is
also a teacher, and he wants
To go back and get his or get
his PhD. And when they're
looking at this, I would get it,
he wouldn't.
Surely, by looking at us.
And I, I have an issue with
that.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so
to go back to your first
question, um, the the reasoning
for this language is to allow
international students to be
able to have access to this
scholarship program, which is
very important because you have
a lot of amazing international
students who choose to become
New Mexico residents, um, so
that they can go to world class
institutions like UNM, um, and
this graduate fund would allow
them or assist them in doing
that, so that is, that's why the
language is drafted.
that way so that we include
international students, back to
your other question, um, so, Mr.
Chairman, Representative,
respectfully, I think you're
reading into the language,
something that's not there, um,
all the language requires is for
the scholarship, the people who
work making considerations as to
who.
Who meets the um qualifications
for the the scholarship versus
those who don't, they simply
have to take those factors into
consideration, it is not
specifically defined for a
reason, um, so that, so that
those factors will be better and
more developed in their process.
We did not want to put it in law
exactly, you know, that a
Hispanic female should get
precedence before Hispanic male
or I mean, that's that's not.
There's no place for that in
this particular law. I'm sure it
sounds like my expert can help,
um, explain as well.
Representative, um, I also just
want to add that another factor,
for instance, that would be an
underrepresented community would
be a rural community.
And so Representative Vincent
would be giving consideration
representing a rural community
in the graduate fields. Our
rural communities are
underrepresented within the
graduate studies, and that's
something that we are trying to
rectify and that we are trying
to make sure that we are giving
every opportunity. Um, I'll
speak to, for instance, at the
law school, we have, uh, we are
so proud to serve New Mexicans
and to be the primary school
that creates the lawyers that
end up serving New Mexico from
New Mexico, but we have an
underrepresentation.
in the in the uh the law school
from rural communities just as
we do in the healthcare, um,
graduate studies and across the
board. And so this is another
way to give that type of
consideration to those types.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, um, and, and the fact
that you brought up that this is
So that international students
can can get this, I think that's
kind of like.
I fear that people come, I mean,
which, which I, I, I have no
problems with people coming here
to get an education, but then
you're now.
With this language taking
precedence over those that live
here.
Um, and so like that are that
are.
United States citizens that are
gonna be that so so someone is
coming here and would more than
likely because they qualify for
uh in in minority and and
everything else, they would
qualify and they would possibly
get the the scholarship over a
um a United States citizen and,
and that's what I have an issue
with it. Thank you.
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I, um, there was some
concerns, I, you know, and
unfortunately I was reading
over.
then now
Last night, so, um, but I did
have a couple questions, so
hopefully I was reading at my
notes from memory.
Um, my understanding is one of
the UNM, um, analysis had that,
um, their law school requires a
2.5 GPA or good standing within
the law school or this is a 3.0
minimum.
That correct.
For the scholarship.
You have to have a 3.0 minimum
BPA to keep the scholarship.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
guess I'm I'm looking for
clarification on your, your
question. So the law school
requires a 2.5 to be considered
in good standing, however, in
order to meet the requirements
to have and keep this
scholarship, it's a 3.0 and that
is correct, right, OK, um, thank
you, Mr. Cha. That was one of
the, the questions because I
think they had a.
Jesse.
To, um, what their GP.
is what I recall.
Um
Uh, Mr. Chair, this another
question this is a concern for
me. I, I have absolutely.
the student visas for these
students to come here.
And then um
They're able to qualify for the
scholarship cause it looks like
the scholarship has limited
funds per year, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
that is correct.
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
looks like it may be um a cap at
488,000 for higher education
department, is that correct?
Mr. Chairman representative,
that is correct. So Mr. Chair
and Representative, it looks
like you, they were only able to
serve 68 students that received
the scholarship.
uh, fiscal year of 25, is that
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
it is correct that 68 students
were served. I'm gonna go to my
expert to give you a little more
detail on why that.
Yes, and that's actually part of
the reason why we're here today.
Mr Chair Representative, um, I
believe that is correct. Um,
you're that number. I also want
to recognize that Heather
Romero, the director of
financial aid at the Department
of Higher Education is here and
can answer some of these
technical questions and Heather,
please correct me if I'm wrong,
but I believe that that was what
hap what happens is that the
higher education department
distributes the funding amongst
the higher education
institutions proportionately
based on the students that are
served. And then they have the
ability to award.
This bill, what it would do is
give the ability to cover the
full cost of tuition, and we're,
you know, we're hoping to see
that that amount get increased
in the budget because we do
believe that the more students
that were able to serve, the
better. That's not this bill.
Um, what we're trying to do is
ensure that the full cost of
attendance is able to be
covered. Um, by this, by this
scholarship, which is right now
it's capped at 700, which leaves
a big gap for a lot of students
that disqualifies them from
being able to attend to graduate
study program.
program.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
So
When is she that I had um.
With this, and I'll just tell
you.
He had this issue with the
lottery scholarship when we
started seeing the um in news
quite a bit. We were depleting
and they had to try to change um
the criteria and they were
looking at low in um.
The greatest financial need,
which really left out the middle
class, uh, when they were
looking at trying to change
that, and that's my concern here
is, you know,
I'm
Our family is very middle class.
We don't qualify for financial
aid, but we can't afford to pay
for our children's education. So
luckily we had these
scholarships and um chair
represented my, my daughter,
she.
went to UNM for her undergrad
and then went and got her MBA
right afterwards from there.
And, you know, we know
scholarships are very limited,
um, and that is my concern is
that this is a very limited pool
of money.
And
now it's kind of like we're
spreading it out a little bit
more once we're looking at
international students.
And I think our primary, and
this is personally because of
limited funds is is that our
priority should be our, our
students here within.
New Mexico.
Um, just because it is such a
limited if we had a great pool
of money, I could see where you
could do that cause we wanna.
Keep them and retain them here
in New Mexico, labs are a great
place for them to go. But it is
very limited amount of funds,
uh, and Mr. Chair and
Representative and the other
thing is is um aligning that GPA
with law school, um, I think is
pretty important because
You know, you're an attorney, I
have no, you know, I, I do excel
really well, but you know, some
of them have a lot of class
loads and they in the 2.5 is
where they keep them within
their programs, so I would like
to.
Well
Um
And um
At this point, I, I think.
Mr. Chair,
A couple of questions.
Mister Chair and Representative,
the 488,000, is that a line item
yearly the higher higher
education budget.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, I'm gonna defer to my
experts, but I believe so.
Yes it is. And then Mr. Chair
and Representative, so a goal
will be to in the future years.
Increase that amount, is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative, that is correct.
Thank you, and then just two
more quick questions. Does the
money go directly, Mr. Chair, to
the institution to pay the Mr.
Chairman Representative, yes, it
does.
Thank you. And my final
question, Mr. Chair, is Senate
Bill 68 is now in Senate
Finance, it seems to basically
duplicate the bill.
Uh, so what will have this, this
is the 2nd committee would go to
the floor if we pass it.
What is the strategy, whichever
bill passes first, we'll move
on. The other one.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It, you know, I, I knew a young
lady that uh
My wife was her kindergarten
teacher.
And uh she made straight A's all
the way through school.
went on up through high school,
graduated, went to UNM.
It did premed at UNM her goal in
life was to be a doctor and
serve the rural New Mexico.
Uh, she gets
Time to go to med school
couldn't make it into UNM for.
Whatever reason, because they
allow so many of this, so many
of that and.
So many of something else, you
know, but she never could get
in. She went to med school in
New York.
The clinicals in New York.
Its time for residency.
Most people, most doctors.
Uh, wind up practicing where
they did their, do their
residency.
Uh
applied
you and him to
to do a residency.
Couldn't get here.
Uh, I talked to Doctor S Grace,
who was the secretary of
Everything at that point in
time, I think, at least 2
agency.
And so he checked and they
hadn't even reviewed her.
Paperwork, she didn't even
Get a review of paperwork at
that point, there were 300
applications for residencies in
New Mexico. There were 2
residents.
Got to know doctors Zonis, who
was head of the medical system
there at UNM got her.
Uh, paperwork reviewed, and
still, you know, you let in so
many of these students, so many
of these students.
Whatever, uh, some of its
merit-based.
Uh, she didn't make it.
So she went to
The state of Washington.
Get her residency there. He is
now a.
Successful doctor.
And she got married somewhere
else just like.
Everybody knows that happens.
And she practices back in the
Midwest somewhere, not in New
Mexico.
Uh, people that live in New
Mexico tend to practice in New
Mexico.
People that get married in New
Mexico, practice in New Mexico.
I, I would wish that we had a
merit-based system that we
didn't just
Uh
Or from
Uh
Different targeted
types of people, you know, so
many of these and so many of
those.
I would like to see it
merit-based and
And uh
You know, I think we would.
Have more people stayed in New
Mexico after we educated them
and uh for that reason I
probably won't support your
bill, but I, I understand the
good intention of it, but I'd
like to see some New Mexico
kids, uh, get educated here, and
I'd like to see some folks from
elsewhere.
We're gonna stay here, get
educated here. Thank you,
mister.
I don't have anybody else on my
list. What's the will of the
committee?
sister.
We do.
So we have a pass on 89 by
represent Lara, seconded by
Representative Groda. Madam
Secretary, call the roll and I
do pass motion.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Ladder. Yes.
Representative.
Maribal Moya? No.
Representative
Oral Caballero.
Representative Collins.
Representative of Torres
Valasquez. Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Madam Cha Garrett.
Yes
man Yes.
by about 63 I do past 89. Thank
you.
All right, so that concludes our
meeting. We'll see you all folks
at 8:30 on Wednesday.
