Here.
Uh, Representative Gurula.
Here
Representative Lata.
Representative Moya.
Representative Caballero.
Representative.
Representativeselliques
representative.
Vincent
Madame Chair Garrett.
Madame Vice Chair, sorry. Yeah.
Here.
All right.
Good morning folks. So before we
get to our budget presentations,
I want to welcome Representative
Cullen, Representative, if you
wouldn't mind introducing
yourself to the committee and to
our audience. We'd appreciate
it.
So I represent Rio Rancho at the
North.
I served 8 years on the rear
board.
I also association.
All right, welcome. Please make
sure you go through the chair.
We do that to depersonalize the
debates that we do have here. So
welcome aboard. We appreciate
having you and your expertise
here. All right, so we have our
director of the LESC, um, Mr.
Liu and Madam Secretary,
welcome. So we're going to be
going over the budget. So as we
mentioned on Monday, um, we're
going to have weeklong budget
presentations, um, to talk about
and this is our opportunity as
has education to get a briefing
on what's been done.
in the interim um and provide
our commentary as to where we
think the um
House appropriations and Finance
Committee should go on their
budget to match the policy that
will be considering here
in-house education, so, um.
Please
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, members. Um,
So for those of you, well,
hopefully you will have your,
your yellow folder from uh
Monday. If not, we do have extra
copies of the document, the
budget documents that we're
going to be talking about today.
Uh, before we get started with
Before we get started with
actually with the numbers
themselves, I wanted to go over
very quickly.
Um, I know we talked about above
the line, middle of the line
below the line on Monday, but
I'm actually going to walk you
very quickly through how to read
this document because the
different sections read a little
bit differently.
And so if you'll start at the
top on line 2.
What you see there is the is in
the first.
column of numbers on the left
hand side that says FY 25 Obud.
Those are the amounts that the
legislature appropriated to the
public school support.
For the current fiscal year. So
for FY 25.
The next 3 columns represent the
three recommendations from the
executive on the legislative
finance Committee, and from the
legislative Education Study
Committee.
If you look at line 2 under the
the recommendation columns.
What you'll see there is
actually uh a carryover from
line.
20
7
I'm sorry, line 22.
So essentially we're carrying
over the current year's fiscal.
the current fiscal year's
appropriation.
As a starting point.
For the conversation this
legislative session.
Every number that you see below
those numbers are either
proposed additions.
Or subtractions from the base.
So as we go through this, you'll
see.
Um
The first few numbers that
you'll see, for instance, in
lines 4 and 5 are subtractions
from the base and we'll talk
about why that is.
And pretty much every number
with the exception of a couple
after that.
Our proposed additions to the
base. So again, that line two is
the starting point. It's the
current fiscal year program
cost.
Everything below that is what
we're proposing to add or
subtract from that base number.
So the way we're gonna, we're
gonna run this today.
Um, I'm gonna go over um some of
the differences Sonny and I are
going to sort of ping pong back
and forth here to talk a little
bit about the different
recommendations.
When we're done with this
document and going over.
Um
SEG categorical.
And the related recurring.
Then we're gonna hand it over to
the secretaryate and she's gonna
walk you through this document.
That talks a little bit about
the differences um between.
The legislative recommendations
and some things that she wants
to highlight with the executive
request.
OK.
So with that, let's go ahead and
get started.
Um, the first thing we're going
to do is talk a little bit about
uh the SCG.
So again, we'll start on line 2.
And we'll just move our way down
through through line two.
Lines 4 and 5 you'll see your
subtractions in both the LFC and
the LESC recommendation, and
both of these have to do with a
bill that you'll see on Monday,
House Bill 63, and I mentioned
that on this past Monday.
About revisions to the state
equalization guarantee.
Those revisions will
Change the way that we
appropriate or that you all
allocate an appropriate.
At-risk funding.
And so these first two
subtractions are actually a
representation of the repeal of
the way that we currently use
the at-risk factor. So the first
line is removing title I from at
risk.
And the second is removing the
mobility units from at risk. And
again, this is sort of an
accounting exercise here.
We're going to take out money
when we, when we stop using
those mechanisms.
And then in lines 6 and 7.
We're gonna put money back in.
When we substitute the family
income index as that poverty
indicator.
And then adding a standalone
factor for English learners and
students who have exited English
learner status after two years
after they exit.
So you can think about lines 6
and 7 as replacing lines 4 and
5. So we're taking money out,
but then we're putting it back
in using different mechanisms.
And you'll see there that lines
456, and 7 between the LFC and
the LESC recommendation.
are exactly the same.
For line 8.
Is the addition of $51 million
for an increase.
To the secondary factor for
grades 7 through 12.
So currently, the formula funds
students in grades 7 through 12
at 1.25 units, and we talked a
little bit about units on
Monday.
This would increase that to 1.30
and at the cost of about $51
million.
And line 9.
is also increasing the factor
for 6th grade, but because the
6th grade unit factor right now
is actually smaller.
There's a larger difference to
get to that 1.30, and that's an
additional 40 million, and with
that, I'll stop for a second,
Mr. Chen handed over to Sonny to
talk about um.
The
recommendation.
Thank you, John, um, for those
of you joining, my name is Sonny
Liu. I'm the LFC analyst for
public schools. Uh, and John did
a very good job of covering the
differences between the two
recommendations uh for the
formula reform, the LLC was a
part of the.
Is this better? No.
The LLC was a part of the
funding formula task force, and
we were
There for the two years study
period we did agree with the
LESC recommendations to replace
the at-risk index with the
family income index and have a
standalone English learner
factor.
There are a lot of concerns from
LFC about having a secondary
weight increase of this
magnitude given that we know
secondary student enrollment is
going to decline the next
decade. And so that would
actually create more penalties
in the future and concerns about
how that would affect school
budgets.
But I will say that the LFC
recommendation does include a
slight increase to the 6th grade
weight.
Signaling that the committee is
open to considerations about
adjusting these factors. I think
that there's a real
need to improve outcomes for
middle school and high school
students, and that's
acknowledged here, but I think
wars for conversation.
That'll turn it back to John.
So Mr. Chair, members, now we'll
walk through uh
quickly line 11.
And you'll see there that every
uh all of the recommendations
include a pretty substantial
increase for for K-12 plus
units.
You all created K12, the K-12
plus program and House Bill 130,
which essentially provides
additional funding to school
districts and charter schools
that add days above 180 or 5 day
school weeks and above 155.
For 4 day school weeks.
And so this number actually
represents.
Uh, you'll see, you know
As we get further down this
sheet, um.
These, these units already
exist. School districts have
already added these.
To their calendars, and so we
want to make sure there's enough
funding for the for the next
fiscal year to cover the
increase uh in those days and so
this is essentially you, uh,
school districts cashing the
check that you wrote.
In House Bill 130, the law says
that as they add days they get
additional funding. This line 11
pays for those additional days
that have already been.
schedule.
I'll let Sonny talk a little bit
about lines uh 12.
14 here in a minute.
Um, actually, why don't you go
ahead and do that right away,
Sunny and then before we go to
the the rest of the.
Sure. Thank you, John. So lines
12 and 14 are reductions to the
SCG to account for enrollment
declines and other unit
adjustments um each year as we
prepare our budget
recommendations for LFC. The
committee provides guidance
asking analysts to look at
potential workload adjustments
and then enrollment declines as
part of our recommendation.
When you sort of look at all of
these units that are being lost
in the formula and all the units
that are being added from these
proposed changes, you can almost
essentially.
Replace a lush unit with a new
unit to
Essentially do more.
Uh, these unit projections are
based on a very consistent trend
we've seen for the last decade
of about
Anywhere from 0.5% to 1%
enrollment declines, the actual
credits here do not take it into
full consideration that full
drop, it's a partial reduction
to account for that unit loss.
Uh, you also remember for those
of you that have been here on
the committee for a while.
That during the pandemic schools
experienced about a 4% reduction
in enrollment.
Um, as a result of COVID-19.
closures
However, the state did not take
the full 4% credit that year.
still continued to 1%
adjustment, uh, assuming sort of
status quo enrollment
adjustments. So that's a bit of
a history on those and the LFC
recommendation continues to
include those adjustments in
SCG.
Thank you, Sonny.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'll say one
thing about the credits and I
think Sunny's right to point
out, um,
We've seen about a 1% drop in
enrollment every year for the
last decade.
So it is important, I think that
the legislature recognize that
as you start to lose and so to
put in context, we used to have
about 330,000 students in the
system we're, we're at about
300,000 now.
So that if you think about that,
that is that 1% essentially drop
every year. So I think it's
important that the legislature
consider that. At the same time,
Um, and we hear this from school
districts and for those of you
who work in schools, it's
important to remember that those
drops in enrollments are not
uniform across the system.
You have some districts that
experience larger drops in
enrollment, some districts that
don't experience any drops, they
sort of stay flat.
You know that when you have
students leave a school that
doesn't necessarily mean that
you need fewer teachers. I've
been using the example of, I
don't know, I would say there's
about 20 of you up on the up on
the podium today, if two of you
left.
You still need a teacher.
If
5 of you left.
You would probably still need a
teacher, right, so just, just to
consider and as Sunny said, this
is not a one for one deduction.
This is not a one for one credit
in enrollment, but it is
important to continue to
consider.
How those drops in enrollment
actually affect schools and
whether or not they actually
result in in um
Lower costs.
The, uh, so we'll go ahead and
go down to line 17.
Line 17 is the proposals for
increases to educators salaries.
You'll see that the executive
and LESC are recommending a 3%
salary increase for education
personnel.
LFC is recommending a 4%. So
that's the difference between
that 100 and 1 million in the
135 million.
On line 18
Elias's recommending, well,
actually both LFC and LESC are
recommending increasing teacher
minimums.
So to 55, 65, and $75,000 a
year.
levels 12, and 3 respectively.
The reason that there's a
difference in those amounts.
is because LFC is recommending a
4% increase.
LESC is recommending a 3%.
So there's a little bit
difference in the amount of
money it would take to to
increase those minimums based on
those salary um percentage
increases.
Lines 19 and 19 is about
insurance.
You've all continue to hear I'm
sure about the increase in
insurance premiums.
This amount would pay for a 10%
increase in premiums for both
medical and risk insurance.
And you'll see that those
numbers across the
recommendations are very
similar.
As are uh
the recommendations for fixed
costs.
So for that portion we're we're
pretty close and all that sunny
if he has anything to add there.
John, I would just concur that
the recommendations and these
are very similar between the LFC
and LESC and.
Uh, for compensation with the
executive, um, the only
difference in the LFC
recommendation is that the risk
premium increases 8.5%.
So the last thing on this
particular section, Mr. Chair,
members, is we'll go straight
down to
Uh, line 27.
Which is your subtotal.
For for the SCG and you'll see
the differences across the
different recommendations there.
That subtotal reflects all the
changes that we just talked
about. So for the executive, you
have an increase from last year
of 4.8%.
For LFC 6%.
And for LESC 8%.
We'll go down now to lines 32 to
36.
And essentially what you're
seeing there's a very similar
requests across the board for
transportation. And again, as I
said on Monday, this is that
categorical middle of the line
portion.
These funds can only be used for
to and from transportation. So
districts get their allocation
distributed through a formula
that the department administers.
Um, and that money can be used
only.
To transport kids to and from
school. So when we think about
transportation and all the other
things that kids go on field
trips and
Extracurricular activities,
these funds cannot be used for
those purposes. This is only for
to and from school.
The only difference I'll point
out here, two differences. One
is on line 36. You'll see that
compensation difference
reflected there again, that's
the.
The difference between the 3 and
4%.
because transportation salaries
are captured in the
transportation distribution.
And then on line 38.
Uh, you'll see a $5.2 million.
Recommendation from LESC.
During the summer of 2023.
Our staff conducted a
transportation study.
worked with superintendents and
transportation directors across
the state had, I want to say
about 6 regional meetings across
the state to talk to folks
about.
How the transportation
distribution is working for
them.
And you all have probably heard
from your constituents depending
on the year, uh, how that's
going.
This 5.2%.
Reflects
Um, a inflation adjusted number?
From the high water mark of
funding in the mid 2010s, there
was a time when we, when we
reached a high point in
transportation funding for
economic reasons, we had to
decrease that number and we've
been slowly building back up.
That 5.2, if you were to add
that to the transportation
number would be an inflation
adjusted.
Um
number based on that high water
mark. It's something that we
recommended last year and didn't
make it in, but we decided to go
ahead and do that again because
we continue to hear concerns
about transportation funding.
Sonny, you want to add anything
in transportation.
Thank you, John, Mr. Chair. I
think the only difference is
that um.
The LFC recommendation does
include a base adjustment on
line 32.
So that's why you don't see a $5
million difference, but rather
$2 million difference between
the transportation
recommendations, uh, this
accounts for the new charter
schools that have started their
own transportation programs, and
that's an adjustment within the
LFC based recommendation there.
Thank you.
OK, Mister Chair, we're going to
go now to lines uh 43 to 47.
These are our other categorical
appropriations.
I'll start with line 43.
Which is the Indian, I'm sorry,
with the universal school meals.
Again, this is uh to pay for the
program that you all created in
Senate Bill 4 that essentially
pays for
All students in New Mexico to
have free breakfast and lunch.
Prior to this fis or up to this
fiscal current fiscal year,
you've funded that through a
below the line, non-recurring,
uh.
Appropriation during the
interim.
staff recommended that we
actually put that money in
categorical because it is tied
to statutory requirements that
we pay for these meals.
Schools
Actually receive this funding on
a reimbursement basis through
the department in a formula
based on federal reimbursement
rates, and so we felt having it
in a recurring and a categorical
appropriation was the
appropriate place uh LESC
decided to do that there. You'll
see that the executive has 50.7
million, which is $5 million
less in this particular line,
but they have another $5 million
for cost overruns in another
line that you'll see later on.
So the exec and the LES.
See our our
have identical
Recommendations there.
Line 44, the Indian Education
Fund. You'll see $20 million
across the board.
The secretary will probably
speak to uh a difference there
and we might talk a little bit
more about a difference in uh
Indian education funding later.
Otherwise, you'll see pretty,
pretty strong agreement for
standard-based assessments
because the state pays for those
annual tests that students take.
emergency supplemental and a
small amount for out of state
tuition where we pay for.
Students who live near borders
to other states where it's
actually more convenient for
them to go to maybe Arizona or
Texas and to attend their own
district school.
Pretty minimal in the larger
scope of things, but we continue
to fund that because we do have
some students.
I don't wanna add anything
there.
Thank you, John, Mr. Chair, I
would just add that the LFC
recommendation once again for
universal school meals is
actually on the next page.
Under line 68.
You'll see that the
appropriation for this year for
recurring is 41 million um in
the FY 25 output column.
That represents about a 3%
increase in the LFC
recommendation for recurring on
universal school meals.
And then if you go back to the
first page on line 43, that's in
comparison to over 20% increase
in the executive in LAC
recommendations.
Thank you, Sonny. Mr. Chair,
I'll point out there part of the
issue I think with school meals
currently.
is because it's so new.
Um, and the department is still
gauging.
What the uptake and eventual
participation in that program
is, and it can vary from year to
year. So I think there's still
some um
Some work to be done there to
understand exactly what that
might cost.
On a year over year long term
basis.
Lines 50.
5
Again, we won't talk too much
about most of these you'll see
unless you have specific
questions about specific
appropriations later, we'll just
focus on some of the differences
because you'll see that there's
pretty strong agreement uh with
some minor differences, a pretty
strong agreement on most of
these line items. I'll just
point out a couple from the LESC
perspective on page one as line
56, which is $6 million that
LESC staff recommended.
For steam initiatives.
As well as 2.3 million for New
Mexico grown that LESC and the
executive are asking for that is
not included.
And the LFC wreck.
And then, uh, I think it's
important we point out a line
6364 and 65.
On the second page.
These are appropriations for the
bilingual multicultural Hispanic
education and Black Education
Acts, as well as for school
safety and and learning
management system and
microcredentials. You'll see
there that the executive
recommendation includes
appropriations for each of those
lines.
Um, I just want to, and you can
write this in your sheet if it's
helpful on line 63 under the
LESC recommendation.
If you'll look to line 100.
You'll see a similar
appropriation of 1.5 million for
those three acts.
But in a non-recurring
appropriation versus a
recurring.
Uh, that the exec is
recommending in line 63, but the
numbers, the amounts are equal
there.
For line 64 for school safety.
If you'll turn to page, I'm
sorry, to line 143.
That's gonna be on your 3rd
page.
Both LFC and LESC are
recommending $50 million from
the public school capital outlay
fund for school safety.
So it doesn't match the 5
million on page 2 that the exec
is recommending, but there is a
$50 million appropriation for
school safety initiatives,
infrastructure and initiatives
on online 143.
And then finally
Um, line 65, the $3.7 million
for the learning management
system and microcredentials.
That's included online 139.
For both LFC.
Ellie SC
To be paid for out of the the
balance of the
Public education reform Fund.
Um, that turn over to Sonny if
he has anything to add.
Thank you, John, Mr. Chair, I
think the only thing I would add
is the LLC has.
On page 3, which I believe we'll
be talking about on Friday.
A um
$38.4 million recommendation on
line 169 for math achievement.
Um, does not include a steam
appropriation in the.
In the recurring section.
Sorry, I was just making sure
you're awake, um.
Does not include a recurring
appropriation of 6 million for
seamen initiatives to the
department.
Mr. Chair, I have to say I think
this is probably the earliest
we've ever presented the
education budget in the morning
and
I don't know about everybody
else, but I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm
trying to pick up some speed
here, some steam.
OK.
It's, it's early.
To be, especially to be looking
at such small numbers.
OK, so with that, Mr. Chair, uh,
that concludes essentially the
recurring appropriations in the
recurring recommendations, and
again, if you'll look at
The total number line 80.
You'll see those, those totals
running across the board 4.6 for
the executive 4.66 for the
executive 4.69.
For LFC and then 4.8 for the
LESC and the associated
percentage increases at.
bottom there.
Would you like us to continue on
to non-recurring or do you want
to stand for some questions for
recurring at that point.
Um, if we could hear from the
secretary on the recurring um in
the PED budget.
Please, Madam Secretary,
welcome. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you so much for having the
3 of us here. I think it's, it's
great to have us here because.
As you've heard both Sonny and
John speak about the 3 budgets
there is quite a bit of
alignment.
And this is not by accident,
this really um deeply together
since um really early September,
the first time I have been in
front of this committee to talk
about this budget is actually
September.
So, um, the executive budget
comes out first, as you all
know. Next is LESC and then the
LFC budget comes out at the
beginning of January, so I think
what you see in the different
budgets is kind of a iteration
of our shared thinking.
But
I think you will be able to to
clearly um recognize that there
is a lot of alignment in terms
of the priorities within this
budget.
Um, the first thing that is on
this sheet.
in front of you, which really
calls out kind of the
implications of the of the
funding shortfalls that are
particularly in the LFC budget.
Um, the first one, I think John
and Sonny did a really good job
in talking about that $35.2
million.
Um, reduction due to enrollment
declines, um, I don't disagree
that we need to look at how do
we?
factor in enrollment declines in
our SCG funding, but I think
it's something that we need to
really look at, and I think it
would we would benefit from LFC,
LESC and and PED to really study
this together. Um, I am
concerned about backing out
funding that would essentially
have a big impact on what you
all are trying to accomplish
with the SCG increases related
to at risk in the secondary
factor, so that does, um.
Concerned me, uh, what those
implications could be in terms
of the overall funding.
For our schools.
Um, the next is related to
universal, uh, school meals, so
there is a $13.5 million
shortfall from the LFC budget
recommendation, and I'll just
say we continue to see um an
increase in participation in
both breakfast and lunch in our
schools, um.
Uh, last school year we saw um.
An increased, you know, served
in our schools, um, and the
executive budget includes a
projection of a 5% increase,
this is really in line with what
we're seeing this school year as
well, um, based on the
reimbursement request that we
received from the schools every
month.
Um, this shortfall would also
impact New Mexico grown meals.
This program is really critical
to improving the quality of our
school meals, um, this, um, this
legislation not only was about
making sure that every student
has access to free meals, it is
also really about improving the
quality to make sure that our
students get the most
nutritional value, but that they
also want to eat the meals, we
hear a lot from students.
around the state.
Regularly, pretty much every
time I meet with student groups,
one of the main topics, I know
that this is something that
Representative Chatfield is very
interested in, this is something
that the department really
believes in partnering with our
local um food producers to make
sure that we're bringing in
local food products into our
schools to really improve the
quality.
Um, the next thing I'll point
out is the family income index,
um, both the LESC and LFC did
not include an appropriation for
um the family income index
program.
The approach that they are both
taking to move that.
Methodology for calculating at
risk using the family income
index.
It's something that I support,
however.
That funding really does not get
down in a very.
Specific and strategic way.
To the school level that we can
see and so the family income
index really is focusing on
those schools that have the
highest rates of poverty. It
allows at a school level for
teachers.
the families and for school
leaders to determine what
specifically does that school
need to support students and
families and so we would very
much like to see uh that program
continue.
Um, we also have the special
education, um, shortfall within
the LFC budget of $4 million.
This money is critical because
it really supports.
Um, the work that the office of
Special Education is currently
doing.
They are deeply engaged in
professional development across
all levels, teacher.
Um, as well as families and
there are there are um
professional development
trainings that are done around
the state, we have a special ed
fellows academy that has
actually just been hosted, we
hosted a great parent university
with over 500 attendees as well.
Um, this funding also supports
key programming like the stay in
school initiative, which is uh
supporting our students with
disabilities, we had a pilot
program that.
Was highly successful.
Um, with
Huge increases in graduation
rates, we'd really like to start
uh continuing these programs,
and so this funding is really
essential to allowing us to do
this, and it also really
supports our legislation which
will codify the Office of
Special Education. Let's see.
else I want out here?
Um, the
Education Acts that were also
mentioned that LFC did not have
this in their budget, um, these
education acts, Hispanic
bilingual multicultural and
black education acts are asked
that this legislature.
Um, past.
And so making sure that we
continue to fund these acts,
including we have two FTE in the
Hispanic Education Act that
supports that work, supports the
advisory council.
But also administers the uh
funding that goes out to
schools, that supports important
language and culture programming
that we hear from students and
educators and families all the
time, this is really about
engaging families, honoring
language and culture, so.
Um
We
Request. So I can stop there and
then shift back to.
Oh,
thank you, thanks.
OK, so now we're gonna go
through a long list of things.
Um, before I do, actually, I
wanted to, I want to clarify one
thing that the secretary
mentioned about family income
index, and it's not to clarify
what she said, but just to draw
the distinction because you're
gonna hear
Family income index a lot this
session potentially.
There's a distinction between
the family income index
mechanism.
Which is a way that we've been
using to identify poverty.
At a school level
And that we are now proposing to
use to identify poverty at a
district level in the SCG
revisions that we've talked
about.
But the secretary was referring
to as the family income index
program.
That program has used that
mechanism.
To distribute
a non-recurring appropriation.
Two districts, but for the
specific use at specific
schools.
Right, so the secretary is right
that both LFC and LESC have not
included.
An appropriation or
recommendation for the program,
that $9 million that she talked
about is not included in the
other two recommendations.
There's about
37 $38 million as part of the
SCG revision.
Additional
In in at-risk funding as part of
that SCG revision. So while
there's not $9 million in in
this one pot for the program
cost.
There is money, additional
funding for at risk using that
family income index mechanism.
To the secretary's point, it is
not a school-specific
appropriation, the way that we
were using to uh to run the
program.
But as a state we we will be
able to if the proposal were to
pass, identify which specific
students at which specific
schools are actually generating.
Those funds for districts in a
way that we cannot do right now.
And while SCG is discretionary.
It can school districts and
charters can spend that money
however they'd like.
We are able as a state to track
which students are generating
and whether or not districts are
spending money.
At those particular schools in a
way that we've not been able to
do before.
Just wanted to clarify the
distinction between the
mechanism that you'll hear about
and the program.
OK.
Let's keep going.
Line 83. I'm actually going to
skip over a little bit uh other
than to say
This is an appropriation from
the general fund.
To the public education reform
Fund.
That public education reform
Fund is a fund that was created
a few years ago to capture
reversions from the K5 plus and
ELTR.
ELTP program, ELTP.
is redundant, um.
But we'll talk more in depth
about that on Friday. So for
now, all you need to know is
that
LFC and LESC are recommending a
general fund appropriation to
the public education reform Fund
to pay for some.
Long term, um pilots.
We're gonna go ahead and go
through these lines pretty
quickly. Again, you'll see a lot
of agreement.
I mentioned in the SCG the
appropriation for K-12 plus
units.
And in line 84, this is a
supplemental appropriation to
pay for units that were already
generated, but that we didn't
pay for last, last session. So
this will cover the cost to keep
the unit value flat for the
current fiscal year.
Line 85, you'll see $30 million
across the board.
For the summer literacy
institute, these are, this is a
program that the secretary may
speak a little bit more about in
a little while, but there's
agreement to continue that
program.
86 is going to get a little
confusing.
Because you'll see that there
are different numbers across
those three recommendations
1540, and 30.
There are actually about $45
million for for CTE work-based
learning and other initiatives.
In various places across the.
this sheep
And so even though that
particular line item, there's
actually a lot of agreement.
There's just some
Differing viewpoints about how
to pay for it and where to place
them. So we'll talk a little bit
more about that if you have
questions.
Um, line 87, and I think the
secretary will talk a little bit
about educator fellows. I'll let
her do that, but there's mostly
agreement.
about uh educated fellows.
As well as out of school time
and high dosage tutoring.
Line 89
you'll see $15 million in the
LFC and LESC rec.
For K-12 plus programs again,
and that's
If we see additional uptake in
K-12 plus, that $50 million is
there for the department to use
to pay for any additional units
that are created.
If additional schools sign up
for more days.
Um
Sorry, line 90, um.
$12 million for a statewide
student information system in
both the LFC and LESC rack.
I'll let the secretary talk to
to speak to that if you'd like.
School transformation.
Um, you'll see on line 91,
there's actually some
Additional lines, LFC has a
line.
As an appropriation in line 170.
3, I believe that we'll talk a
little bit more about on Friday
as and so does the executive.
Let's see here, what else should
we talk about?
The last thing I'll mention, uh,
again, you'll see a lot of
similarities is line 97.
Uh, where the LESC staff is
recommending $3 million for
behavioral health.
And uh that's something that the
other, the other recommendations
do not include currently.
Sonny.
You, John, Mister Chair.
I think John did a very good job
of covering the major
differences, and I actually do
wanna quote him from yesterday
that.
You know, just a few years ago,
we had only about
2 or 5 special.
Non-recurring appropriations and
the LLC.
Has been increasing funding for
non-recurring given the recent
surplus in oil and gas revenue.
I think it becomes a real
question of what is
non-recurring actually mean if
these are appropriations that
you see every single year, and
at some point, um.
There may not be enough capacity
for non-recurring to be at such
a large rate as recurring needs
begin to take more priority. So
typically the direction of the
staff is to not recommend
non-recurring appropriations if
they are.
Going to create a recurring need
in the future.
I think I'll try to wrap this up
very quickly, Mr. Chair. The,
the only, I think the last thing
I'll draw your attention to, if
you will, is turn to line 113.
You'll see in the executive
recommendation $90 million.
ended for the Indian education
fund.
And I'll let this the secretary
speak to that a little bit.
Um, I'll point out on line 94.
The um
LESC has a recommendation there
for Indian education initiatives
of $5 million which is in
addition to that 20 million that
we talked about in the Indian
Education Fund.
LFC on line 174.
As a $15.5 million.
recommendation for indigenous
education initiatives.
Again, we'll talk more about
Perf on Friday, but I, I believe
that's a, that's a 3-year
appropriation. So essentially a
$5 million per year.
the next 3 fiscal years.
Last name, Mister Chair, I'll
take us to line 132.
These are a subtotal of those
non-recurring.
Recommendations, um, again,
you'll see the exact 262.
Uh, LFC at 343 and LESC at 366
for non-recurring.
The rest of this sheet is
something that we're gonna focus
on on Friday, which is the
public education reform Fund.
Um, I already mentioned that $50
million for safety on line 143.
So I think for today, Mr. Chair,
that's a pretty good rundown.
I'll turn it over to the
secretary to speak through some
more of those differences and I
think then we'll be ready for
some questions. Chair, thank
you, John, and thank you, Sunny.
Um, I'm gonna start with the
difference for the um educator
fellows program, so, uh, the LFC
has a $5 million.
Um, shortfall from both the
executive and so I just really
wanna highlight.
importance of this program, this
is really a locally grown
educator program that the
department started with federal
funding, which ends this year.
Um, we will already see, um, a
reduction in the number of
educators in this program as a
result of the loss of that
federal funding.
Um, so this funding has um a
pre-service educator, often in
educational assistant or another
um, person, um, their education
degree.
It allows them to work alongside
a licensed teacher in a
classroom, and also allows us to
have more.
Educators in a classroom with
students, so there's an added
benefit there, um, as you all
know, we still have over 70.
This program is really critical
to make sure that we help fill
those those um vacancies because
this program is really a locally
grown program, we are seeing
these educators really in their
schools and so we, we really
feel that investment, especially
in light of the loss of the
federal funding and so having
that double hit in one year
would really be a significant
reduction in the number of
educators we have in our in our
pipeline.
But
um
Next, I'll talk about the Indian
education funding, so John
referenced.
$90 million over 3 years, um.
We are, um.
Wanting to make sure that we
continue all of the important um
Indian education efforts in our
schools.
Um, but we also want to increase
funding that's going directly to
our tribes, nations in Pueblos.
This is something that we have
been working with.
Um, tribal leaders for several
years now to make sure that we
are increasing the amount of
funding that they receive that
they can direct to support their
student, this is in addition to
all of the important programming
that are happening in schools,
but to provide additional
funding that they, that honors
their tribal sovereignty that
allows them to provide very
specific.
Um, educational and it has to be
educational supports and I'll
just remind you all not that I
need to, but Native American
students are still some of our
lower performing student groups
academically.
And we feel like this is
something that is important to
um honor that relationship and
uh provide them the opportunity
to direct that funding to
support students.
Um, I also will talk about the
$5 million that is in the
executive budget for school
safety.
As John mentioned, there is a
$50 million.
Of capital appropriation that
includes safety.
CTE and other sort of school
maintenance costs.
We
Hear from um our school leaders
regularly about their they are
significant.
It is a daily.
Issue that they have to work on.
Um, and so.
As great as it is to have that
capital funding go through
PSDOC.
We can't really address the
other concerns that we really
hear from them, including the,
the um interoperability
particularly in all parts of the
state.
response times for is extremely
long.
Or more sometimes, and we have
to really address those sorts of
um needs as like a state sort of
approach.
As well as some of the other
concerns that they have, um, for
school safety that is not
capital specific, so, um, I'm
not adverse to capital.
investment, but it really isn't
just capital to support a school
safety based on
Um, the regular sort of feedback
that
hear from
Of the agency budget of
Um, it's on the bottom of
Your
Your handouts there and so.
Um
Education department, um.
Staff wise is.
Relatively small.
Comparison to the budget that we
oversee.
Um, the
He does have
A $2 million shortfall.
us, um
is really on allowing us to
Um
um
uh
about
75
of our agency budgets are
currently funded.
able to make up that gap using
federal funding, which again is
going to funding as well as
vacancy savings. We very much
need.
The staff at the agency to do
the important work to oversee
such a large budget and all of
the programs and do the, the
support, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll say
very quickly as the secretary
was was.
She reminded me I should have
said something at the very
beginning, that's what I get for
now.
ahead of time.
I think there's some strong
recognition in in all the
recommendations here.
About the student groups.
out in Martinez.
specifically the, the
The SCG revisions.
some that are shared and some
that aren't here, but.
student groups for those of you
not super familiar with that
yet.
Uh
out by the lawsuit were
economically.
disadvantaged students.
learners
Americans and students with
disabilities.
see across.
Recommendations.
Strong efforts to continue to
support those student groups.
in the revision to this.
guarantee includes additional
money.
at-risk students and
Under this proposal would be
essentially defined as, as um
economically disadvantaged
students using the family income
index.
Creating a stand-alone English
learner factor provides more
transparency and hopefully more
intentionality on the school
district's part.
To serve those students.
And of course, we also heard
about the need for strong.
college and career counseling as
well as that secondary.
Talk more about this probably
next week in in association with
Hospital 63.
we start to see declines in
Achievement and outcomes is that
middle school area.
also start to see increases in
absenteeism and other sorts of
behavior that we know.
detrimental to student outcomes
and so that secondary piece
there, but I just.
wanted to call out that across
the recommendations.
including things like education.
fund increases, um.
have some very good options to
continue to respond and support
students called out.
That
The secretary has one more thing
to say and then I'll stop
talking.
Mister Chair, if it's
Time allows, I did not talk
about our C2, OK.
so much, Mr. Chair. Um,
I was thrilled about having um
Elias, this is really critical.
To making sure that our data
quality is there that we're, we
have one system statewide allows
us to make sure that we have an
eye on students as they move
through the educational system
as they move around from school
to school or district to
district.
Um, this would include our um
special education IEP.
with IP, which is really
important.
Um, so
Really, really happy about that.
There are a couple of other
Um
Data projects that are not
included.
Uh, let's see.
and LESC budget.
Um
Actually just
Apologize. Um, they're not very
large, but um they involve
funding dashboards that allow
the schools to better access.
Data on a daily basis, so that
they're using student data to
inform instruction and um
This, uh, this funny but also
find an IT platform that would
allow
The contracted assessment
contract with vendors that that
help support their their student
testing to allow them to
directly upload those cells.
This is really important because
it reduces administrative and
the quality of data is much
better. It removes a lot of the
manual sort of.
Ery data entry that's have a
really positive impact um on our
student data.
Um
is just really fun um our open
books dashboard. This is our
dashboard if you haven't looked.
At it.
Let me know. I'd love to show it
to you. This has the financial
data.
Um, um, our LEAs as well as um a
dashboard regarding our
attendance report.
So these are without, without
the.
Can't really uh prevent.
stop there, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you all so much for
your presentations before we get
to questions, I just want to
recognize that we have a
returning champion in the
audience, Representative.
Just part of the uh
House appropriations and Finance
Committee, and then we also have
our house appropriations and
finance committee chairman, uh
representing Nathan Small so
thank you both for joining us.
Um, so we'll go to committee
questions. The great thing about
this is that we're going to have
the presenters back on Friday as
well. So if you all do a little
bit of
Research or don't get your
question in quite today. We'll
have a second.
Um
You'll have a second opportunity
on Friday as well to ask those
questions, but please concise
questions and answers from our
panelists so our first go to
Riverside.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. the first thing I'd like to
talk about is alignment. It's
great to see.
How close these things are
coming in, it's, it's good to
have a choice.
But it's also good to have
confidence in those choices are
reasonable.
Whenever you see alignment
between, between the three
budgets.
I feel like
Whichever choice we take is
gonna be close, you know, it's
gonna be a reasonable.
reasonable choice.
I thing that
the
some of us are
We, we get to see this but
several times.
LFC.
appropriations.
We see it here.
And, and that's good for me
especially because I need to see
it 3 times. I understand it.
But the
The other, the uh, the other
aspect of that is that if
there's something that affects
us.
it up and
Let's see we bring it up in
appropriate and
we'll bring it up in education.
I mean, so, uh
share of hoping the study
doesn't throw that coffee cup at
me, but.
Recently,
Uh, the transportation formula.
was changed a little bit, and I
think the change involved maybe
density factor.
And some of our small schools.
Yes
up with a shortage, a shortfall
they weren't able to.
the amount of money they needed
to run their buses.
And uh
I noticed the the line 38,
there's, there's uh money there
for.
For
Shortfall. I don't know if that,
I don't know if it.
for that shortfall or not, but I
I've been told there is some
money to take care of that
problem.
Like
Bring it up and let let
everybody know.
But we do have different.
in the
That um
Create a problem with some of
our small r.
Thank you all for this time.
Have any comments on about the
man.
Thank you Mr. Chair
Representative.
Uh, you're right, the all of the
recommendations to increase
transportation funding to try
and ameliorate some of the
Volatility that happened.
density factor was removed.
I think that there's
still some time to see how it
all shakes out, given that.
You know we are seeing fewer
students, but as you all know,
you still have to run.
buses down those routes, even if
you're picking up fewer
students.
that is included that you may
not see in these recommendations
is uh our authority for the
department to use emergency
transportation funding to help
those individuals districts that
might be seeing significant.
false, so I hope that
your question.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah
You me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you panel. Um, I, as many times
as I've seen these numbers,
every single time I look at it,
I see something different, so I,
I, I like the fact that we get
to do it often, um, a couple of
things um.
Um, just to clarification on the
um
3 + units, um, on, um,
Or is it
The line 11, is that OK so I
know that that is anything over
180 days.
Is that also include uh the
extra money for over 190.
Yes.
R K 12 units, thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, now, um, I'm kind of
gonna go along the um lines of
uh Representative Chatfield
Transportation. Do we know with
it with what we're recommending
and what we're putting in. Do we
have any idea if this is, I know
it hasn't been adequate in the
past. Is this closer to
adequate? Is it adequate? Are we
meeting?
It's cause I
I know many.
Um
Districts are having to dip into
their operational funds in order
to to uh take care of that
shortfall. Are we getting closer
to that?
Um
That's a really great question.
2 years ago, LESD, as I said
earlier, did a transportation
study and found essentially that
that districts were spending
about 110%.
Uh, of the appropriation. So in
other words, they were having to
dip into their operational to
cover the costs for
transportation.
LES FC recently did another
transportation evaluation and
found something very similar
other than to say,
Uh, the appropriation covers
about 90% of the costs for
school districts. I think
Where, where we've both
struggled a little bit is
Still getting to the to the um
Getting to know whether or not.
Districts who who make it work.
Have enough money or they just
make decisions to make it work.
And so questions about
efficiencies versus.
Cutting costs in a way that
Allow you to to use only your
your your transportation
appropriation but may not be the
best thing for students when you
have students on buses for an
hour each way or something like
that. So I think
It's something that we continue
to grapple with and I know, you
know, some of our analysts who
have been working on this
literally for
years are sick and tired of
talking about it, but it's
because we know that we're still
struggling to understand.
What, what sufficiency in
transportation actually means
because districts are making
local decisions based on do they
have a contractor that they pay.
In that case, sometimes
districts will just take their
entire
Appropriation
And give it to a contractor, and
they say we have enough.
But we don't exactly know, you
know, whether or not those what
the true costs of that system
are. So I think there's a lot of
nuance in that conversation.
I think every year we attempt.
To get closer to that number and
sometimes when we, we fix
something from one district.
We, we, um,
becomes detrimental for others
and so.
Still, still complex.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
I think what you're hearing from
this is that there's just
something foundationally.
Um
about the transportation
formula.
It uses prior your spending
patterns to drive future
appropriations.
And so,
When you change the formula and
you change how districts adjust
to their spending patterns. It
creates a whole different
allocation each year for each
district, which is very
volatile.
Um
One of the plaintiffs groups in
the Martinez Yazi lawsuit did
highlight to the court that they
were dipping into, as John said,
their operational dollars to
cover their shortfalls while
we're also seeing some school
districts revert unspent
transportation funding into the
emergency fund, and so there's
some mismatch between how the
formula allocates.
schools and how much they're
actually spending and as you're
also well aware, our districts
are all very different in their
geography.
And how much space they have to
cover so.
Um, I can't say that there's a
perfect formula, but as we
adjust the appropriation levels
and look at changes to that
density factor.
I think we'll get closer over
time.
Presentative just to add to what
they said, building off of what
they said because I um.
This is one of the topics that I
hear regularly.
From school leaders and um you
know, there are aspects of the
formula that I think people
disagree with from district to
district depending on the size
of that district and with the
rurality factor that
The legislation we hear a lot
from districts who feel like
they really lost in that design.
Um, I will just.
Advocate for really looking at
the individual system some
school.
systems, bus systems,
transportation systems have not.
Changed in decades, even though
their student populations have
changed and so I think in
addition to looking at the
formula for funding
transportation, I think there's
a lot of value in looking at the
individual transportation
systems to see if there are
efficiencies that can be.
realized if there are tweaks to
the system that would affect
their overall cost.
Um, thank you, um, for your
answers, Mr. Chair, and, and
panel, um, I, I think this is
like what all you have have
talked about is why this
adequacy funding for rural
funding is is really important,
because I know particularly like
uh my district spans 22
counties. And, um, and we have a
school that is over 30 miles
away from where our bus compound
is. That's the school. Then we
pick up students another 10 to
15 miles on, on the other side
of that.
And, uh, and if they're the
first person on the bus.
We don't get reimbursed for any
of those miles until we pick up
a child.
And so, but we still have to pay
for them to, to get there. And,
and so it's, so it is difficult
when you have these, these, um,
a big, uh, districts that that
and I know a lot of our rural
districts, they're they're,
they're, they're in there for,
they're on that bus for an hour
and a half, um, and so, uh, so
those are, those are a lot of
miles and, and it's very
difficult because again, if we
have a drop in enrollment, that
doesn't mean that we still have
that one student that's still
out there, that bus still has to
go up there for that one
student.
So, um, so we still have those
costs. Um, so it is important,
so thank you for the LFC for
having that adequacy funding
because I think that's, that's
huge. Um.
The um
Quick question on the the
salaries. I know we have a um um
committee sponsored bill.
Um, for to increase um all uh
school employees' salaries to
30,000, does that include?
People in transportation, or is
it are they two separate things,
um, how does, how does that
work?
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Mirabel, I want to clarify that
the
So you have 2 bills coming out
of LESC that were endorsed one
to increase the minimums for
educators to the 55, 65, 75,
that's captured in the budget.
There was a bill endorsed by the
committee to increase all school
personnel to a minimum of
30,000.
That amount is not, is not
included in the budget
currently.
But yes, that would include all
employees. So if you, if by
chance you had somebody.
In a transportation position,
they would also be affected.
And then, um,
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, um,
learning the
Learning management system, I
know up here in the in in the
top part, I forget which one was
it that, um, I think we had it
somewhere else, um, I think the
executive possibly had, it was
learning management and
microcredentials, um, but, uh, I
know we've replaced the learning
management system in other
places. Do we have allocations
to continue um microc credential
because I know the executive
branch did, but the rest of us
didn't.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
uh, Mirabal Moya, um, we would
need that canvas, which is um
the system used for micro
credentialing.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. So it
kind of, it goes with it. So if
you're doing the, if you're
funding the learning management
system, it's a kind of applied
in there. OK, thank you.
Um
Let me see, I think, um, one
last thing, oh, just a quick
little plug, I was um um Madam
Secretary was, uh,
Uh, talking about Ed Fellows,
that is a very important
program. Um, I am gonna do my
little plug, uh, I've seen it
work again, I, I mentioned it
last time, um, we now have
hired, we, we've had a science
position that has been turning
over for because we hire people
that are not from Berlin and
don't love it like we do. Um, so
it's easy for them to, to, to
leave.
for various reasons and we have
just hired our uh Ed fellow that
was uh going through the program
in the science, uh, department
and, um, and she is from Berlin.
She has the same, the same
passion for, for what we're
doing and, and I, and I can
imagine that that is happening
all over the state, especially
in those areas where it's hard
to attract people from out of
that area to, to uh to come and
teach and, and so I'm really
hoping that we can um make sure
this keeps going because it
really does.
do that homegrown and, and you
have teachers there that are
invested in that community, that
love that community, like for
me, I'll never leave Berlin. So,
um,
So, uh, so, so that's, it's
important that we keep that
going. Um, the very last thing
since, um, Representative, uh,
Herrera doesn't have a mic, I'm
gonna reiterate a lot of her
thoughts, um, uh, so, uh, and
I'll, I'll be.
I'll be your mic for you. I see
a lot while I do think it's
important that we take care of
our Martinez Yazi, uh,
shortfalls and I see a lot of
funding for the Yazi part.
I see throwing a bone for the
Martinez part, um, and, and I,
and I can't wait till we get to
the point where those fundings
are similar, especially when
there's more Martinuses in the
state than there are Yazis. So,
um, so that's, that is my plug
in something that maybe if we
say it enough, then there will
be uh there will be more people
thinking about that. Thank you.
You Representative Baca. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you for
your presentation. I will be
brief and direct and so, um,
short answers are.
Sufficient for me.
Um, first, Mr. Chairman and
committee, like, like Rep
Chapfield and.
Like some of my colleagues, uh,
Representative Garrett and those
of us that have the good fortune
of sitting on LFC.
And um
Alright, I'm sorry, education
and uh host appropriations.
We've seen this budget several
times, um.
Whether or not that's uh good,
uh, and, and.
It depends who you ask, but, um,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and um maybe one of
the things that I want to, and
I'm this is more.
A wish or to do next year is
that I do appreciate the
alignment and again, both the
sitting on appropriations and
Chairman Small, my chairman's
there. We have been very
supportive of education and
funding of education.
To add, and I think to add the
next layer for the next steps
are actually to include more
work during the interim process.
Where we have not just
collaboration with the staff,
but also we have opportunities
for those who sit on this
committees or the various
committees and also get input
from our superintendents from
our school boards.
For our parents and students as
to what that means, so that we,
when we come in here, there's
even greater alignment and
greater collaboration on this
process. I think that would both
help us. I think that for, you
know, it would provide light. We
sit here in Santa Fe.
And we think that we can solve
all things. We need to hear it
from those who are actually on
the uh receiving end of that.
Uh, Mr. Sherman, my, my question
is, as far as the educator
fellows, does that also include
teacher residents as far as in
that funding.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
no. Uh, so educator fellows in
the line item that you see here
is specifically for that
program.
Uh, prior to the current fiscal
year you were funding educated
uh teacher residencies on a 11
year at a time, uh,
non-recurring basis. Last year,
you all included $60 million for
residencies, teacher and
principal residencies as part of
your grow appropriation. So you
have a $60 million.20 million
dollars a year for the current
fiscal year and the next two.
Thank you and I, I think that's
also important as we, we look at
second career or folks that are
coming into our system. uh, Mr.
Chairman, we're going to talk
about the New Mexico grow and
uh.
One of the things that I want to
kind of put out there as a
thought is.
When we talk about
After school programs we talked
about.
Addressing hunger because that's
important, right? That's why the
universal, I, I support that.
You know, what about using and
tapping into that resource.
That we send food home with our
kids like we used to be the
backpacks, we used to have those
when we talked about kids that
are staying there for late for
practices whether it be band or
choir.
Students who may not, you know,
we say we feed them.
Two good meals a day, breakfast,
lunch, some of them don't eat at
home until we get to the next
day. So I think that as we look
at some of these funds and these
pilots, we may need to look at
How we can support that.
Two different folks, and again,
I know it's a collaboration of
agencies, but I do think that
that's something that would not
only help to address our nation,
it could also help with our
attendance and otherwise.
Uh, mister, uh, Chairman and
I want to talk about CTE, OK?
Briefly. And I know I asked this
in House Appropriations.
And it's the total dollar amount
because I want to make sure.
That
As we are looking in from year
to year that we are increasing
funds, OK, in those particular
areas of particular interest to
me and many of my colleagues
here.
CTE
School safety
And social emotional learning,
right? Because without those, we
talk about Maslow without
meeting those three basic needs.
Learning is not going to occur
at the level that we're able.
So,
Mr. Chairman, Sonny
Or the CTE.
Fonds
And I know it shows across
different areas.
What is the difference or how
much?
Have we increased funds?
From last year to this year, or
where are we with that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative.
Or non-recurring.
There's 45 in this year's
budget.
Uh, the executive has across all
its non-recurring about 41
million.
The LFC is flat at 45 million.
And the LEC has 46.5 million.
I'll also add that John has
indicated in their secondary
factor increase in SCG, that
part of that is going towards
operational CTE type
expenditures.
Thank you, Mr. and thank you for
that answer. One of the things
that I, one of my concerns is
that we put money in above the
line spending, we sometimes get
lost and it does not hit our
intended places as well, so, uh,
want to talk about that.
Um
Mr. Chairman, one of the other,
uh,
areas that I think that
is a real interest to us is
Activities that promote
engagement and increased
attendance, as we said before.
40% of our students right now
are at risk.
Not just the Yazi Martinez, also
the Smiths and whatever.
So I, I believe, uh, whether it
be through the, uh, Mr. Chairman
through the out of school time
or for our funds, we have to
invest in making kids.
they belonging and making them
come to school.
We have our staff. It's not that
our kids.
Aren't, aren't, uh, you know,
smart. It's not that our staff
has been working hard, but when
we have 40% chronic absenteeism.
We can sit up here, we can put
as much money as we want to it.
We could support schools, but if
we don't have kids in the
classrooms, if we don't feel
that they.
That the students belong, we are
not going to have the outcomes
we want.
Education is what's going to
turn around our state.
Education is going to help to
address not only our future.
You know, for our citizens, but
also to make sure that we have a
workforce that is prepared for
the diversity that's coming to
the next couple of years. So,
I appreciate what you're doing.
I thank you uh for your work.
And I think that
Through the collaboration and
cooperation between this
committee and others, we can
address.
or education.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Great. Thank you, Represent Buck
and I just wanted to say too is
that um this is my 11th session
and in the past two years, um,
there has been a great amount of
progress between um
collaboration between the
legislative Education Study
Committee, LFC and now with PED
and certainly since since
Chairman Small.
How appropriations and finance,
I think we're starting to move
in the right direction in terms
of um policy and budgetary
considerations working together
with one another and we look
forward to certainly, certainly
continuing that representative
Baca quite well taken.
Representative Gurola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that collaboration, um,
it's only my 3rd year and I can
see how it's improving and
growing and having this
opportunity to talk to that
3 budgets is actually, it, it,
it helps us to feel like we are
part of the conversation. So
thank you so much. And I'm gonna
join Mr. Chair, um
Representative Moya saying that
we have the voice of uh Herrera
here. I'm gonna exactly the same
questions that she had and
comments, um.
It's amazing and beautiful that
we have the support for our
indigenous communities, uh, I
wanna see the same support for
our uh Martinez part of the
lawsuit communities to, um, I
have a question really a little
bit related to that. I don't
think it's enough, the budget
that we have, but uh for some
reason.
On line 63, we have for all the
acts bilingual, Hispanic and
blackation Act, uh, we don't
have it on LFC.
And it's not recurring and LES,
so could you expand on that, um,
a little bit. Thank you, Mr.
Cha.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative I start and then
hand it off to my colleagues,
um.
The uh
Indian Education Act is very
specific to preservation of
language and culture for
indigenous communities and a lot
of the Indian education fund
appropriations go toward that
language and culture, um.
process
Of the Hispanic Education Act
calls for the department to have
a liaison.
to do a study.
And to report their findings to
the legislature and the black
Education Act similarly has a
A focus on studying black
education and also a focus on
anti-discrimination as well.
The, I want to thank Simon
Miller, the DFA analyst who is
now leaving us, but I'm moving
on to another role with
Albuquerque. He was able to do
some accounting and find out
that the
Is the bilingual multicultural
education Act employees at PD
are included in their operating
budget.
The
Black Education Act employees
are also included in PED's
budget.
The Hispanic Education Act
employees, however, are being
paid out of a non-recurring
appropriation. So for
consideration of those
operational activities, you may
want to consider um an
adjustment to the operating
budget for the Hispanic
Education Act employees.
Outside of that, back to the
original statement of
non-recurring funding. What is
non-recurring funding supposed
to accomplish. We've
traditionally made
appropriations to the department
for
As say Hispanic Education Act
activities to update the Spanish
language tests that teachers
take for licensure. We've
increased funding on a recurring
basis sometimes to conferences
and other professional
development opportunities. We
have not seen.
Significant changes in student
outcomes as a result of paying
for additional conferences and
research does suggest that it's
really that ongoing coaching and
implementation and practice in
the classrooms. Um, that is
actually going to affect uh
changes in instruction.
There are formula factors in the
SCG for bilingual education,
there's a focus on revitalizing
languages or preserving existing
and maintaining languages of
school districts and charter
schools have that as a resource
as well.
I think the LFC is concerned
about what additional activities
beyond what schools can leverage
from SCG that are necessary as a
separate line item to the
department.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, if I could, if I
could add all the things that
Sonny said, um.
Just
I don't have a copy and I think
it'd be worth for those folks
who haven't done it yet. I know
Martinez Yazi, the, the ruling
um, happened in 2018 with the
with the findings of fact and
conclusion of law coming out in
January of 2019.
That's 600 pages of testimony
and and.
Comments from the court.
And if you haven't read it yet,
Probably have a lot of free time
right now.
To do that
I do want to remind folks that
even though there are certainly
aspects of that case that called
out the need for culturally and
linguistically relevant
instruction and materials.
Um, obviously English learners
are called out in that case and
we're trying to address some of
that with the standalone factor
in the revision to the SCG.
A large portion of that Martinez
case actually focused on special
education.
It was, it was not specifically
targeted.
on Hispanic students per se.
So I think it's important people
remember that that we did call
out.
uh, the outcomes for indigenous
students and the need for that
culturally and linguistically
relevant um instruction and
materials, but that the Martinez
side of things, um.
was was heavily focused on
special education and we
continue to struggle with with
how to to to work on that and I
know that the secretary, you're
gonna hear from them later in
the session about the Office of
Special Education and other
initiatives that folks are are
working on. I do want to call
out that in the formula.
School districts generate about
$800 million.
To serve special education
students.
So that's on top of federal.
IDEEA funds.
And so when we talk about the
Martinez side of things, I do
want to just remind folks that
that that that is um
Special education was part of
that discussion as well and
that.
A large portion of SCG flows to
school districts for for special
education as well.
But to Sonny's earlier point
about um some of the other
things.
Elias in the past has also
recommended uh these kinds of
appropriations to fund um.
Efforts by teachers to become
bilingual endorsed.
An English and endorsed teaching
English as a second.
Second language, I'm gonna get
that wrong. um, and so to your
point, representative about
recurring versus non-recurring.
Those are appropriations that
we've
Recommended so that the
department has some wiggle room
essentially to decide.
How to use those funds to
support teachers and their
department initiatives.
Mr. Chairman
Every small addition to the.
To the great points that both uh
Sunny and and John made.
Do have advisory counsels for
the acts that actually make.
Recommendations to the
department.
And to and we take into account
when it comes to establishing
the budget and informing
programs, and so that work is
really important and that is
part of all of the acts and so
our staff works year round, so I
just that's something that was
not mentioned and they are
informing and weighing in across
the 3 education agencies
specific to those student
groups.
And then I will just reiterate
about the programming when we do
get funding for Hispanic does
fund programming in schools, um,
and these are, um, again,
language and culture programs.
We had a wonderful, um, group of
very young students who are
learning mariachi in their
school, and they came and
performed for us recently at
PED. Those are types of programs
that we can support through
funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
and Mariachi program started in
my school in Albuquerque, so I'm
very proud of that, Mr. Sir. Um.
You mentioned something very
important, uh, language and
culture.
I think uh when we think about
bilingual education just as
biliteracy, I think we are.
Be cha of what we are talking
about, um, um, that our Hispanic
communities also lan and
culture, and I think that's the
part that we need to remember
that when we talk about
bilingual education and Hispanic
education, uh, represented back
and mentioned about when the
students belong, they stay, um,
I have witnessed that with the
students feel that they belong
in the program, they stay. So
that's why I'm a strong advocate
for those programs. So maybe we
need to start.
Looking into this uh funding
through those lenses like our
other communities are doing it
through uh identity and language
and culture, not just, not only,
not just but only uh by literacy
but also um as their part of
their culture and language. So
it's something that may be true
that next in their committee we
can talk about it or some of the
pills this year, um, thank you
for for responding to my
questions. My last question is
just to, to insist on the budget
for.
All employees, um, I have
colleagues in my school that I
used to work at they they had to
have 2 or 3 jobs because they
can for as for their full time,
um, workers at school, um, there
was a tragedy 3 or 5 years ago
in my school, and the first
respondents were the front from
um um this people and their
salary is embarrassing. So um I
think uh those minimum of
30,000.
All employees is something that
Thank you so much Mr. Chair and
thank you for preparing this and
for uh help.
Explaining it again. Every time
that I hear, I learn something
more.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Robert Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, um,
Thank you all for, for your
presentation.
I have several, um,
Comments and questions.
My first one was to
I'm not quite sure it'll be in
the form of a question, but
just.
Um
Being aware so that we can
monitor.
I, I wanted to ask if we had a
particular plan.
Should we?
Um, be affected.
By any reduction in federal
matches or federal subsidies.
Ah, should they dry up, not be
available. Um, I understand from
our appropriations here that we
also are going to be monitoring
all the funding across the
board.
Reference to our association or.
Dependency or whatever on
federal matches or subsidies,
and one of the I guess the
question related to that is that
I would be interested in knowing
so that I can help monitor as
well is
If anyone can provide either
right now or later a percentage.
Of our dependency on these
federal subsidies or matches, so
then we can look at
How that's going to impact.
Whoever wants to secret, Madam
Secretary or Mr. Liu, yes, thank
you.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, if I'm
understanding your question
correctly, you're talking about
the federal fund freeze.
Currently in New Mexico receives
about 580 million.
In federal revenues from IDB,
special education, title
programs, um, our food from USDA
grants.
my review of OMB's list
yesterday it was at all of these
funds were on.
um
breeze, but my understanding is
that there's changing guidance
about whether they will still be
included and we're monitoring
that.
Thank you for that and and I
that's why I that well that's
what prompted the question
because I saw that
particularity. The 500 million,
580 million is what percentage?
Of our overall.
Your current general fund
appropriation amount is about 4.
4 billion
In recurring, so 580% is about
and.
9th, so about 11%.
Thank you for our state, that's
pretty significant, so, um, I
think we really need to pay
attention to how that's gonna.
Would you like to answer
you all to continue to go
through the chair.
I'm sorry.
Representative,
um, I will just say that um
across I speak for myself, we
are monitoring.
sort of freezes to federal
funding.
Um, as we saw yesterday, it was
changing kind of minute by
minute and we tracked that very,
very closely, um, at I federally
employed.
Um, um, employees, we have
federally funded employees
throughout school districts and
charter schools, um, in addition
to just talking about all of
our, our title programs, IDEA,
um, but we are.
that these are priorities we're
not changing our we're
supporting our students, our
educators and families, and so
we are continuing to be
vigilant.
Um, but we are not, uh, we're
staying the various supports.
We remain in conversation as
well monitor, but reassure um
our staff throughout the state
that are funded.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um.
I, I really would encourage a
plan.
Be in place
So that we know how to fall back
on specifically.
Especially prioritizing those
main areas that's.
That's all I would request on
that.
On that end. Thank you very
much. And Mr. Chair, I have um
another.
Um
Question
And it's related to our
discussion about.
Uh, Martinez and Yazi.
In the Martinez Yasi lawsuits.
And um
What would be helpful?
For our discussions on that, so
that we
This is where when we get into
budget and appropriations and it
becomes uncomfortable, because
then we look at things versus
each other rather than
collaboratively together or
collectively, I should say,
together.
In which
When we get into these kinds of
Discussions relative to money,
funding, so on.
Um
To avoid that.
One of the things because it's
uncomfortable. We don't want to
put any
One population versus another
population. The one thing to
note, and that was incredible
with the lawsuit and the um
Entire commentaries throughout
is that we're trying to make up.
For generations of disparate.
Attention, not just funding, but
attention.
to our children's, Mr. Chair
outcomes and achievements.
And so that's what it addressed,
not so much.
The money, it's how are we going
to put the infrastructure in
place.
To address those generations of
disparate treatment.
In those populations and
With the Native American
indigenous populations of which
I include Mister Chair, our
Hispanic population is included
when I refer to indigenous
populations because we are,
that's our history, that's our
background.
Um
It, it, it
It places us in a real.
Protective state.
And so if we could just refer to
it in that manner, I would
indulge all of us to do that.
So, my question is, perhaps
doing it and maybe you have that
already. A comparison.
Of achievements.
Of our Hispanic.
Students and our Native American
students so that we can see.
How they're being, uh how we are
addressing those achievements
and the amount of money that
we've invested in doing so since
2018.
That would be really helpful to
this discussion.
So then we can see what we need
to do in order to be able to
continue to elevate the success
of those children.
And that to me is really
incredibly important because it
gives us a valuable way in which
to address it rather than in a
emotional way of addressing it
and that I think is what we
should be doing. That's one
thing you can I, while you're
looking for that, then, Mr.
Chair, I have um
Another proposal, because you
were very um explicit.
Mr. Liu, I think it was that.
Distinguished
The intent
Related to each fund.
That's really important for us.
Because if we as legislators
have to go in and provide
Expanding language on these
funds so as to address our
concerns.
Because I believe they're
collective concerns, there are
concerns for all of us, then we
need to do that.
So, I know that um because I've
been involved with the.
Uh, multi bilingual,
multicultural throughout the
years with our previous.
Mr. Chair of Education, um.
And
And bringing it forward, I'm
familiar with that language, and
so I direct myself to that, but
the directives, Mr. Chair.
In the funds.
In the apps
Go to you all. So you all have
to do just what we're directing
and within those funds.
I'm sorry. And so it behooves us
as legislators to then look at
amending or expanding our
language, so that would be my
observation in that because
we're doing exactly what we're
supposed to be doing in my view,
with each act.
Uh, appropriately. And then
added to that, we have the
directives.
As per the um Yasse Martinez. So
it's a tough job.
But to help us evaluate.
how we're moving in those
directions, um, doing those
comparisons would be very
helpful.
And then, um,
Believe
Mr. Chair, oh, my final
question, and it's somewhat
relative to uh representative
Gurola.
I noticed, and part of the
uncomfortableness in all of this
is that there are no
recommendations.
From LFC LESC.
Where was I?
Um
On lines 110, 111.
And that's what makes these
discussions also uncomfortable.
Um, so I was
Just wondering.
Why it is that we don't have
recommendations for those two
line items.
Mr. Chair, Representative Roel
Caballero.
To be clear, that's for the
current fiscal year.
Uh, both LESC and LFC sort of
taken those separate
appropriations and lump them
together.
In one line item, so 110 is
black education, 111 is Hispanic
education.
I'll direct you to line 63.
And I'll direct you to line 100.
in the Elis and the LESC wreck
and that 1.5 million for those
acts.
is reflected there. So
not reflected in this particular
lines, but in other places in
the budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
that's, um, that's really
important for us and I I
remember you stating that in
your presentation, so thank you
for the further clarification on
that.
Um, but I think all in all, Mr.
Chair, uh, I think if you can
continue to help us to narrow
our discussions, um.
And that would help us.
He directed into what we need to
do versus what you are already
doing. And I just went up, Mr.
Chair, commend you all on Madam
Secretary, particularly because
you've taken on a very, very,
um,
Difficult task.
And now even more difficult
given the times that we're in,
and not knowing the
expectations, so again, I make a
strong recommendation that we
have a plan.
We're executing plan A.
But we have a plan B, and we
have a plan C, readily available
because the last thing we need
is to fall back, have our
children fall back.
As, as opposed to continuing on
the success.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
just want to say because the,
the
freeze on federal funding was
obviously like front and center
on my mind coming in today and I
talked to Madam Secretary about
it yesterday and John, um, but I
guess.
I mean
Part of that decision is us as
the appropriators is going to
have to come from us and not
looking for external solutions.
So I guess that leads to my
question to to John and to Sonny
is what pots of money do we have
to potentially fill backfill
this $500 million hole that we
could find ourselves in.
Well, February, it could be, who
knows, on a whim today, who
knows what this president's
going to do. Um.
But what pots of money would we
have if during the session, we
have to come in for some sort of
appropriation to backfill Title
I.
IDEA funding.
Universal meals.
What are our options?
Mr. Chair, uh, at the, at the
risk of revealing any ignorance,
um.
I do think and and Sunny is
going to be able to speak to
this much better than I am, but
I do want to say that
For those of you on
appropriations and and LFC
during the interim.
You know that our budget is
built on uh
Certain assumptions about what's
available.
In new money versus what's
available for non-recurring and
how we've spent non-recurring in
the past.
So, um, you know, credit to the
LFC both staff and members for
creating.
A very secure economic footing
for the state.
Right, both in in reserving
money for funds and investments
and being very um
Judicious in the way that we
spend.
the funds that are available.
Uh, on the difference between
recurring and non-recurring.
All that being said, and again,
Sonny will be able to speak to
this a little bit better.
If you look at the at the
assumptions about
Upsides and downsides in our
economy and what's available and
how close we are to hitting that
that downside. We're about to
billion dollars away.
In in recurring funding.
From getting to the point where
we would, where we would be
spending more than we would be
getting in revenue on that
extreme downside.
Assumption. So if you look at
and again, I don't have those in
front of me. Sonny has them in
his volumes, but so I think
there is probably some money in
the case of an emergency,
although like everything else
that we're talking about here.
Being very careful to
Um
commit any of that money to
recurring expenditures in coming
years as we know, revenue start
to flatten out and we have less
room in terms of revenue.
In terms of that one time,
non-recurring and maybe in case
of emergency money, maybe
there's some available. Sonny's
going to be able to speak to
this with more detail.
Thanks, John.
Um, as you are all aware,
John's correct. You've put the
state in a very financially
sound position. If you think
about your reserves currently.
about $3 billion in reserves.
There's also
As far as recurring spending.
You're only about.
I'm probably gonna say this
incorrectly, but you're a little
slightly over $10 billion
despite a recurring revenue
source of about 13. So
ostensibly you could.
Essentially rob Peter to pay
Paul with some of your
non-recurring spending, which
would probably be our first
recommendation. And then second,
after that.
would be dipping into um some of
the more flexible reserves such
as the growth fund, um, and then
in the worst case scenario going
into some of those um.
Deer reserve funds and then
finally cutting budgets. So
you've really insulated the
state from significant shocks.
Uh, we don't see at this stage,
um, I guess it's too early to
tell, but given the
ramifications of delaying
federal funds for all states.
We find it hard to believe that
um
This will be a
substantial um shift in federal
funding um for
the whole country. So I can't
speak to what will happen, but I
think that we see the risk at
this stage to be low.
Yeah.
Thank you for that
representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
I'll, and I'll be brief, um,
first of all, let's make a
couple of comments. One is a, is
a new member to this committee.
Um, I just want to thank you
all, um, been following
committee meetings for quite a
while now, but um, I just want
to thank you for your
collaboration amongst agencies
and also for your clarity and
presentation and information. I
think it is very helpful to, to
see differences and to see
shifts. Um, secondly, just I've
had multiple conversations
offline regarding a concern for
transportation.
as well, and I'm just echoing it
so it is online and on record,
um, you know, I appreciate the
move, um, towards possibly
tweaking or looking, but um
really my concerns are, um, you
know, the rurality factor, um,
just, uh, efficiency and also
looking into a possible activity
bus transport. So those are all
echoing the sentiments of
everyone here on the board, but
um I think those are all
important and all need to look
at collaboratively together, so
I also appreciate the efforts
of.
had only
Just pump in more dollars in,
but also looking at the
efficiency of spending within
school districts. I think it's
gonna get us closer to that
target.
Um, and then really just my, my
one question is, um.
Specifically on online 58
teacher professional
development, and I'm sure it's
interwoven additional places
here within this budget. Um, but
just wanting to express my
concern that as we're talking
about, um.
Increasing outcomes and, and
working on students just really
want to call attention. There is
a difference in agency
recommendations with regards to
professional development, um,
and wanna just ensure that
We're talking about improving
our systems, but it really
starts with our educators and,
um, you know, maybe what the
goals are there for, um,
retention for support, um, and
as we're looking to transition
other workforce into education,
um, you know, I think one major
challenge is really preparing.
Other professional individuals
coming into education with the
realities of education. So there
was a lot of those, um, you
know, certification programs and
whatnot, and I don't know if
that professional development
funds addresses that, um, and
also just want to make sure that
that is of.
You know, to increase our
student outcomes, we really need
to increase our teacher
professional development, so.
Thank you.
Representative Gonzalez, thank
you so much for bringing that
up. We've talked a lot about
educator pathways getting our
pipeline into the fields, but it
is also, as you said, incredibly
important that we actually
continue to support our
in-service teacher attendants.
They need, um, professional
learning opportunity, they need
coaching.
And these funds allow us to, um,
target and support.
Cohorts of teachers principals,
um, with more money, we could
obviously um have more
involvement across the state,
but it is incredibly important
that we continue to invest in
that continued, um, professional
learning and coaching that we
know has an incredibly uh
enormous impact on student
outcomes, so as much as it is
for the teachers, it is for our
principals.
Um, thank you for that response.
I, um, again, I did note just
some slight differences in
agency budgets, so I just wanna
highlight that, um, you know,
where, where the priorities lie.
And so we're talking about
students, but our teachers are
at the forefront, so showing
that appreciation and support.
Thank you.
many members to continually go
through the chair for any
comments to depersonalize our
debate here.
All right, so we have represent.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you all three of
you. It is inspiring and no
matter, I mean, this is my 7th
year and I studied budgets
before I was a a legislator.
It's very complex.
And each line item has a
bazillion line items underneath
that that we're dealing with
because if we look at Yasi
Martinez.
Um, I was thinking about it,
bilingual education
diagnosticians. That's actually
one of the most important things
and.
Reaching equality with Hispanic
students that get put into
special ed because the
diagnostician doesn't have the
expertise and um,
Meeting Yasi Martinez, having
our teacher residencies that
focus on getting Native American
teachers and Hispanic teachers
and other teachers. I'm the
mother of a half Asian person,
so let's not leave out our Asian
Americans also, but um and the
family income index dealing with
it in a inequities that come
because of our um economic
things. So I just think it's
important that it's not just the
line item of 1.5 million.
but it's
In so much of our thinking and
everything, and I want to thank
you because I know the PED LFC
and LAFC and all of us were
trying to work on that area.
Um, I have one question for, I
don't know if I should say madam
acting secretary, Madam almost
secretary.
Um, anyway, I'm just gonna say,
Madam secretary.
And, you know, data is not sexy,
but actually your C2 projects
and data quality sports are
actually important. So how are
we gonna deal with that.
And, and how, how it's just in
the executive budget, but
Uh, John and um
Sonny
How can we deal with that?
Because if we don't have
accurate data, and that point
about data being automatically
going into district systems.
I mean, it's really hard when
you're getting data integrated
in September and October.
And you're teaching in August.
So, is there a solution to that
in this year's.
Budget proposal. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
Um
For IT projects, we don't have a
very good track record.
Statewide, it is not.
ED alone that struggles with
standing up IT systems.
I think that there's certainly
value in doing.
Smaller projects that can be
done with agility.
And can be scaled up over time.
That's generally a best
practice.
we'd be big, make big
investments in large IT
overhauls, that is when we get a
lot of issues as you're also
aware of that.
Um
We're a bit concerned about the
recent exit of PD CIO and a
historic
You know, reauthorization of IT
projects in the past. We've
reauthorized some projects for 2
years because the money has just
not been spent.
We do think that part of the
solution is to have more
statewide coordination, hence
the investment and
recommendation for an essa SIS
system.
Of 12 million, I think it
remains to be seen with the
department's plan is and how
they will roll this one out, but
at this stage, this is the only
recommendation coming from LFC.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um,
A lot, a lot of what Sonny said,
uh, again, LESD also has the $12
million appropriation for the
the statewide student
information system that we think
would would be a huge asset,
both the districts and to the
department. Um, I'll also say I
think on Monday you're going to
be hearing House Memorial 2,
which is about data governance,
um, statewide.
Specifically.
With education data and across
education agencies because I
think
And as we've presented to LESD
in the fall.
Uh, the need for some sort of
statewide either formal
structure or cooperation amongst
all agencies and the legislature
and other folks who either
provide data to that system or
or.
rely on the data as we do with
the legislature to give you
information about those things.
Um, there's been more alignment,
uh.
agencies, I think around data in
terms of the longitudinal data
system.
Um, but we still, and you'll
hear about it more in regard to
that memorial. I think there's
work to do in coordinating those
different systems. And so to
Sunny's point,
Making sure that when you do
invest in some of these data
systems.
There's efficiency, we're not
creating redundancy across
agencies and that those systems
are set to talk to one another
from the get-go, not after we
figure out that they that they
didn't work. And so, um, more
conversation I think needs to be
had.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Garrett, if I may just.
Build on what they're saying and
addressed a couple of the things
that were mentioned, um, the,
the funding shortfalls that I
mentioned are specific to
dashboards, so again, I think
we're all in agreement that
creating a statewide student
information system is really
where we need to go next, but
making sure that our data is
accepted in these dashboards do
that, whether it's open books
about transparency, whether it's
financial transparency, whether
it's a tendance.
its students, I mean schools
actually having access to their
data, all of those things are
very important as well and
something that we think is about
transparency, accountability,
and just making sure that we're
utilizing our data that we
collect to actually inform
instructions, so I just wanted
to point that out and then I do
want to acknowledge as Sunny
said, our CIO uh did retire
after many, many years serving
the state of New Mexico and I
will say that we do work.
very collaboratively across
state agencies on data, and we
are and work to be very
responsive.
To data a request from the
legislature, I think we do a
great job with that.
Um, and again work to be um
collaborative in terms of our
use of data and the data how are
not only at the department but
with. Thank you.
Um, and, my other question again
is just to, um, Madam Secretary.
So they um PD we've heard and
and briefly talked about there's
4 bills coming up.
Is, uh, my first question is.
The, um
You find it that 90 million over
3 years.
Uh, line 113.
Is that 1/5 bill? How, what is
that?
How are we doing that one?
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, that is um.
that will go to the existing
Indian education fund, which is
created statutorily.
Um, and so we are um making some
modifications to the
administration of that fund
through roll.
Um, so the there is no um
legislation that is purely a
budgetary request.
OK, thank you. And Mr. my final
question is,
Is their funding in the current
budget that addresses the uh
literacy, structure literacy
bill, the math and science bill,
especially in the special
education bill. Is that funding
already in the budget, or will
we need to add additional money.
Based on those bills.
Which we hope to see any day.
Mr. Representative Garrett, me
too, so we're we're working very
closely with legislative council
services to get those out,
hopefully today, um, but, uh,
yes, the, the budget requests
for math.
Um, for literacy is really
continuing the work that we're
doing.
Um, and special education.
The funding request in the
budget do support the work again
of the Office of Special
Education, all of those things
that I mentioned, the great work
that's happening there, um, and
then the mass bill very much so,
that will help us fund
professional development in
math.
As well as um math instructional
coaches, which, so that is very
much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I represent Colin.
Chair
Um, yeah, I
Question
Um
versus a behavioral health
supports, um, we have in the 9.
What kind of services is that
looking at fighting.
Mr. Chair Representative Collin,
so our recommendation is based
on some things that the
department has support student
wellness overall, including
Um, to restorative practices
where they've trained students
and staff across the state.
Um
So, emotional supports for
students. Um, I think this is
actually wrapped up, wrapped up
in some of the things that the
secretary said about school
safety. So in addition to the
structural safety of schools.
We're also talking about student
wellness and student behavioral
health.
As a component of that of that.
Safety, if you will, and I don't
know if that's secretary wants
to add anything.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
everything that John said, um,
restorative justice sort of
practices, um.
Um, working on students and
belonging, all of those, those
sort of practices, um, I believe
wellness rooms is a component.
Um, of that funding as well, and
so, um, just as much as we know
that um.
Again, the safety of capital
needs.
and communications are
important, um, just from a
school safety standpoint,
behavioral health is um as well
as just making sure they're safe
at school, uh, again, have a
strong sense of belonging and
are able to really engage in the
classroom, um, activities.
Yeah, cause we're seeing such a
huge increase in need.
Mental and behavioral health
within us.
Seen it before COVID, but post
COVID, it has increased.
Sure that we are providing
Counselors and services that are
needed within our school
districts to be able to help.
With these
See
Of how we're seeing our
counselors there for a long time
guidance counselors that really
helped with their academic.
sure we have enough credits.
we're seeing such an increase
in.
It's really truly
Budget
Um, for these needs.
And share, thank you. Um, the
other questions with
transportation, um, I came from
Rio Rancho Bulls, um, since
2013.
On that board every single year.
We were at a loss and always say
it was going.
Get over to a million dollars
coming from our general.
Transportation department.
Uh, always the challenges is the
transportation formula and
nobody really wanted to press it
for many years because it is
complex issue is.
that you are looking at it.
Of course we're having
and
you would like to see the study.
Um
that has been done
And then, um
My other concern is in the
question is, is within the uh
Rearrange it was an early
doctor for the K through 12 plus
program and I understand that
the district has talked about
Well, is that with that change
now they have lost.
Um
With oh could you kind of
expand.
On that they went over some of
the.
Figures with me, um, and now
they're really, yeah, they're
really.
Right in the negatives with.
So
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative
Collin, very briefly if I could
go back to your original
question about behavioral
health. I also do want to say
that I know career technical
education has gotten a lot of
attention when it comes to the
secondary factor increase.
But again, going back to this is
also a product of our middle
school study and the need for
behavioral and social-emotional
supports for students, uh.
The secondary level and so that
90 million wrapped up in 6.
through 12th grade increases is
that districts could also use.
For those purposes, because we
know that the program adding
programmatic pieces of of that
are very important, whether
that's career technical
education, performing and fine
arts, those kinds of things.
As well as that sort of
Infrastructure of supports that
students need, um, and so
districts could also use that
additional funding for those
purposes.
For K-12 plus.
Um, what you're probably
referring to, for those of you.
This is, this was a complication
of the way that we used to
administer K5 plus and the and
the extended learning time
program.
And the transition to K12+. So
prior.
schools had to add, for
instance, 10 days.
To their calendars in order to
receive extended learning time
program funding.
It didn't matter where you
started.
So if you were at 175 days in
your school year.
And you added 10 days.
You got 10 days' worth of
funding, and now you have 185
days.
When we transition to K12 plus.
The law changed, and it said
that schools that added days
above 180.
Got additional funding. So for a
district and I'm just using this
as an example that had gone to
185.
Before they were getting 10 days
of extra funding.
Under the new law, now they're
only getting 5 days of extra
funding.
And there was language in the
budget that prohibited school
districts from reducing the
amount of time.
they'd had in the previous year,
so that district that added days
to 185 had to continue to offer
185.
was potentially receiving less
funding for the same amount of
school days because of the way
that those two different
programs were written and
administered.
So, um, that's part of the issue
there with how districts ended
up with potentially less
funding.
With for the same amount of
time.
Mr. Chair, just to complicate it
further.
Um, there was a non-recurring,
once again, non-recurring being
an issue of $60 million.
And fiscal year 23 to
potentially account for changes
in the formula that were
unexpected.
Um, the department two
secretaries ago.
Use that $60 million to create a
whole new formula program called
K-12 plus out of school time.
Only about half of the districts
and charters signed up for this
out of school time formula
program, which gave them
additional units.
Or adding hours rather than days
to their calendar.
Um, you'll see that 60 million
online 16.
That was put into the formula to
try and
smooth out
And put it into a recurring base
as opposed to being a one-time
non-recurring appropriation, but
for those of you who are really
familiar with the funding
formula.
Um, it doesn't flow out 1 to 1.
to every district once it
happens, so large districts like
Las Cruces, Rio Rancho, that
we're getting this supplementary
K-12 plus out of school time
funding in addition to their
formula K12 plus funding.
saw that out of school time
component vanish, which was
significant.
And I will actually, um, we'll
talk a little bit offline for
our.
Thank you, Representative Torres
Velascius.
Sorry about my voice, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm gonna try and keep this
kind of brief because of my
throat.
Seems like we've got something
going around and um,
I really appreciate the work
that y'all have done.
Um, it's very helpful to see
this and to have it explained.
This is the 2nd time that I hear
the explanation of the education
budget.
And, um, or the 3rd if you count
Monday, and so it's very, very
helpful. Um,
There's some things uh that I
know that my constituents are
going to like because for many
of them, education is their top
priority. They're concerned
about where we rank in the
state.
In terms of um public education
and how it affects um
Our economy
In our communities, but mostly
their children.
And so I, you know, I try to,
uh,
Do some.
Explanation about where those
ratings are coming from and what
else to look at, um, but it is
out there in the public where we
rank.
So, public education, um.
It is very important and, and I
also understand that we're one
of the few states where
legislation and funding is
evaluated and so that's, I
think, part of the function of
the LFC in terms of how
How well is our money being
spent?
And so I can understand the
cautions that you're placing on
some of the funding.
And the creativity that you're
placing on some of the funding.
Um, and by the way, welcome, um,
Madam Secretary.
Um
So where education is the top
priority or one of the things
that I heard from a few of my
constituents is that teachers
really needed to get paid more.
The teachers were not being paid
enough.
And um
From people who are teaching in
the public schools, the ways
that insurance costs just rose
so highly and so I am really
glad you're addressing that. I,
I don't think the amount, the
percentage is enough, that's my
personal opinion, but um, I, I'm
glad that there is an increase
to teacher salaries or to all
staff salaries, and I agree that
all staff.
Need to receive that, those
salary increases.
Um, Mr. Chair, I also, um, would
like to ask a couple of
things, but, but first I'd like
to share that um
With my involvement in the
Martinez lawsuit, I, I'm a
little struck.
A little surprised at the
serious misinformation about
Martinez and Yazi lawsuits
plural.
And, um, so I would love the
opportunity to talk with you
about that sometime.
Um
Because it affects it, it
affects the discussions I'm
hearing at the table here.
Um
I also have some questions, uh,
Mr. Chair, and, um,
Members of the committee and um.
Resenters, um, about.
Those
Acts
Um, having served as the
Hispanic education liaison in
2010.
Uh, and having re created a
report.
Uh, I would like to see the
current reports from the
different acts, as we're looking
at this budget.
I'd also like to see the
suggestions that they've made.
What have the council suggested,
how have those recommendations
been implemented.
By the PED um where have the
funds come from to implement
those recommendations and I'm
wondering,
Um, if that's the data that Mr.
Lew is referring to in terms of
those recommend the acts are not
effective.
In raising school, um.
Achievement.
Um, so
I
Um, I have another question
similarly to the
microcredentialing, um, because
as a professor at UNM I work
very closely with teachers who
were having um some concerns
about the microcredentialing,
and I'd like to know where the
assessment is coming in for that
process and I know that that's
something that's typically
discussed in interim with the.
ESC, um, but I, I really like to
see where's the assessment in
terms of the effectiveness of
the micro credentialing, um, if
we're, if we're looking at data,
um, I think it's very important
for us to look at all aspects of
how we spend our money.
I really want to applaud Mr.
Chair, um.
Representative Royal Caballero
and Representative Rob
Caballero, you are welcome to
say that you also worked with
the Martinez lawsuit because you
Have the very message that we
have been wanting to send.
Um, that is, um, that this is
not just about money.
But about systemic change, and
so I am really glad to see some
of the ways that you are looking
at the funding formula, and I do
believe that that will address
some of the things, some of the
concerns and the Martinez
lawsuit in terms of the funding
formula.
But I, I
you know, I'm hoping we have the
opportunity to talk more about
the actual education that our
students, all our students
receive.
Um
And then, um,
Lastly, I would like to, uh, Mr.
Chair, I'd like to thank
Representative Garrett, my
sister is a bilingual special ed
diagnostician. And so when you
bring that up, I know exactly
what you're talking about, and
we have some real um real
incredible needs in our schools,
and it's, it's great to know the
extent that this committee
thinks about all of those
concerns as I hear the
questions, I'm really proud to
be on this committee. Thank you
so much.
Thank you.
Anybody else
OK, I'll go on to my questions.
Um.
So there's a difference in
secondary enrollment between
Or sorry, the
Um, secondary factor um between
LESC and LFC and I think uh Mr.
Liu, you had mentioned about
declining enrollment, um, as
it's featuring part of that, um.
I, I was, I was wondering if you
all could elaborate on kind of
the inclusion of 6th grade.
Um, but
Not including 7 through 12th
grade, Mr. Chair, a great
question. So you're currently
your largest.
Grade is 9th grade right now. Uh
they were the last big
kindergarten cohort.
In 2015.
Um, every year after 3 years,
every year after that, you're
going to see fewer and fewer
high school students statewide.
Based on our projections. So if
you raise the secondary weight
for
9th through 12.
Uh, that will begin to decrease,
um, after fiscal year 28. And
Essentially schools that may
have been generating units for
those kids for these programs
and still having those teachers
and fixed costs associated with
them, the CU units over time.
Um, there's a bit of a concern
about the longevity of a simple
Increase in the secondary
weight, um, 6th grade because
it's already um in front of that
large cohort was considered, I
think there's also a lot of
express needs. I know LESC has
looked at.
Middle school as part of the
review, and also the the needs
that we see once student
proficiency starts declining
after those grade levels.
Um, the LFC recommendation does
contemplate getting 6th grade
halfway.
To 1.25.
Which is the current unit factor
47 through 12.
There is also concerns that
The 0.05 factor increase was a
bit arbitrary.
Um, there is
A lot of research that has gone
in previous studies.
Such as the AR study in 2008
where there was a lot of
professionals and a panel
developed to actually look at
the cost specific between uh
serving elementary and secondary
rural and urban students, LESC
has in
Even further back than that,
done very extensive study on
cost differences, which is why
there are differentials between
these grade levels.
Um
I think due to the timing of
when this memorial ended, there
wasn't um
A lot more discussion from the
task force on what an
appropriate secondary factor
might have been, we would
actually encourage additional
review and work in that area,
rather than rushing to raise a
weight to 0.05.
And
Thank you for, for that, um.
Mr. Liu, um,
I guess.
We heard um directorenna
mentioned that um,
The costs continue for school
cause we're still going to have
to offer programming for the
students that are involved.
Um, at the school site including
the changes that we made last
year to high school graduation
requirements and continued for
technical education.
Um, some of that funding could
be used as we heard for social
emotional learning, um, I, I was
just wondering if, if you all
had any concerns about that or
would have an argument as to
where the money in the LFC
portion in the budget could be
found for for.
Um
Assisting with some of those
more costly programs.
Mr. Chair. Thank you for the
question.
I think that um when you look at
the LFC recommendation.
It's a 6% overall recurring
increase.
Which is in line with the
committee's target um for making
sustained growth across state
government without expediting
the day when we will have to.
flattened budgets because of
revenue constraints.
The committee has always given
staff targets by which they can
work from.
then build upon during the
legislative session.
You can almost see it as a floor
or.
your baseball fans, it's spring
training. This is just the
starting point, um, that
You can use as a consideration
as you begin your budget
development process.
One of the biggest differences,
I would have to say.
Um
That would actually make a dent
if you're considering
adjustments between the two
recommendations would have to
come from compensation.
is the single largest item.
Between the 3% and 4%.
Uh, that may even come close to
addressing some of the recurring
needs outlined in
The other recommendation.
Mr. Chair, if I, if I could, I.
first one to say, you know, uh,
we've
Obviously, we worked with a lot
of partners in coming up with
this particular proposal.
To
And really value all their
input.
This is gonna be a very general
statement. Um, but I think it
has to do with a number of the
things that that you all have
mentioned today.
Um
That have to do with
transportation.
has to do with belonging.
Um, and I'll, and I'll steal a
phrase that one of our
superintendents used uh last
interim when we visited.
Carlsbad
Is whether or not we're funding
for sufficiency or we're funding
for excellence.
And
I, I completely understand and I
think we as staff have had these
discussions about.
Um
Enrollment declines and all of
the things that that we know are
happening in schools.
We're very lucky to have.
Such great education expertise
on this committee.
And so I always ask folks to
think about your own experience
or your own.
student's experience in schools.
And I think about it because I
have, I'm a parent. I have a
high schooler and a middle
schooler right now.
And whether or not
The experience that my students
have, my students go to Los
Alamos public schools.
And whether or not students
across the state are able to
experience and have the same
level of opportunities that
exist in that community.
my students
do all students have that
opportunity.
And how much are we asking
communities and parents and
families to contribute to the
education system on a regular
basis.
To have those kinds of equal
opportunities.
Transportation is super
important.
Not just in the to and from
school that you all are talking
about in this in this
allocation.
But whether or not your kids can
travel.
To games
The field trips.
To all the things that we know
are the probably the things that
we all remember most about
education and made the biggest
impact on us.
culture and language doesn't
happen at a school only.
Those things require probably
traveling off site and
participating in community
events and other things that are
going on.
This recommendation doesn't.
Solve all those problems.
But the majority of the money
that this legislature has
appropriated over the last 6
years since the Martinez Yazi
ruling.
With the exception of increases
to the at-risk funding.
Have gone to very specific
things.
Primarily to pay for teachers.
In in salaries, which is
extremely important, and I have
to say that over and over again
because I was a teacher and my
wife is still one.
And for time
Whether through K5 plus and
extended learning.
Or increased instructional hours
in K-12 plus.
vast majority of the $1.6
billion that you've put into
education over the last 6 years
have paid for people and time,
and those are really important.
I think we can agree
We need great teachers in
classrooms, and we need.
Kids to be in school enough to
learn.
It has not necessarily provided
the flexibility for innovation
across the board.
CTE is something that we've been
funding at $40 million for the
last couple of years.
But only some schools received
that grant funding through the
grant program at PED and it's
really important for startup
costs and other things.
If you want different things to
happen.
In schools
schools have to have the ability
to do something different.
And so this
We, we completely understand all
the other factors that are going
into.
How we determine funding for
schools. I'll go back to the AIR
study. We have a graph that
shows.
There was, there was a number
that that study recommended for
school funding.
In the last couple of years.
On an inflation adjustment
adjusted amount, we've actually
crossed the threshold for what
they recommended.
That's great.
That's been for 2 years.
Prior to that
We were significantly below.
What people's, those that group
of experts that Sonny mentioned.
We've been significantly below
what those experts said it costs
to run schools the way that we
want to run them.
And so, again, this doesn't
solve all of those problems, but
it gets us closer to ensuring
that every student has equal
opportunity without schools,
including my own, which has a
lot of resources, still relying
on me and our family.
To contribute to those programs
that I know are the reason that
my kid wants to go to school. It
isn't for algebra 2,
unfortunately. I, I wish, I wish
she cared a little more.
But, but it's those other things
that often parents and families
are having to support it in
those communities where parents
and families can't.
Kids are doing with that.
Thank you. um
As far as the family income
index, um,
The directors and you mentioned
kind of the difference between
Um, the program itself and then
the mechanism and that we're
looking at.
Doing away with
At risk by using the family
income index as a mechanism to
determine um.
funding for at risk and where
the students and the dollars are
going.
Madam Secretary, you mentioned
Abel, at least as far as the
executive budget, there isn't
anything for adding those family
income.
Index units.
But then you had mentioned the
program funding. So I guess I
was just wondering about
Do you support the idea of
having
This
Changing of the at risk in this
restructuring of at risk and
utilizing family income index.
An identifier
Then
Are you still advocating for the
additional funding on top of
that for the individual.
Mr. Chair, thank you so much for
that question, so, um.
I
Believe that the family income
index.
Um
Methodology that we use for the
program that is being proposed
to be used for.
Uh, calculating at risk.
Is a good
Um, move. I, I, I think that
that is, um, as John said, will
allow us.
To generate that funding based
on what's happening at the
school level.
The way that funding will flow
through the SCG still gives.
Our districts the ability.
As they do now,
To figure out where that money
goes.
Um, and I, I believe that they
have lots of um costs as we've
talked about over the course of
this meeting that will draw upon
that that funding.
And so whether or not.
At-risk funding truly gets.
To the students that generate
those funds.
We don't really know.
We know that's the intent.
But we don't really know.
Um,
So the program, the family
income index program is.
clearly away to get those funds
to the school level for students
that have the highest.
For schools that have the
highest concentration of
poverty. So it's not one or the
other. I, I do think that it's a
great move in terms of
calculating that risk funding,
but I do think that there's
value in being intentional about
getting this $9 million that
we're requesting actually to the
school level, um, to allow
schools to have that, um, that
influence that autonomy to
support their students.
These proposed changes, uh,
director Senna, would we be able
to calculate the exact amount of
Well, I'll call it the risk
funding for now that um
utilizing the new family income
index as an indicator, we'd be
able to calculate exactly how
much a school itself should be
able to generate and get, is
that right?
Mr. Chair, yes, because the
index um what originally started
as the secretary said as a site
level calculation.
We have the percentage or the,
the number of students and the
percentage of students uh in
poverty in every single school.
methodology that we're that
we're using will actually ramp
that up essentially to a
district level.
We'd still be able to say on a
district by district basis
because we still have that
school site data.
How much of a district's at
risk.
Appropriation or or allocation.
was generated by a particular
school.
The SCG is discretionary and so
there's no requirement at that
as the secretary said, there's
no requirement that they spend
that money.
But
In 2019, you all passed.
An omnibus education bill that
included the creation of the
Education plan.
Every district is required to
submit to the department and
education plan that outlines
How they plan to spend at risk
money.
With the new methodology, we
would actually be able to track.
One, how much they spend in at
risk and where they spend it and
whether or not
Particular pots of money are
going to the schools that.
Mr. Chair, can I just add on to
that and.
I, I would like to be able to
provide districts that
information about the schools
that generate.
Specific funding. I would like
to be able to provide that to
them upfront as they're setting
their school budgets.
Um, I think that's a useful
budgeting tool, um, something
that I, I know that the
department can do and that I
would like to do. But I just
want to.
reiterate, reiterate that they
then still get to determine how
they. Yeah, no, no, and I
certainly appreciate that and I
think that's the intent of, of,
of the change in the fact that
we would have that information
of how much the schools are
generating. We can also follow
up with what sorts of
programming are those schools
offering for targeted at the
students that are generating the
funding and the added supports,
um.
We are running up against time.
I have a couple more questions,
but like I said, we can um
continue this discussion, um,
certainly when folks, um, if
something occurs to them between
now and then to bring them up,
but we'll have you all back on
Friday at 8 o'clock. Um I just
want to highlight that um the
secretary had passed out, um, a
flyer that I'm losing mine right
now, um.
says 7:30.
So there is a breakfast with
3,
Department secretaries, early
childhood, higher education, and
our PED secretary
Friday, um, so the time says
7:30. We're starting at 8
o'clock here. Are you all
holding firm to that 7:30?
Um
Um, Mr. Chair, we absolutely can
move that up, so let us, um,
make sure that we can get that
out to everyone, um.
Um, and I'm, I'm sure we can
work with um.
Getting that space earlier in
here in the building, so we'll
make that change, um, and get
that information out to you.
Certainly appreciate that. Thank
you. Um, cause it's
Good amount of members. I'm sure
there'll be a lot of interest
and a lot of questions and we
want to have a good amount of
time to interact with you all.
So thank you for, for doing
this. Um,
Now, Lunar New Year. Happy,
happy New Year.
Um, so.
That's it, folks. We'll see you
back on Friday at 8 o'clock.
Thank you again to our house
appropriations Committee
chairman, um, represented Small
for joining us, and we'll see
you on Friday. Thank you all.
