Representative Christine
Trujillo yes ma'am.
Vice chair Garrett Care.
Chairman we do have a quorum.
Here.
Hi everybody I hope you all are
doing well
On the Saturday in our Marathon
committee meetings
Representative Stapleton I had
heard word that you had asked to
go first to is is there any
pressing reason because I know
we have Representative credit
not waiting as well.
You're on mute Representative
chairman I'm fine go ahead okay
thank you I figured you're gonna
have to stay with us the whole
time anyway.
So I'm.
But for this morning so we were
going to hear the Committee sub
for House Bill one fifty if you
remember we rolled that over
last week I got a call from
Representative bash this morning
asking that we continue to roll
it as they keep
Refining the bill so we will do
that we'll hear that at a later
date
But this morning we will start
up well the other thing to madam
secretary is is it was announced
that representatives L. would be
moving to appropriations so
She has been.
For more Canadian.
Okay.
Someone would place it is not
committee
not that I know of
Representative okay thank you Mr
chairman but if anything comes
up co chair certainly let you
all know.
All right so we'll go ahead and
get started I'm going to promote
Representative Cadena
Representative if you would in
the attendees side can you raise
your hand so I can easily.
You to our panel all right.
Good morning representative did
I need to promote an expert.
Yes good morning Mr chair I have
with me some key leaders from a
S. NMAA you are associated
students of MSU they include
Gabriel of the Enron deal never
a few adult and Matthew Madrid
the I at a is an agency users
could please raise your hand so
that chair and staff might
trying to.
Right.
Here we go.
Mr chair on hand in case we have
any technical questions I also
have Dr van dean McKenzie who's
the director of financial aid at
NMSU.
And Ricardo read the assistant
VP for governor agents NMSC so
they'll they'll just be
listening in with us should we
have a more technical question
about the administration of the
scholarship awesome I appreciate
that I'm trying to keep my
screen at twenty five people so
awesome thank you Representative
says house bill two seventeen
for everybody so Representative
when you're ready please.
Good morning Mr chair and house
Education Committee I'm grateful
to be in this conversation with
you today
I as for those of you that I am
having it quite met in person
and look forward to building
relationships with I represent
New Mexico's house district
thirty three and then you and I
County that's about four hours
south of here here are capital
but it also and really important
to me includes New Mexico State
University one of our big
research schools as you all know
and and the cornerstone of New
Mexicos land grant institution
and Hispanic serving institution
hire its system I was excited to
hear the enthusiasm of NMSU
students and leaders in trying
to figure out ways to best
accommodate students across the
state both in the two year and
four year systems that
potentially have faced
extenuating circumstances as
we've all done our best to
navigate this public health
emergency and economic crisis
rolling to New Mexico and most
of the world H. B. two seventeen
is fairly straightforward what
we're doing is amending the
requirements for eligibility
that a student must meet in
order to remain a qualified
student and receive the lottery
scholarship in particular we do
want to shout out and need that
because of thoughtful crafting
of this legislation over many
years with you all in the lead
there is already a provision in
the lottery scholarship that
that would allow students to
articulate potentially
exceptional mitigating
circumstances that would keep
them from meeting up academic
responsibilities but our concern
and the concern raised by NMSU
is that those decisions have to
be made on a case by case basis
certainly and that all the
students may not be aware of the
allowances and an appeals laid
out in that process that we
fundamentally believe that in an
emergency like this a public
health emergency that students
should be treated treated
equitably and have the same kind
of framework to make it just.
Admins and their scholarship
also very quickly Mr chair and
committee of the the provisions
here are mostly outlined on page
six section three where we have
a new section called public
health emergency details for the
qualified students the biggest
deals that we're giving the
secretary of higher ed Authority
to potentially drop the minimum
GPA semester to semester during
a qualified public health
emergency from two point oh two
point five to two point no for
that GPA the other significant
pieces it also gives the
secretary of higher ed again
only semester to semester doing
a qualified public health
emergency capacity to drop the
required full time hours folks
so dropping out from fifteen
credit hours a semester at the
four years to twelve and then
twelve to nine at the two years
SO with that Mr chair I might if
I might ask the two of my areas
and miss you leaders to make a
very brief statement and then
we'd be ready to go to
committee.
Please whoever would like to
start first welcome.
Representative Devin on Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is and they fear the assistant
director of governmental affairs
for the associated students of
New Mexico State University as
part of our association my
director and I are tasked with
advocating on behalf of our
students during the session and
bringing awareness for different
situations that might jeopardize
the continuation of them seeking
higher education an estimated
twenty four thousand plus
students in the state of New
Mexico rely on the lottery
scholarship as a means to pay
for their education five
thousand nine hundred twenty for
the students are from New Mexico
State University we have heard
from our students and they are
in desperate need of assistance
to keep these funds an attempt
to help students maintain their
lottery funds through
circumstances they might be
facing we've created House Bill
to seventeen with the help of
Representative Cup Anna they
gives the higher education
department secretary the
authority to reduce these
requirements during a public
health emergency we have worked
with secretary Rodriguez and the
higher education department and
their support of our experts to
ensure that all students across
the state in New Mexico are
being heard.
Students are you dealing with
the decreased amount of aid
brought by the lottery
scholarship and they're now
facing the harsh realities that
all of us are facing in this
public health emergency with the
expectation to uphold a grade
point average and credits that
we worked for once were held to
before this leisure is not
available to all students due to
a variety of circumstances that
they're not faced with and
students are not having to put
their education as a second
priority behind their well being
whether it be the need to stay
home to take care of sick family
members or guardians that have
been affected by the pandemic
closure small businesses and job
loss across the state or even
students having to take up extra
jobs to make ends meet of all
affected their abilities to
remain eligible for the
scholarship but I'm having a
drop credit hours for reasons
that are beyond their control
then there comes the struggles
of online learning many students
have been taught in person
settings their whole life and
now we're faced with the
problems of online learning what
we have learned comes with its
own set of problems for internet
connection not following being
able to understand the material
decreased mental health which is
important to our students and
other factors are holding
students with previous good
grades the struggle to keep
their grade point averages while
adapting to these new learning
styles all at once in fact at
the beginning of the year
estimates you released a survey
so that receive feedback from
students on how the pandemic has
affected them and over seven
hundred students gave their
testimonies one student
responded by saying students
have gone through a lot of
financial emotional and academic
pressure and stress this
semester we deserve a second
chance to increase our grades as
we know the pandemic has not
only affected students by on the
mat sickens economically from
personal experience I'm from
south eastern New Mexico and my
family faced the downturn and
for low.
of oil field workers at the
start of the pandemic and
because of this my family is not
able to support me financially
which makes me fully reliant on
my scholarships to keep me in
school because I'm in different
stem classes I'm not able to
fully grasp the understanding
that I'm supposed to have since
most of these classes are based
on hands on learning and if my
grades are to suffer now or in
the future because of this I
would have no choice but to do
this continue my education and I
know many other students have
been put in the same situation
that I'm in.
So we understand that students
can individually file to keep
their lottery scholarships
themselves on a self need
basically however giving the
secretary this power to amend
the lottery requirements would
create a clear pathway for
students understand how to keep
their scholarships without
filing the extra paperwork and
reduces the stress on the
financial aid offices to
individually go through these
cases themselves.
Most importantly if the
universities are left to
determine whether student has an
excuse acceptable enough to keep
their scholarship it's often
requires students to put their
life on display hoping that this
school is really understanding
of their situation but it also
brings a sense of very ability
and depending on the higher
official that they talk to you
to students with the same
situation could get different
answers on whether their excuse
is deemed acceptable we have
students are grateful for the
continued support higher
education department and
education committees have
offered a continuing the lottery
scholarship however we're asking
for your continued support in
bringing opportunities lottery
scholarship offers to students
that they do not have access to
without it thank you Mr chair
and I also have been around you
with me another expert witness
from just wants you to speak on
our behalf.
Thank you very Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Gabriel around key and I'm the
director of governmental affairs
for the associated students New
Mexico State University as
mentioned before we are changing
a couple of requirements for the
lottery
scholarship for the four year
institutions we are on their
usually fifteen credit hours
that we have to take a for two
year institutions we have to
take twelve credit hours we both
had to keep my GPA of two point
five or above the other Rick
requirement is being a resident
of New Mexico and that's the
only requirement that we are not
willing to change because we
believe that the lottery
scholarship was intended for New
Mexicans and would like to keep
it that way so the changes go
from four institutions not
having to go below twelve credit
hours for two year institutions
not to go below nine credit
hours and to both keep a two
point oh GPA and above on a four
point oh scale and and other
important requirement that we're
changing on is the semesters the
program semester so student
qualifies after the first
semester on campus and they
receive seven programs masters
after that to receive the
scholarship now something a
change here is that during a
public health emergency the
semester's don't count I'm a
student fails or is not a role
there in a public health
emergency that's Mr not count
towards them and they will keep
receiving their scholarships
after the public health
emergency
and we have to understand that
it's meant to help graduate that
the students graduate on time
that's what the whole letter
scholarship with Amanda back
back but now we're asking that
if they lose a scholarship then
none of the students will
graduate so this is important on
we are students very had
different types of scholarships
other than the lottery on and
they also have requirements to
them so if those requirements
are not met then we lose the
rest of the scholarships we're
asking that we at least can keep
one of them and that's a lottery
we have the capability to
actually control that what the
legislature here and this is
exactly why we're bringing it
and bringing this legislation.
So help us at least keep the
lottery because we have really
rely on.
That students have really rely
on graduating with the lottery
and twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty year here and I miss you
thirty one point five percent of
the students are actually on the
lottery and we see back in the
numbers in twenty fourteen to
twenty five point six percent of
students only on pal graduated
while sending five point three
percent of students were only on
lottery graduate that's a big
difference and that just shows
us that we actually do have
really rely on the lottery
scholarship.
Another important thing to know
on this is that there's no
appropriation tied to this bill
the lottery fund will stay the
same and will not be adding any
other students to this on with
this legislation that's
something important because not
there's no increase in students
we're only asking that we help
those who are already qualified
a qualified student.
I'll be keeping the scholarship
but a student who was not
eligible or did not qualify
before the public health
emergency will not be getting it
back that's something important
to know because people will be
that will be getting given back
the lottery scholarship to
students for a loss that before
her but this is not true.
So another important thing to
know is that the requirement
changes are only temporary
they are only during a public
health emergency and they will
go back to normal after the
emergency is over and the
secretary has the power to do on
make these changes from semester
to semester it's not from a
yearly basis or however long
they want it's only from
semester to semester and but as
mentioned by my other colleagues
is that this is a blank you for
all New Mexico students I myself
was not even aware that I can
appeal my scholarships to the
financial aid offices so if a
student doesn't know about this
process and the loser
scholarship that's it for them
we want this to be a blanket to
help all students this is equity
at its best all students to know
about this appeal and those who
don't will all be benefiting
from this another person another
people who will be benefiting
are the financial aid offices as
mentioned before we we can do
this process it's up to the
financial aid offices to
determine who can appeal who
can't and who gets to keep the
scholarship so this again is a
blank it's all students and help
solve the financial aid offices
as well because if there's a.
A lot of students going at
thousand students going to
offices that they have those
cases deal with one by one and
it what this legislation will
help all the students and help
those financial aid offices and
they will also get to be
partners with the secretary
they'll actually help the
secretary with recommendations
when they see these numbers are
are up in the notice trends and
they ask the secretary during a
public health emergency to help
them out as well on lastly I
just wanted to say a personal
note that I had just recovered
from the COVID nineteen pandemic
and I had to take care of my
brother I got sick myself and I
had to take care of myself and
school was hard very on
motivating to go to school and
classes were beginning to be a
struggle for me so with the help
of my family members are also
able to keep my scholarship I
was able to to help out as much
as they can but not all students
are benefiting but this not all
students have the help from the
family members from friends to
help them out during these types
on these times so we ask that
you you look into this for all
students and I just a individual
basis.
Lastly Mr speaker and and
members of the committee we want
to thank you for hearing us
today and we hope that we can
rely on you as on the
legislature has been trapping
for higher education for so many
years now we really appreciate
it thank you.
Great thank you all for being
here Representative you'll stand
for question.
Yes Mr chair thank you.
Excellent so before we go to
questions and we have some eager
beavers in the audience
so we'll go to opposition first
those who are opposed to house
bill two seventeen opposition.
All right so we will go to
support those in support House
Bill to seventeen please
indicate areas here and.
Gives people chance before
actually click on them okay so
you'll have up to two minutes
please do not be repetitive but
you'll have two minutes as soon
as I welcome you all in.
Ricardo good morning you have up
to two minutes please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I don't need to
repeat everything that the
students just mentioned they did
a really good job of explaining
the bill but New Mexico State
University those highly support
the bill and support for
students in moving this bill
forward it does have a major
impact on all on all of our
students and as Mr on on Q.
mentioned that students are only
receive Pell grants for
graduating at a much lower but
students that have both Pell
grant and the lottery are
graduating at a much higher
level and thank you for a
letting us talk about the bill
today and thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you for being here.
Mark good morning your books two
minutes good morning Mr chairman
thank you Sir I just want to
stand in for the executive
director New Mexico council
university presidents we
represent the seven four year
institutions in New Mexico and
we stand in support of hospital
to seventeen also just wanted to
give you know that the lottery
scholarship fund continues to
decrease in terms of the
percentage that's available for
students so with this
legislation and then going into
into on the internet session
would like to work with you Mr
chair and members of the
committee to try to figure out a
way to help support increased
funding for the lottery thank
you Mr chairman members can meet
again March that New Mexico's
reimbursed for your presence we
found support thank you thank
you.
All right we'll go to heather.
Morning heather you have up to
two minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is heather
Bassett and I'm Albuquerque
public schools and I want to
stand in support of HB two one
seven we hear a lot in this
pandemic about extending grace
to ourselves education students
and and we feel this bill puts
into action what it means to
extend grace to students during
this time as a personal note at
a mother of two children in
colleges one is at NMSU so I
think the sponsor for this bill
because I know how much
encouragement to college
students need right now to keep
on fighting our APS students
from the class of twenty twenty
and twenty twenty one this
upcoming school year we'll also
need the encouragement and
support of this bill and so we
thank you for listening to the
needs of our student and
bringing this legislation thank
you all right thank you.
All right so we'll go to Steve.
Morning Steve you have up to two
minutes good morning Mr chair
thank you and members of the
committee on behalf of our
members we support this bill as
it will help students with the
financial barriers to pursue or
continue their their higher
education goals and we do want
to know the this and echo the
voices in support of the bill
does not include an
appropriation for the lottery
scholarship and and does not
have a positive impact in the
state lottery twitching Fund
would you support the intent but
question the fact why this bill
does not increase the pie of
money to fund the lottery.
Many students as of today are
eligible for the scholarship and
receive the funds because of
limited funds are receiving
limited financial way and not
the fully promised by the
scholarship.
We support the intent of this
bill we thank the sponsor for
report this bill and we just
that the concern around the
funding of the scholarship be
considered as part of your vote
thank you.
Right thank you.
There any more support on our
attendees list.
Okay so will come to committee
representative blot out please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to Representative got in on my
legislative neighbor to the
north I I have a question Mr
chair you know you you know well
when when Representative when do
you anticipate that this bill it
gets to the governor's desk will
be implement to.
Mr chair representative on thank
you and first second I caught
myself off guard like we what's
the question in here in a lot of
part so I like to be in
conversation view with their
share needs and
connections back to the
borderline Mr chair
representative we have gone back
and forth about this and
potentially and as we prepped
for this bill yesterday we said
again to ourselves let's also
education what they think about
the appropriate effective date
and potentially look at adding
an emergency clause when we move
to our next committee right now
all this bill as introduced we
did not included emergency
clause which would mean this
really wouldn't come into play
until the fall of twenty twenty
one semester and for so many
others including the
conversations that we've had
with higher and and and the
council of university presidents
there is concern and potential
momentum to see if we can put an
emergency clause on it and in
turn have it in place for the
the semester that students are
currently participating in
NMSU experts please correct me
if I got parts of that wrong I
certainly am grateful to be in
this conversation but don't do
this every day like you all do
Mr chair representative that was
one of our big questions we said
yesterday let's see what they
think and if if they think
that's an appropriate direction
we would work on an amendment
like that for next committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative about because
that that that that that was a
person that popped into my head
Mr chair was you know if that's
the case so we can get the
emergency calls on there or
whatever for whatever reason I'm
wondering if if we if this could
be applied for me to read about
retroactive so I that I think
that's really important because
you know our our students are
suffering now and it's going to
be really important that we
address that thank you
Representative reading this bill
I fully supported thank you Mr.
Thank you representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chair first I want
to thank
all our associated student
representatives you did a
fantastic job if everybody who
testified came prepared with the
kind of statistics and evidence
that you brought our job would
be a lot easier as I hope that
we will see you advancing
government in the future Mr
Chairman second of all my my
question is the same as
Representative who are as can we
amend it with an emergency
clause here and now is that
possible.
I'm Representative I would I
would rather if we're going to
do that I think I was going to
mention that my comments but it
can be applied in the next
committee that'll be twenty okay
thank you Mr chairman that was
my question.
As a question it me thank you
representative Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative have the then I
want to echo representative
Garrett's compliments on your
expert witnesses they were right
on that was excellent and my
question is sort of the same so
we are now in the third college
semester this public health
emergency right it started in
spring semester of twenty.
We apologize to any in our
spring of twenty one so.
How does it apply Amin who who
would would we go back to spring
of twenty to look I mean I guess
I'm just a little fuzzy on the
logistics of it thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative seats
there thank you all and
certainly I just want to echo
that well deserved a justified
appreciation for these
incredible students thankfully I
could just show up here today
keep learning along the way and
be be a vehicle to make sure
part of the legislation like
this was considered for that
question my I turn to doctor
mackenzie doctor Mindy McKenzie
are NMSC director financially to
explain because she keeps
working it out on over with me
this is the best price on this.
Dr Kerr brings your hand.
Please if you were a doctor.
Yes good morning.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
As we're dealing with this for
the past three semesters we
would definitely based on the
recommendation of the committee
of how far back you would want
us to go we would be able to put
that in place
we.
We know there are students who
went ahead and they had already
submitted their appeals we have
process those for basically all
the students from once they had
to care COVID their appeals were
approved so we have gone through
that process but right now the
major thing is as we're going as
we're continuing and.
COVID is still with us students
are just continuing to have a
harder time.
So if the committee decides that
this goals retroactive for.
This spring semester or the
students in the fall then
definitely we would go ahead and
make that change because for the
spring off.
Twenty twenty which was the
first semester of it.
We had been given some
additional weight from HUD when
it came to the lottery and so
the the students were basically
not impacted to a certain extent
because we that there was
additional accommodations maybe
in the spring now going through
from the fall that's when the
definitely had to do with the
majority.
He is had to be submitted so if
any emergency clause was go
would be going in would
definitely be looking at.
The end of the fall semester
going into spring so this this
students who would not have
received their lottery this
semester is the major aspect the
majority group that would be
impacted.
So thank you for that Mr chair
so so what you're saying is we
kind of wiped out spring of
twenty and if if they somehow
jeopardize their lottery
scholarship in the fall of
twenty that's affecting them now
and if we were able to enact
this bill and get signed by the
governor then for fall of twenty
one we would go back and give
them a year another year
essentially in my and my
interpreting that correctly.
Okay I'm.
Mr chair and representative if
we if we could go back to do
what to do with this spring that
the students are in so this
spring would be the major thing
if we're doing anything
retroactive it would have to I
would ask the committee to look
at being going retroactive to
the sprint.
So Mr chair again I'm sorry just
Saturday morning I guess so we
lost our scholarship in the fall
of twenty and that's affecting
their spring of twenty one
correct so are we going back to
follow twenty or is it only this
semester that we're looking at
sorry.
If if I can try to explain this
the way the legislation as
currently drafted to date the
legislation in front of you
without an emergency clause we
would only be impacting students
beginning in the upcoming fall
twenty twenty one semester to
just be transparent we weren't
sure what kind of momentum or
energy that would be for this we
know that debates around the
lottery scholarship can be quite
the gigantic and expensive so we
wanted to start at a base line
making sure that if this
emergency continues or if we're
facing another emergency in the
future public health emergency
we would have this in place
as I've gotten into this
legislative process with you on
heard enthusiasm and support for
the idea it does seem clear that
we would be strategic to put on
that emergency clause as it's
been explained to me if we do
that emergency because we can
catch students in the semester
that we've currently started so
spring of twenty twenty one and
then have that moving forward
other ways as far as as we read
it and and intended to drafted
there is no retroactive period
that so far income did
encompassed in the drafting of
this legislation.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that clarification
representative because I heard
your your student experts say
that we were bringing anybody
forward who had lost in the past
but I I wasn't sure in the past
met prior to the pandemic of
spring of twenty or or if we
were going back that far and I'm
still a little fuzzy on it so
I'll just conclude Mr chair by
saying I agree that we need to
extend grace and trying to
figure out how we can get the
students hole and get them
toward graduation I also share
the concerns that were echoed in
the public comment about the
lottery scholarship funding and
disagree with the student
experts and saying it doesn't
affect it because certainly if
you are extending certain
semesters force or number
students it will affect the
overall high and I at this point
I don't think we would need to
know how much hopefully
hopefully not a lot but but so
there are many things to
consider and with that I'll I'll
learn.
Quit talking thank you Mr.
State representative
Representative.
For the question.
Okay so I'm no I would like to
thank you all for bringing this
forward I think it's a really
great piece of legislation to
help students I think we heard
from the from the public
testimony as well that
you know it's it's affecting
students now and will affect
students in the upcoming
semester especially those high
school students that are making
that transition and students
that are are currently within
the higher education system as
they move forward so I think
it's it's a very timely and
necessary piece of legislation
that.
I'm a lottery recipients
utilize stat on in a think it's
hopefully playing that.
Can stay until we a permanent
solution and we can guarantee
college to all on this costs but
until then we have a water color
ship here in the state and it's
been tremendously helpful for
for a lot of students but I
think Representative Kevin and
you heard about an emergency
clause
I think that is certainly
warranted if I'm speaking out of
turn or not place of of my
committee members please let me
now but sounds like that would
be something that would be very
much welcomed certainly it
doesn't change necessarily the
scope of the bill or what we're
trying to do here so I'm
certainly I would make an
exception to to having an
amendment and rolling this over
as I think it's something that's
very necessary and important to
us to get moving through the
system to address this very
critical need
but with that.
I will entertain a motion.
What do passed.
All right so we have to pass a
motion by Representative
Williams Stapleton I'll second
that.
Madam secretary called the roll
wanted to pass motion for House
Bill to seventeen please.
Representative Baldonado now.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dowell.
Representative Dow.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Ladda.
Absolutely yes.
Representative landing.
Representative Lente.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Roybal all coming
at all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Swetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Vice chair.
Garrett yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Eleven to one.
All right by a vote of eleven
twenty having to pass on house
bill two seventeen thank you so
much and thank you to all your
experts.
Thank you Mr chair committee
have a great weekend.
You too take care.
All right.
Moving right along.
See how fast my internet is to
pull up the next bill House Bill
to nineteen
All right.
Who will be presenting for us.
Mr Chairman myself and
Representative Trujillo all
right do we need to summon any
body.
Yes for people and if they can
put their hands up doctors to
sign I invited Johnson.
Dr Burr land up the gate.
Ruth krait.
And David Rogers.
And three of them will speak
briefly and David Rogers will
just he'll be president to
Answer any questions are
necessary all right yeah that's
quite a few panelists so.
They can be brief in a brief as
relative.
Okay.
Okay
was I think so everybody's
hearing you'll have to double
check to make sure your experts
are here but when you're ready I
think everybody should have
developed to nineteen go ahead
representative madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This call House Bill to nineteen
I I wanna give a shout out to
Representative Tomas Salazar he
brought it forth a previously
but this has a little bit of a
new emphasis and and I also want
to remind everybody on this
panel we often hear that New
Mexico ranks at the bottom of
education and I want you to know
that in the field of do language
dual language education by
literacy they choose by literacy
with Spanish and indigenous
language as we are leaders in
this nation and we should really
be proud of the fact that we are
setting the standard for
research and implementation
House Bill to nineteen would
create a working group of local
language and literacy experts
who would work with the public
education department to develop
by literacy and oral language
development frameworks that will
ensure that all New Mexicans
students have access to
culturally and linguistically
relevant instruction as well as
the opportunity to develop
literacy skills in two languages
it would identify and develop a
by literacy framework that would
align with the required English
language development and stated
that K. twelve Spanish language
standards and and oral language
development framework that would
support tribal and pueblo
communities rationale and goals
for oral language development
and indigenous language
revitalization and that's really
important because some of our
pueblo languages are not allowed
to be written down so that oral
capacity and study as vital and
as our elders who are most flow
into our.
Alive it's it's important that
we do this and I'm gonna turn it
over to my co sponsor
Representative two Trujillo to
add a few remarks and then we'll
have a very brief remarks from
three of our experts thank you.
I feel like I.
That there's something going.
We can hear yes okay.
But the echo in my head I guess
the.
The bill is a really important
bill and Mr chair and
representative Garrett members
of the committee.
But you know for those of you
who have known me we've worked a
long long time and bilingual
multicultural education.
One of the hardest things
that bilingual and multicultural
education educators have had to
deal with is the lack of of
resources that are relevant to
this area of the southwest
so this bill that only helps
prepare educators
to move forward in that arena to
get the training that there
needed that's needed in this
arena and I just left a KFC of
and we were dealing with higher
ed and the issues of concern
that we have regarding ethnic
studies multi cultural education
and the colleges of education we
need to create that process to
ensure a process that supports.
And it and the.
In large is that pool of of
educators that are necessary to
to have it our classrooms so
that kids receive appropriate
and relevant instructions I want
to I won't to
Belabor the point I think my co
sponsor has done an excellent
job of of framing what we want
we want to better resources
better education and strong
supports and four hundred
thousand dollars from the
general fund to PED to to
support this is a drop in the
bucket because Yazzie Martinez
has strong expectations
education help you.
Representative I got it okay.
So the bottom line is that we
ask for your support thank you
Mr chair.
With that we're gonna ask three
of our state experts to give
brief remarks it'll be doctors
zoom out you brought Johnson for
New Mexico State University Dr
Berlin debate again from central
consolidated schools district
which is located in Shiprock and
members krait then of from the
dual language education of New
Mexico so it will start with a
doctor you bought a Johnson and
just a reminder to all three of
you that we've learned less is
more.
Could you please drive thank you
good morning one of the as Mr
chairman members of the
committee my nemesis on about a
Johnson and I'm an assistant
professor of bilingual diesel
Education New Mexico State
University I'm also the co chair
of the bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council so
thank you for letting me share
with you today my expertise on
the importance of a by literacy
framework students participating
in in bilingual multicultural
education programs have the up
for two need to become by multi
lingual by literate and
multicultural when attending New
Mexico K. through twelve public
schools in our it bilingual
education classrooms by literacy
includes models were
communication occurs in two or
more languages in or around
writing.
Phoenician that I use of by
literacy in my work is that
bilingual learners are learning
to read and reading to learn
around prend oral and multi
modal Tax using to linguistic
and cultural systems to convey
messages for a variety of tax
context also to develop by
literacy a more holistic
understanding is needed and so
for example students literacy
practices of their cultural
specific ways of doing literacy
is very important to include in
the classroom and also making
connections between languages to
support students as a engage
with and comprehend context and
tax and then lastly what I would
like to share with you as co
chair of the bilingual
multicultural Education Advisory
Council we developed a
subcommittee what was
established to identify
advisement in for the public
education department and it was
related to professional
development needs in our state's
bilingual multicultural
education programs this survey
was disseminated to bilingual
educators and our findings that
came from two hundred ninety
eight educator responses that
show the need for more
professional development in
literacy in two languages or by
literacy our subcommittee
develop the by literacy or
language development advisement
that is aligning this work to a
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum which
addresses the need to support
students more holistically in
our bilingual multi cultural
education programs this is why I
asked the committee to support
house bill two nineteen thank
you so much.
And Mr chairman we have doctor
for Linda Begay.
The staff today Mr chair April
in the Begay and Shia honestly
not track the seventy buses team
could take a bus to to dust in
addition other.
Good morning or good afternoon
Mr chair and fellow committee
members my name's Berlin to be
gay and I work with central
consolidated schools I the
bilingual multicultural
education coordinator and my
current job entails a lot of
what this bill is requesting
under the newly developed
department that I work in called
The ICO Department so as
indigenous as indigenous people
we know that the essence of who
we are our cultural identity is
embedded in our language and as
indigenous people we have our
own type of education so and our
language education it's unique
because involves our
methodologies that consists of
our appears to Maliki's our
culture protocols and a
respectful practice but it's
also a unique type of cultural
linguistic responsive pedagogy
in this sense we
have a different category for
that at in our in our way of
thought as indigenous people we
call that and did you go need so
in terms of that we are not in
the same category of two days
Western bilingual multicultural
education because today schools
are dominated by the western
ideologies that target
specifically academic
achievement but with indigenous
way of thought in education it's
really to promote and sustain
life long learning to protect to
we are the culture and take
gritty and the sovereignty of
our indigenous nations and so
with language revitalization
means to restore direction to
harmony with traditional life
long values just to sustain who
we are because we must continue
to remember that devastating
effects of colonization that
destroyed and and did a lot of
who we are and assets and so.
The loss of our language is part
of our indigenous identity in
the twenty first century so to
include indigenous education in
the area of or language
development with COVID bilingual
multicultural education it
contradicts the objectives of
survival and decolonization so I
wanted to find a definition as
an indigenous person as a
citizen of the Navajo Nation
that
the definition of or language
really is what it means to us is
inter active dynamic and
interpretive in terms of the
processes in which the listeners
are engaged in in terms of
active construction and and
Are in the meeting so it's
really important to know and
support not to categorize
indigenous oral language
development with COVID bilingual
multicultural education
methodologies and approaches
because indigenous oral language
development does not fit into
western common concepts and
standards of bilingual
multicultural education we
simply cannot continue current
way of thought of fitting square
pegs into round holes because
indigenous or language
development needs and methods
involved a more holistic view
talk for the current purpose of
survival of our cultural
identity so with oral language
development it's an approach
with the different purpose
involving decolonization and
assets indigenous oral language
development reinforces our
cultural vital values thank you.
And Mr chairman Ruth cry then
we'll finish the panel.
Thank you very much Mr chair it
and members of the committee my
name is Ruth quite then the
students who are enrolled in the
programs that my colleagues have
been talking about are often
referred to or identified as ESL
or English as a second language
students they could be called
emerging bilinguals academic
language learners or culturally
linguistically different diverse
students regardless of their
label the students require
specific and intentional support
to develop effective lifelong or
language and literacy skills and
their teachers I'm at need and
deserve the same specific and
intentional guidance in order to
develop an effective program
researchers studying the
students have found that readers
draw on a particular on the
titular kinds of culturally
acquired knowledge of language
to guide and influence their
ability to producing and
comprehend spoken language and
written language this is the
deeper meaning of a culturally
and linguistically responsive
pedagogy it refers to the
understanding that students
bring with them diverse
experiences and background
knowledge the must be validated
incorporated in every program
every instructional approach and
every methodology teachers and
other educators develop in order
to for them to be successful
House Bill to nineteen the both
legislation brings together this
working group of local bilingual
and bicultural experience
he improvised commendations to
our PED for improving and
sustaining appropriate literacy
by literacy and oral language
development programs for our
students thank you so much.
And Mr Chairman with that are we
stand for questions.
Great.
Thank you representatives and
thank you experts for being here
so we'll go to the audience
propose on our hands I'm gonna
start off with opposition is
there any opposition in the
audience for House Bill to
nineteen.
Once twice okay so we'll go to
support House Bill to nineteen
those and support that wish to
speak given brief comments.
What the hands go up.
For the change the order.
Okay.
All right so you have up to two
minutes please do not be
repetitive but John.
John good after good morning
afternoon good noon.
Good evening Mr chairman John
Thompson registered lobbyist for
central consolidated school
district Mr chairman we stand in
strong support of this
legislation Mr Chairman we
believe that this legislation
will help build a healthy
confidence in our children by
bridging the educational and
social emotional gaps that are
found throughout New Mexico
particularly in the areas that
are district covers Mr Chairman
out I want to keep it brief we
thank the sponsors
Representative garret my long
friend Representative Trujillo
for bringing this bill forward
we ask that you pass it thank
you Mr chairman.
Great thank you John evenings
not even else stand.
Good morning stand good morning
Mr chair members the committee
staff around representing the
school superintendents of New
Mexico as well as the
educational leaders over the
years we've been in strong
support of or language
development and I appreciate the
term redevelopment in this
particular case we recognize New
Mexico especially as a unique
state with very unique needs in
this regard we've been woefully
short changed in the US and we
want to thank the sponsors for
brain house bill two nineteen
for domestic committee to vote
in favor thank you right thank
you.
All right well we make good
morning.
Good morning Mister Turner and
great to see you all again I'm
really more cheese the
legislative lays off of the New
Mexico school board association
Mr chairman one of our top
legislative priorities one of
our top twelve is regarding
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum New
Mexico scored Association
supports legislation that
continues to fund culturally and
linguistically responsive
training that provides
curriculum materials and that
develops methods of reporting
and accountability in this
regard New Mexico score
Association works to ensure our
New Mexico students are provided
these opportunities so that they
can engage in the work necessary
that will help create change in
our schools and then addressing
education disparities for these
reasons of the others that
weren't particularly depart
because speakers and sponsors we
support the creation of this
working group we stand available
to system whatever capacity is
required we certainly appreciate
the appropriation and we ask for
your favorable consideration
thank you for allowing us to
voice our opinions.
Right thank you.
Hello.
Hello thank you Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
heather Bassett and I'm here to
speak for Albuquerque public
schools in support of H. B. two
one nine and I think these two
sponsors for their continual
ability to advocate for students
and stay connected to the people
of schools in the processes that
work well within our districts
we have sixty seven schools with
bilingual programs including
eleven with native American
programs last may we awarded
fourteen hundred twenty
bilingual sales to students on
five hundred seventy nine of
them were graduating seniors the
rest for K. twelve on behalf of
the PS and specifically are
language and cultural equity
department we thank the sponsors
for this conversation I want to
let you know that we offer our
support collaboration on this
topic as it moves forward I'm
and would suggest that we added
mechanism in the bill or the
process as it moves in the PED
for recognizing and honoring the
work underway in APS and other
districts to meet the needs of
language and cultural equity for
our students rather than as the
analysis suggests to address
programs found insufficient so
we suggest the Sanchez added
language that identifies
districts and charter schools as
partners in this collaborative
process rather than what it
sounds like silent subjects of
the study thank you.
It thank you.
Jasmine.
Yes ma'am two minutes good
morning.
Good morning I chair members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep that and I am a member of
the tribal education allowance
the tribal education allowances
in strong support of this bill
we believe that the language is
part of identity right and that
this bill would help further the
efforts in helping native
American students be strong in
their identities and strong in
their of course there indigenous
core values I wanted to know
that this bill and everything
that this bill stands for is
noted in the pathways educate
Indian Education report that was
actually just published in in
December of twenty twenty and I
believe the tribal educational I
it's representatives was it
we're able to send out a copy of
that report to various.
New Mexico state legislator
course and so this this bill
really reinforces the findings
that indigenous languages should
not be subjected to what
mainstream western by literacy
models and that this state has
much to benefit from a at this
task force in the work that they
will find in the input they will
provide to the public education
department with that I'd like to
urge the committee to vote in
favor and pass this bill thank
you.
Thank you yes Stacey.
Now you're with us morning yes
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Steve shyness
and the New Mexico government
relations director on behalf of
our members we support this
legislation because it addresses
a coordinated effort to
effectively implement bilingual
multicultural education programs
that as per national studies
demonstrate are beneficial to
our students regardless of their
own language.
We know that this committee has
approved some very needed
legislation in the field of
bilingual multicultural
education and we thank you for
that.
It also has been a concern that
some bills did not directly
address the question of how.
But we feel this bill addresses
that concern.
It does by establishing a strong
leadership.
Foundation and bringing together
working group of experts in the
field.
The bill is also aligned with
their goals to ensure student
equity in opportunity.
Let us not a scene up we'll
connect a used vehicle parked in
most of the list of the
questions openly at you thank
you that was assistant there's
no magical able to special what
the following request could
assist.
Thanks Steve.
We'll go to Carlotta.
Actually but they say I'm sorry
Steve jumped off and jump the
list but they say you're with us
good morning.
Chairman Romero and members of
the committee my name is
Patricia Jimenez late them and I
am the project manager for
transform education New Mexico
nationally transfer much
occasion would like to thank
representatives Karen Trujillo
for supporting and sponsoring
house bill two nineteen for
decades chairman experts across
the state of New Mexico have
researched and advocated for
literacy by literacy an oral
language development programs
and regarded as net regarded
nationally for their expertise
House Bill to nineteen allows
for the opportunity for the
public education department to
work with school districts and
New Mexico local experts to
design a series of frameworks
and long term implementation
plan aligns with culturally and
linguistically relevant pedagogy
specifically the by literacy in
oral language development or
bold framework aligns with
culturally and linguistically
responsive CLR curriculum by
implementing provisions of state
statutes CLR instruction and
language preservation programs
identified by the learning
policy institute in twenty
twenty report need to be more
holistically supported to
support students we are in
critical times chairman related
to language loss in both
indigenous and Hispanic
communities House Bill to
nineteen provides a framework
and support for the advancement
of high quality community based
language programs the solution
to mitigate the language loss
crisis in our state
transformative cation New Mexico
and it's twenty three
Organization affiliates stand in
support of house bill two
nineteen and respectfully ask
members of this committee to
support the bill again thank you
chairman Romero for the
opportunity.
Right thank you.
All right Carlotta for real this
time.
Carlotta Good afternoon.
Good afternoon chairman remand
and legislators and participants
I wish to support this bill and
what this bill for a couple of
reasons I'm from Santo Domingo
pueblo I am a member of the New
Mexico tribal language
consortium and we are constantly
trying to educate everyone on
the importance and necessity of
tribal languages to the
intellectual property of tribal
communities.
We thank the participants who
spoke earlier and emphasize the
point.
Thank you to Representative
Garrett and Representative
Trujillo for bringing this
forward and we hope that through
this process we can expand the
thinking.
Of long range planning and
concepts and methods that are
more appropriate to the
languages of native Americans
thank you very much.
Thank you.
We'll go to.
Adrian are are in.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee this is agents on
the lot representing the center
for the education study of the
request it.
I just want to share that we
stand firmly in support of age
between nineteen the court which
is to develop a long term plan
for improving sustaining and
supporting literacy by others in
oral language development
frameworks those remarks are key
to supporting at the the
continuance of our linguistic
and cultural legacy here in the
state of New Mexico thank you.
Right thank you agent.
All right and we'll go to.
And Melissa.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Kessler minute
turning at the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty in a member
of the legal team for the ask
the next in the house Martinez
case The New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty strongly
supports this bill New Mexico
students are talented and
capable yet too many have been
built by the insufficient system
that's not embrace our cultural
and linguistic strengths the
working group that house bill
two nineteen establishes will
engage in the important work of
ensuring educational programs
reflect the state's multi
lingual and multi cultural
heritage in communities in order
to best engage Mexican students
into the field of state laws
requiring a multi cultural
framework and that includes I'm
statutes like the bilingual
multicultural Education Act
Indian Education Act and the
Hispanic Education Act we
believe this bill will further
the state's efforts in providing
access to culturally and
linguistically relevant
education to the for student
groups and the Yazzie Martinez
case we thank the sponsors for
introducing this bill and asked
the committee for your support
this legislation thank you.
Great thank you Melissa anybody
also wishes to speak in support.
All right so we will come to
committee representative Lotta.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to to the sponsors will bring
this forward I I appreciate this
bill and I know the importance
of it however Mr chair I do have
a question so we're we're
talking about you this bill is
talking about establishing a
framework in putting together a
group of experts to to establish
a framework.
The only thing Mr chair that I
see that's missing or and bring
this to the attention of the
Sanchez is that we know you know
we can develop the curriculum we
contain training or teachers we
can offer professional
development but there's a very
key portion of this that's
missing that I think should be
included Mr chair.
And that's.
Instructional materials to this
so we go through the framework
we go through the pedagogy or
anything else but yet
instructional materials is
included in this Mr chair and I
would like for that to be
included in the framework as
well so this so this group can
also make recommendations to the
publishers or to PED in regards
as to what we expect to see in
the instructional materials Mr
chair I don't know if if any of
the my colleagues have a
response to that but I do think
that's an important part that
should be included in the bill
thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman.
When I spoke earlier thank you
Representative Lotta I did talk
about making sure that the the
language also included
instruction of the purchase of
and development of instructional
materials materials and I get
just it's implied rather than
written but I'm I'm assuming
that my of co chair and I are of
the belief that that's what the
intent was.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative thank you and I
just you know as we know the
importance of that is is you
know it's it's very important
and I thank you for or for
considering that thank you Mr
chair in thank you and I will
say Representative added that if
you look on page three on
section the and then subsection
three focus one of the focuses
on how and why didn't I
frameworks have been successful
in the identify which culturally
and linguistically responsive
curriculum assessment
instruction materials and
professional development the
best supported the
implementation of by literacy
are by literacy and oral
language development framework
so so it it is peppered
Within the bill
this the your point's well taken
and in it being explicit but but
it is factored into the bill and
in different places and that's
one example word it's thank you
Mr thank you for the
conversation.
Great thank you representative.
There's a wish to speak.
All right so
I I will say on that
Representative Eli thank you for
bringing this forward I think
it's obviously very necessary
piece of legislation as it has
been one what Representative
Sierra had carried it I mean one
thing one thing I would add on.
Is in this is to think about
and we can ask the committee but
it's something relatively small
looking for it now the reporting
requirements so on page four
It has a legislative education
study committee which is awesome
and a lot of us are very much
part of however it has no
mention of legislative finance
and legislative finance does
deal with a lot of these issues
and especially when we're
talking about instructional
materials we have a lot of
cross colonization between
memberships and it's becoming so
some of you all serve on
probation I serve on legislative
finance and legislative
education study committee but I
think in in the spirit of.
Sinking things so that
information is is is
disseminated and especially the
important work that this group
would be doing it seems to
include legislative finance
committee as somebody that this
report would be reported to does
that sound like something
Sanchez that would be amenable.
Mr Chairman yes it does is that
something that we can do on the
spot or do we need to do that
before the next committee.
I think that's something I mean
I'll put it to the committee if
that's something we can mutually
agree to I mean I'd be happy to
just add legislative finance
committee and we can do it on
the amendment would be on page
four line twenty three after
legislative education study
committee.
Comma.
Legislative finance committee
comma.
Would you making that a motion I
would second that.
All right so we have a second on
that Mr chairman their car.
Okay is there any opposition to
that
amendment.
I see none.
Representative could you could
you repeat that again that would
be on page four line twenty
three.
Yes after legislative education
study committee I'm we would
enter.
The legislative finance
committee okay comma.
Provided legislative education
study committee with first dibs
on okay.
Okay.
So was there any objection to
the amendment.
Thank you.
You have been amended bill thank
you for being amenable to that I
think it's just important that
we get as many.
Voices in as many years in on
this conversation as possible
but with that member entertain a
motion.
Mr Chairman so.
so move to we don't have a say
we need a specific question a
motion to do pass house bill two
one nine as amended second Mr
chairman all right thank you
representative meant that second
by Representative Stapleton the
representative
so madam secretary called the
roll on the do pass for House
Bill to nineteen and submit.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative of the level.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Representative del.
Representative Figueroa.
Madam secretary I'm popping
between new meat and two
meetings would you remind me
what we're going to remote in
and house bill two nineteen just
amended bill passed as amended.
Yes ma'am I vote yes.
Representative laying yes.
Representative Ladda.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative for Volcom bye at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative Switzer yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Chairman vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman yes eleven zero all
right so by a vote of eleven to
zero you have to do passing
house bill two nineteen as
amended Representative thank you
experts.
Thank you everybody Mr chair are
you referring this to what's the
next committee.
Representative Lee it's House
Appropriations okay thank you.
All right.
Representative did you want to
add another committee to that is
that what you're asking.
Okay.
Just double checking can never
be too sure these days what's of
miscommunication.
All right so house bill two
thirty two Representative
Stapleton and.
do I need to promote anybody yes
Mister chairman you need to
promote
Stephanie Lee with the American
federation of teachers.
All right if you all what in the
attendees listed she's calling
out your name please raise your
hand.
Okay.
Stephanie is here
Representative.
And then I need to also promote
Christian Rauch response was a
first grade teacher at one point
and then he's now with the
national energy management
institute as an engineer and
director of training.
Okay.
All right so I think we have
everybody in the sector act.
Yes Mister chairman.
All right so if you would please
house bill two thirty two.
Mr chairman and members of the
mid committee good morning and
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it's afternoon sorry
I'm I bring before you House
bill two thirty two public
school or ventilation
improvement act Mr chairman and
members of the committee H. B.
two thirty two a creates a
public school on ventilation
improvement fund and sets
criteria for a grant program
through PED to address the
critical need for better
ventilation and air quality in
all public schools district will
apply through a grant
application process that
requires an assessment from a
mechanical engineer a certified
technician Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
current COVID nineteen pandemic
has focused the need for
improving air quality since the
disease is transmitted through
yeah Bond virus particles as
people gather in buildings and
classrooms educational purposes
PED has issued guidance from
minimum equality requirements
that public school districts
must follow to re open for
instruction districts are
required to upgrade their if
there is.
To thirteen right do you know if
not possible to use the highest
possible more breaking that is
compatible with this system and
additional steps to improve air
circulation in the classroom and
in schools madam chair Mr
chairman and members of the
committee H. we do that it would
strengthen that guidance to
include an assessment conducted
on side of the district H. back
functionality and operated in
accordance with the requirements
of the New Mexico mechanical
called and aligned with the
COVID nineteen recommendations
and assessment report submitted
to PED that identifies the need
but just mentioned repairs
upgrades are replacement.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee the centers for
disease control recommend
schools replace our renovate H.
back systems to increase how do
you.
Yeah.
Right install more restrictive
if they'll just after virus
particle install supplemental it
cleaning devices and technology.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I once made to
districts will apply our local
district without sufficient
renewable resources to improve
the H. back system projects that
are critical for reopening
schools and those projects that
are essential for health and
safety of students and personnel
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee this piece of
legislation would eliminate that
lock down learning that we
currently have for our children
H. B. three H. B. two thirty two
we accept public school
ventilation improvement fund
that will receive federal grants
state appropriation give some
donations and be administered by
PED to provide grants to
district applicants seeking to
improve their ventilation and
air quality systems and Mr
chairman I do have an amendment
this piece of legislation.
And I stand for questions and I
have an amendment Mr chairman
great did did any of your
experts have any opening
comments are they here for
questions.
David Abbey comments and the
they're there to answer the
questions Mr Chairman.
All right both so I don't know
who would like to start but if
you make your comments briefly.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
Stephanie Lee A. F. T. New
Mexico president thank you for
hearing this bill and thank you
to leader for bringing this bill
forward as you know back with
the COVID nineteen started our
you had worked with other unions
and researchers to figure out
what was needed so we can have a
safe re entry of schooling for
our students because we know
that's where at the best
learning can take place and so
this bill goes along with what a
lot of the research across the
country shows and you will also
know that this bill is a line
we've worked closely with the
governor's office and the public
education department to
to ensure that we have saved
ventilation in our schools we
just need to ensure that it's
the expert checking the
ventilation systems and just one
other thing sorry Mr chairman
but as you know senator Heinrich
sponsored the keeping school
safety act which was intended to
provide billions of dollars in
financial support for a wide
variety of school air efforts to
include have to filters and a
lot of them are filters and
everything that New Mexico rate
in the governor has laid out so
this bill is really important
for all the schools in New
Mexico and there is a great way
to increase the ventilation
systems that is needed thank
you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I appreciate the
opportunity come to with this as
a former first grade teacher
this bill is near and dear to my
heart and I come to you the
unique perspective and that not
only in my former first grade
teacher but most of my career
was spent on rooftops of
verifying that Bonelli she
systems operated as designed.
House bill two thirty two would
establish a public school
ventilation improvement program.
It's important to realize that
the benefits of this program
will be long lasting and will
extend beyond COVID nineteen by
ensuring a healthy environment
for our students staff the
public.
And by saying that what I mean
is that the heating ventilation
and air conditioning system.
Can assist in the mitigation and
reduction of airborne trance
oxygen transmission.
That being said as well though
proper ventilation that has been
well documented by many studies
show that increase the proper
ventilation will result in
increased cognitive retention.
Productivity and reduced
absenteeism however the benefits
that I mentioned here a proper
ventilation will only be
realized if the systems are
operating as designed.
This was well highlighted in the
two thousand nineteen report by
UC Davis supports Berkeley
national labs they looked at
unit Senate highly efficient
units that have been replaced
within the last three years in
California out of those units
when they tested I'm only
fifteen percent of those units
had a median ventilation rates
of fifteen CFM that's the
minimum adequate ventilation in
only fifteen percent of the
classrooms that it thank you for
the opportunity and I look
forward to being a resource for
this committee.
Great thank you all so that
concludes a presentation on the
bill as is so before we go to
any of the attendee is
Representative Stapleton if you
can
we have an amendment so can have
a motion to discuss the
amendment for discussion second
thank you thank you
Representative Figueroa thank
you Representative Trujillo
Representative say then if you
could read the two oh two number
for our members and then they'll
give us time to pull it up.
This.
Point two one nine seven zero
three point.
All right so it's the first one
on our shared drive.
Okay we all have go ahead and
explain it please Representative
you chairman would you like me
to go through each line a would
you like me to give an a a
synopsis of what and then it
does can you can you give us a
actually a good all encompassing
synopsis of what the amendment.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the amendment
clarifies language in several
sections to strangle the
qualifications and certification
of technicians by requiring that
the certification of that
isolation is approved by the
construction industry commission
so Mr chairman for example
throughout that page two line
seven thanks to line five page
two line eight page two line
eleven and pay six line eleven
it all talks about
that the technicians must be
required by the certification
organization which is the cost
construction industry commission
Mr Chairman the amendment for
the insurance that specific work
such as testing adjusting and
balancing work in the assessment
of the ventilation system and
this is on page six line eleven.
That at.
In a ventilation on balance and
what.
Well formed in the assessment of
the ventilation system be
performed by a qualified person
all I'm a comical engineer and
Mr chairman the bill also now
has an emergency clause it
states that
I'm section six.
It is necessary for the public
peace health and safety that is
active effect immediately.
Mr chairman I now stand for
questions on the proposed
amendment.
Thank you representative are
there questions on the
amendment.
Like emergency clauses are
popular today Mister.
Representative out.
Mr Chairman what was their
amendment received by the
committee within twenty four
hours.
Yeah it had been sent out a text
posted on our share file that
you're only question.
No thank you Mr chairman I mean
do you discussion on the
amendment yes.
Mr Gramm okay all right thank
you Mr chairman and did this
strike I'm sorry I don't have in
front of me did this strike that
seventy percent that was it I
have read early earlier that in
the earlier version that you had
to have seventy percent of
workers at the only use a
contractor a seven cent
apprenticeship graduates is that
still there is this replacing
that language Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr Chairman representative
basically what this says is that
on page two line I with strike
industry recognized and insert
twelve on on page two nine
seven.
We're gonna say that is that
credit to of the certification
organization is approved by the
construction industry commission
on page two and after certified
it strike there remained on the
line yes and it's in tidy and
start by an accredited
organization that's correct I'm
Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative I'm
sorry I don't have a part of me
so does it still maintained a
language that it has to be
seventy percent of the
contractor has to employee.
Seventy percent of employees
from an apprenticeship program.
I have to find we saw that.
And.
What in the original one it was
on page three definition G..
I'm sorry that I don't have the
amendment in front of me I'm.
Juggling two committees and.
Skilled and trained construction
workforce means a workforce in
which at least seventy percent
of the work of the graduates.
I'm a registered apprenticeship
program in New Mexico for the
applicables construction
occupations.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative did any of that
change in the amendment.
It's.
I'm trying constructs built with
it
thank you Mr okay thank you Mr
chairman it's still in the it's
still in there so this is
it it would does the ID certify.
The C. ID certified heating air
conditioning do they do indoor
air quality technicians.
Mr Chairman that is what the
amendment does it says that
provided that the twelve of the
certification organization is
the construction industry
commission that's correct.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Even this agency your this this
committee does not oversee air
quality control we're going to
give them the authority to
decide who are the contractors
to get approved that is that
what I'm understanding.
Mr chairman this amendment came
from the regulation and
licensure department for the
state of New Mexico.
Requested this amendment be
placed in this bill.
In regards to construction the
construction industry
commission.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative but it's not my
understanding that the ID they
do not have or certify indoor
air quality technicians so I I
mean C. ID is directing you to
have a commission that doesn't
have an apprenticeship at I'm
not understanding.
COD doesn't do that C. IDA only
recognize the regulations C. ID
is the predator of the
certification.
That they thirty five.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative does this brought
in the internet for contractors
to bid or does it Nero the
amendment narrow the opportunity
of who's eligible to bid and
provide services.
The amendment Mr chairman
Representative Dow.
Specifically say.
That it has to be twelve.
And it has to be a pro with
their credit that credit to
whoever it is of the
cert organization so it could be
any organization but they have
to be approved by the
construction industry the
mission.
Thank you Mr one Mr Chairman
representative that's the one
that gives out the license.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative I don't
understand it to be that way I
think the construction industry
department gives out license but
the construction industry
commission wants to be in charge
of approving who gets to get to
the contract that's very
different so I'm wondering if
like this CNN program have a
great trades program are there
graduates they're not
apprentices in this program and
if a contractor uses CNM
graduates will they be eligible
with your amendments of to to
participate.
They have to go to this this
commission and ask permission to
bid what is that how we
typically do budget for school
districts.
Mr chairman and representative I
am not sure I'm about C. N. M.
all how the state and I am not
sure if Mr Ross has M. and Sir
all Stephanie has an answer.
Mr Chairman Vince I don't know I
I think there's someone maybe
Vince is and that is you know
it's been last night.
Mr Chairman.
Miss you he'll.
Representative.
Other auto them.
Adult.
I think you might be.
Do we have somebody in the
attendees second help clarify
this issue.
Isaiah I said say as name.
Well without promoting any body
to.
Answer something they may not be
able to.
All right we see a spare.
Hello are you there with us.
Need help clarify this for us
yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee
C. idea proves all contractors
in the state of New Mexico
they're not going to be twelve
contractors with certificates
there's already programs in
place that have accreditations
for testing adjusting and
balancing.
C. ID is the does the oversight
of any construction and any
licensure of any contractors.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and thank you I
think after that please stay on
because I'm wondering if are
there people that C. ID
certifies or license that are
qualified to do this work and
currently do the work throughout
the state.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and I'd say I is
this requiring them to go
through the C. I. C. commission
and going through some sort of
accrediting process is that
going to expand the
opportunities for contractors
and get this funded timely way
or would it make it more
restrictive.
Representative Dow Mr Chairman
Representative Dow I I think
that is going to lie in the
rulemaking process on who is
going to be allowed to to
perform the assessment as far as
having certain accreditations
for to perform testing adjusting
and balancing
the language is already in state
law that regulation by is
department does for new
construction
if that answers your question.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Stapleton so this amendment is
going to require of rulemaking
process to be able to implement
this program to have an
emergency clause.
Mr Chairman Representative Dow
normally.
Normally Mr Chairman
representative data just like
education department and other
agencies they have
individualized will process in
that takes place in we got and
so regulation and licensure is
in charge of the construction
industry and they set up their
own rules and regulations.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative but aren't you
creating another layer of
bureaucracy it feels to me like
the amendments creating another
layer and more rulemaking than
what C. ID would normally do
they already have a licensure
process they already have a
certification process the
already have people throughout
the state that can implement the
work but they may not credit and
therefore it would be another
step and somehow CIC because the
approving in your amendment
rather than C. ID.
Mr Chairman Representative Dow I
didn't ask for this amendment
the department regulation of
licenses that I had to have a.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative I think could you
explain why this is necessary
amendment.
Yeah because they they don't
want out of state contractors
coming in and flooding the
market did don't follow state
guidelines so every contractor
that comes in New Mexico has to
follow C. I. D. law of to come
in the state to be licensed to
perform the work this isn't
creating another layer of
bureaucracy the brought the
layer of rocks is already in
place this is just simply
stating that those contractors
that are going to be performing
this work under this new new act
we'll have to go to the ID I
need your help.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Stapleton I I understand that
they need to go through CID I'm
wondering what the across why
the accreditation is necessary
and why the CIC approval is
necessary.
Why wouldn't we just say
resident contractors.
Mr Chairman had your.
Have the superintendent of
regulation and licensure on the
phone.
And so
You I'm Representative Dow
your question is.
Thank you thank you can you hear
me.
Yes yes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Stapleton for
helping me understand this if
I'm understanding correctly we
have read that New Mexico
resident contractors throughout
the state who are already
regulated by the ID under your
agency that are licensed and
certified to perform this work
my question is we're hearing an
amendment that requires them to
become accredited and in
addition to that to get their
approval to complete this work
your act through the CIC not C.
ID the CIC.
Through the the construction
industry commission
Representative Stapleton is
explaining to us that this is a
request of your agency that you
requested this amendment and I'm
trying to understand why I they
educate the explanation that it
is so that out of the folks
don't flood the market but I'm
just wondering why we couldn't
just say New Mexico resident or
Mexico businesses.
Thank.
Representative Stapleton we like
I am hearing I'm having trouble
being able to.
Adoptable.
Just a second just a second what
did you say I'm Mr Chairman what
we're having a very hard time
hearing
The the the representative from
the phone would they be able to
enter the attendees list into
our meeting and then we complies
that.
And yet and then you get on to
the.
The
Yes I'm.
And Representative them to force
to send the email to.
Hello Charles what is it really
is if.
This story.
I train and to adopt rules.
Okay.
Okay.
Representative Dow she said that
it's the commission that have
the authority to do the training
and adopt the rules.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton so
people are texting me now
because I'm I'm trying to
understand so I now I'm getting
texts from people in the
industry there saying that the
EPA certifies and some group I
adding this means A. S. H. R. E.
and ACCA and the indoor air
quality association are are the.
Are the people who oversee and
and and help with this industry
so it seems that there's already
an infrastructure and I just
want to understand is a training
bill or is a bill to get work
done in schools so that we can
get them re open it's urgent
it's immediate we need emergency
clause as the training program
or is this an appropriation for
schools to do he interact with
them.
Mr Chairman representative this
bill is to provide.
Funds.
Is to provide funds all that
assessment being done by PED but
the H. back system to be re
assess test and adjust public
school expects system repair
upgrade and replace existing H.
back system and install
standalone systems if needed.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative I have three
counties in multiple school
districts in each of my school
districts have already done
assessments on their systems and
some of them even ask for
capital so I I want the bill to
I want to dollars to get to the
district so I'm trying to do the
assessment that they did and the
valuations and cost budget
estimates that they gave me
their invalid because they
weren't done in some proper
processor do we already have a
process in place.
Are currently allowed school
districts not currently allowed
to fix their to assess and
replace and repair their
distinct systems.
Representative now what they
have done is not disregarded.
Some of the F. expert
Representative we also have some
of the experts to try to weigh
in and try to give authority to
the US Stephanie Chris and then
I was in college and director
gradual to try to help clarify
things as well.
Stephanie thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee so
what's currently being done
right now just so everyone
knows.
that the governor's office and
the public education department.
What out guidelines that school
districts what they had to do
starting in August okay school
districts had to assess all of
their systems.
And had to say what what
filtration system and everything
that they could get they had to
assess that in turn that
information into the public
education department because
many school districts didn't
have the expertise to properly
assess the systems the
governor's office and the public
education department came to
Saving everyone and said let's
partner up with the fire
marshals in the communities
because they're already there so
there was no cost to the school
districts let's partner up and
have them assess the systems.
And then from there.
The public education department
created this grant system so
that way then they can support
the school districts that have
said look our systems will not
get to the proper standard batch
needed and so we need more funds
from you say in order for us to
upgrade it because there have
been many years of
well I'm just going to say
because you all know I say
what's the reality many years of
nine investment in our
ventilation systems in New
Mexico so it was going to cost
school districts a lot of money
to do what was right to get us
through COVID nineteen and for
the future moving forward.
What we have found is that again
we're going to be really Frank
the fire marshals are not the
experts and so what's happening
is that they're approving
systems in place for safe
reentry for our students and
it's not fully
they just don't have the
expertise so we're having to go
back to the public education
department after they've already
certified schools for being safe
for re entry so we'll have to go
back to them and say it's still
not a safe learning or teaching
environment so what this bill
will do it will make it that
that experts in the field are
the ones who are assessing the
systems and the money for this
our school districts have
received the money if they did
have a cost related to it with
this past December in the
federal dollars that senator
Heinrich was able to get
included so there was federal
money sent directly to school
districts but the governor's
office impact stepped up inside
if you don't have that money
here's another grant
opportunities so the point of
this legislation is to require
that we have that experts
assessing the systems for our
school districts moving forward
so we actually have the state
ventilation that is needed for
our students to safely re enter
our where schools.
I thank you so if we can stay on
the amendment because there's
some clarity that's needed in
terms of may we're going this
route so
thank thank you Mr chairman for
that I understand the intent of
the bill I am wondering why the
amendments Mr Chairman
representative seems to be
putting up hurdles it's an
urgent need we get the money out
we want our schools re opened
and the new certification is not
in the.
Opening guidelines for the
schools the certifications are
available there are
certifications that are valid
there are school districts that
brought in experts not just a
local fire marshal and it seems
redundant and it seems like it's
putting up barriers.
Mr Chairman representative now
it's not new certification all
these last many of all these
businesses around the state Mr
Chairman representative doubt
how many have certification.
Right we could em in this is
like every I have it our Mr
Chairman all over we said we go
to Chris and then we'd go to
director gradual so if we could
stick to that because we're just
on the amendment.
Cimpress please briefly if you
could provide clarity but we
don't need a recap.
Yes Mr Chairman Representative
Dow and members of the community
our it is very important when
you're doing this work that we
understand that this is not
simply ordering and installing
new equipment and installing.
If we want to guarantee adequate
ventilation plaster we need to
make sure that we have a skilled
trained and certified workforce
performing this work.
This is key and this has been
shown over and over if you look
at it again at the report of UC
Davis that I mentioned in two
thousand nineteen.
They show that proper
installation operation and
maintenance of HVAC or all
necessary in order to provide
adequate ventilation in
classrooms.
To that replacing aging
equipment with new equipment
does not guarantee adequate
ventilation in classrooms and
this is because if you do not
have a skilled and trained
worker and you make sure that
that person is highly qualified
and vetted within the region to
perform network then you will
truly see appear Oct receive
money being wasted and this is
been shown in other states with
similar types of programs
however if you have the right
technician in there and you're
using language like this where
you're getting somebody what
we're trying to ship in the
community not only are you
ensuring that they are able to
do that work now but you're now
building what is needed to do
that work into the future
because this importance for
ventilation it's not just stop
right now this is something that
we're going to continue needed
to do in this region on going
thank you.
And then director Atul.
At some clarity to this we can.
Mr Chairman there seems to be
some confusion about is there an
additional accreditation process
and if you look at the the
language of the amendment it is
making sure the construction
industry commission is simply
approving the accrediting body
the accrediting body of the
certified technician so it.
I think I think the question is
maybe is C. ID already doing
that and making sure you know to
to head all right we're just
maybe making sure that the
technicians are in fact
accredited by a high quality
accrediting body not.
I think is that is the basis of
the amendment of the of the
first set of that the first
amendment number two.
Thank you Mr chairman correct
Representative is Mr chairman.
Thank you chairman thank you
Stapleton so I go back to my
original question.
Is.
Is rules and regulations the C.
ID currently licensing and
certifying people who can
currently do this work and are
deemed qualified by the state in
Mexico who are not twelve and is
adding this amendment which
requires the accreditation
making it more accessible to New
Mexico providers who are ready
to do the work and our schools
safe and students back to school
or is it making it more
prohibitive does it really take
more time or less time to
implement.
Already.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
it is put in place what's that
What's already required.
It's need to what you hear.
Thank you Mr chairman and say if
if you already have to be
accredited through CIC in order
to perform he more work air
quality work why is imminent
needed.
That that the.
We will recognize that thank you
with the with the.
Mr Chairman.
Read the original bill did not
identify C. ID.
Locally as the entity that does
the predication and so that's
why that they requested that I
put that in.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton thank
you for being patient with me
I appreciate everybody trying to
help.
Accreditation is required.
Right now under law to do
improvements on a heating air
and air quality out of school
district is accreditation
required right now.
Or is it.
Someone who's licensed and
approved and certified and has
the proper bonding and gets a
bit.
Industry.
Accreditation don't always life
everyone thank you.
The trainee.
Accredited by the national
agency.
credit Dacian.
Mr Chairman the Representative
Dow the construction industry.
The mission does the
accreditation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative I I I think I
understand that part.
In the state of New Mexico.
Aside from this bill.
Do you have to be accredited to
do this work in New Mexico right
now.
Today.
Correct.
Yes yes that's correct Mr
Chairman representative now.
Just recognized that and this
amendment just recognizes that.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you representative table
ten.
Thank you Representative out so
it seems like we have some
clarity on the issue were just
aligning things with this
amendment with how things are
done now so do we have further
discussion on the amendment.
This is a fund amendment all
right who would have been.
I have a motion on the
amendment.
The table the amendment.
The table the amendment.
If you need a second Mister
chairman of
okay.
All right so we have the tabling
of the amendment so
we will go to.
Madam secretary if you would
call the roll on tabling the
amendment.
Your muted Linda I now I just
realized it thank you.
to table the amendment
Representative Baldonado.
Yeah.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Dowell.
Yes.
Representative Figueroa.
The table.
Representative laying.
Yes the table.
Representative Lara.
Notre table.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente.
Representative Madrid.
Representative for above
Colorado now to table.
Representative Stapleton.
No.
Representative Sir.
Yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Absolutely not.
Vice chair Garrett no.
Chairman.
The table.
L. seven two five.
All right so the table motion
has failed.
Do I have another motion for the
amendment.
Motion to pass Mr chairman
second so we have a motion to
adopt the amendment
Representative Stapleton a
second by Representative
Trujillo madam secretary called
the roll on a adoption of the
amendment.
Representative.
Maldonado.
No.
To adopt.
No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative doll.
At absolutely no.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes you do it okay
Representative Gleim.
Just no.
With that yes and I know.
No.
Representative Lente.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative for Volcom bye at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative sensor now.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
I.
All right so we have an amended
bill.
So we will go to the at ten dean
is so those in opposition to
house bill two thirty two as
amended opposition please raise
your hand.
This is the opposing side.
All right.
Welcome you have a two minutes
just.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee first
of all I would like to say that
I am certified by the EPA K.
twelve indoor air quality
all as well as I have given
presentations in regards to
indoor air quality to our
lieutenant governor and other
legislators this bill in essence
is exactly what I wanted but
there are some flaws on page
three line three through six
there isn't definition of
skilled labor force this is
fundamentally flawed for a few
reasons one it strongly
restricts how many contractors
are going to be able to perform
this work there are certified H.
back technicians that the
highest quality standard is
actually considered to be
certified by Nate that's the
north American technical
excellence certification that is
not mentioned here
as well as there are very good
technicians to get their
associate's degrees from CNM and
they are not promoted here we're
just looking at what
program a contractor may have or
may do or may use I
represent many contractors
across this state who are
minority owned businesses and
this language will exclude all
of them from being able to
provide this work.
This work needs to be done
quickly Representative Stapleton
and I agree with you this has to
be done we need this indoor air
quality but when we restrict the
contractors that are going to be
able to do it to two or three
five Max we are not going to hit
all of our school districts in a
timely manner as well as we are
going to really really create
hurdles for minority owned
resident New Mexico businesses I
will support this legislation
with the amendment in that
definition and I think you for
your time Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Matthews.
Representative small.
Representative Carl are you with
us you have up to two minutes
I'm with you can you hear me.
Yes we can play thank you thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Carla
Kugler I am the president CEO of
associated builders and
contractors we stand in
opposition of house bill two
thirty two not because the
legislation is necessary it is
to protect our children and
teachers but this bill requires
our public schools to pick only
a contractor that has at least
seventy percent of its workforce
graduates of a New Mexico
registered apprenticeship
program this one specific
mandate limits the pool of
contractors to a very specific
few the contractor may be
qualified certified by industry
recognize organization
manufactures trained Bill number
hit that threshold of seventy
percent of their workforce being
a graduate of an apprenticeship
program we support a project we
have one right I understand the
necessity of skill training
workforce but this is not
advocating a contractor to
participate in partnership more
mandating it's past tense it
eliminates local workers and
businesses it invites bid
rigging and price fixing and the
familiarity a company can have a
additional school district
previously Bender approved they
would be out simply disqualified
by this one onerous mandate I'm
it's wrong to subject the
taxpayers of this state to a
very limited pool of contractors
and we ask that the sponsor
please remove that specific
session zoom in the legislation
and open this to fair and open
competition for all New Mexicans
qualified certified trained I'm
we'd be happy to support at that
but we can not supported as
written I appreciate your time.
Thank thank you so much.
Is there any more opposition.
Okay so we'll we'll turn to
support those in support of
house bill two thirty two that
wish to speak please raise your
hand.
Right so we have quite a few if
you would please keep it brief.
Ashley.
never mind.
I.
Morton.
Okay I share your with us you
have your hand up do you wish to
speak in support you have up to
two minutes please be very.
Thank you good afternoon
chairman Mr chair and members of
the committee my name is Is is
empty I'm with the sheet metal
workers local union forty nine
first and foremost is safety we
have all been touched in some
way by COVID nineteen it is very
likely that someone we know has
been impacted by this deadly
virus as we emerge from the pack
this pandemic is critical we
return to buildings that are
safe as possible this is where
indoor air quality is key the
importance of ventilation in the
fight against COVID or any other
pathogens is paramount for the
safe return to normalcy second
is the responsibility we must
make sure students and educators
have a safe environment to learn
and work moving forward for this
to happen the skilled workforce
is required to provide an
assessment for school site
heating ventilation and air
conditioning systems third is
accountability we need to make
sure that certified technicians
are giving accurate assessments
of the systems and let me ask
you this would you rather have a
train skilled certified
technician conducted this
assessment or John Doe the
handyman from the neighborhood I
think we all have the same
answer indoor air quality has
been a major focus of the sheet
metal workers local forty nine
for many decades with that we
thank the sponsors for her work
stand in support of this bill
and ask you all do the same.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Are actually.
We.
Actually here with us.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
actually along with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we all know that our
public schools have not been
adequately funded in the past
which is something you all know
that we had a FTE advocate for
continuously.
The COVID nineteen pandemic has
made many issues come into focus
for our communities one of which
is the quality of air within
public school ventilation
systems.
We know that having high quality
systems and therefore claim
circulating air is key for a
safe and successful learning
environment for students essays
and successful working
environment for educators to
make sure this happens it is
critical that highly skilled
trained and licensed
professionals do inspection and
provide assessment and
improvements to the systems.
With that being said we think
the sponsor for being a champion
of this measure in keeping it at
the forefront of our minds we
respectfully ask you all to
support students and educators
and by extension families and
communities by supporting house
bill two thirty two thank you.
Right thank you.
All right so go to John.
John placed in two minutes.
I'm just asking for John
Hamilton there was a John
earlier and I jumped the gun a
little bit so I don't know if
you sorry about that John
Hamilton yes okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
for being allowed to speak on
this
I said on the ashtray technical
committee seven point seven and
that is their testing adjusting
and balancing
our technical committee.
The couple things I think that
we're getting mixed up here is.
We're using the term I AQ versus
ventilation and let's be clear
this is a ventilation.
When we deal with ventilation it
usually takes care of there's
been studies done to show it
takes care of up to eighty
percent of indoor air quality so
this bill is on ventilation and
filtration.
This isn't the bill where
someone's going to be going in
there to take VOC readings and
during chemical ratings and a.
Building and what usually
happens is that when I a Q.
person goes into.
school or in the building they
have to hire a ventilation
expert.
To get that is eight show me let
me know if the ventilation
systems working so this gets
right to the core of it the
ventilation and filtration
that's what this bill is so when
we start process the word indoor
air quality in the here this
starts convoluted that and this
is in the indoor air quality
bill this is a ventilation Bill.
The second thing that I like to
Address with the committee is.
In for Monday was canceled I
know.
Is
Someone brought up Nate
certification covers this.
I know rex the guy who started.
Nate and I think it's very
dishonorable to come in and tell
this committee that Nate the
north American technical
excellence program has a
certification in testing and
balancing they do not they tried
to do it they didn't have the
expertise they don't have the
pool of people to put that badge
on the members that go and do
this work they have one
certification that people could.
misconstrue.
To this committee and it's
called air distribution however
John that was two minutes.
You.
Up to two minutes please.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee CCI you sending
the Mexico government relations
director.
On behalf of our members we
stand in support of this
legislation the bill aligns with
our legislative goals in that
during this pandemic we believe
that Bentleigh sessions systems
should be checked and upgraded
to safeguard the health of
students and educators.
And to make sure we can safely
checking up right ventilation
systems we need certified
professions to do that just like
we need highly qualified
teachers and other educators in
the classroom to teach our kids.
And we want to make sure that
we're doing this without rushing
to re open schools.
For in person learning with sub
standard assessments
jeopardizing the health of not
only students and educators but
also families and communities by
contributing to the spread of
the state.
Well eighty eight members
indicators have done an
excellent job at continuing to
do to cater to operating
virtually so even though we
don't reopen for in person
learning because we're
considering safety as our high
priority learning containing
school we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill fourth and we
ask that you vote in favor thank
you.
Thank you say.
All right heather.
Thank you good afternoon members
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Bassett and I'm here from
Albuquerque public schools to
stand in support of H. B. two
thirty two and to think the
sponsor continually bringing
timely and critically relevant
issues for schools this
committee and the legislature I
can only speak to the need of
our schools for improved air
quality our school each fax
systems have long detention
upgrades and funding
like many things of the pandemic
have only expose some of the
existing cracks and problems and
made it more clear and urgent
APS does agree with the analysis
analysis and that yes you'll see
or PS fate should manage
alongside or instead of PED for
the grant program and we stand
in support of this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
So go to this.
Two minutes.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman my name is.
Good good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Vince
Alvarado business manager of
smart local forty nine I am in
support of H. B. two thirty who
this bill is for the protection
of our students attending
schools our educators and all
the staff that work in the
schools during the pandemic and
the future of our school the
safety of our schools as well I
thank the sponsors for their
hard work in this measure Mr
Chairman the member chairman a
member of the committee I urge
you for a do pass on bill House
Bill thirty two thank you for
your call.
Great thank you really make.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
little more teas provided lays
off the New Mexico school board
association Mr chairman members
of the committee we clearly need
programs at the state level that
will sister school districts and
fill in the gaps in COVID relief
response one of the New Mexico
school board association's top
priority deals with student and
staff safety we support
legislation that provides
directed to districts with the
flexibility necessary that will
help the districts meet the
unpredictable and ever changing
pandemic made including PVD
technology and HVAC systems for
students and just must be a
supports the creation of a
capital improvement program for
public school ventilation
systems to address the school
district needs in providing
safety and healthy school
environments we think major
league leader stable to time for
this bill and we asked the
committee's favorable
consideration thank you for
allowing us to voice opposition.
Right thank you.
Rhonda.
Two minutes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Rhonda
Gilliland Lopez I am the
executive director for the
mechanical and sheet metal
contractors association of New
Mexico we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and we ask for your
support in house bill two eighty
two as this is an important
measure for our teachers and
students to be able to return to
the class safely and we
appreciate your support thank
you.
Okay thank you.
John.
I don't
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor Representative Jeanne I
hear to Representative are
thirty eight different labor
organizations intent that's tens
of thousands of workers across
the state we stand in strong
support of this measure I really
this is about fifty of our
children and our educators in
the schools and our most of us
most of our workers certainly
our family people as well and
and have have children in the
schools but for all the reasons
stated previously are we very
much support this measure and
thank the sponsor for bringing
this up thank you.
I thank you.
Stand.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee stand around for
the state superintendent we're
general support of house bill
two eighty two we appreciate the
sponsor in the efforts to bring
additional funding we hope to co
mingle or to relieve the COVID
relief funding also the school
districts are using for the
purpose of air quality we're a
little we're we're interested in
and were a little puzzled about
why PS if I was not named as
part of a collaborative
partnership with the public
education department says
they're usually the ones that
all of our safety plans and all
over construction plans have to
be approved by as we might
suggest that we would look at
that as this bill moves for we
certainly don't want to slow it
up in Mr chairman we stand and
support at this time thank you.
Thank you anybody else wish to
speak in support.
All right so we'll come to
committee here Representative
Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair.
So Mr chair I I think of this
when I.
Saw the the title of the act and
started reading introduction of
us.
I was excited about this bill
We all know this the the the
issues with COVID.
And the respiratory aspects of
that and so this this does seem
to be providing some funding to
help relieve that for local
students school districts
especially now as schools across
our state are headed back
towards.
Either hybrid or in person
learning.
but then I got to.
Page six.
And.
The way I understand.
We find the exact paragraph.
Program H..
As in Hobbs is that in order for
a school district to be able to
receive a grant pursuant to this
section that school district has
to.
I have
hired a company that has the
skilled and trained workforce
and and I I recognize Mr chair
that was the center of of quite
a bit of dialogue on what that
phrase means and what kind what
type of company this applies to.
But even if they take just a
small amount of dollars Mr chair
it seems that they have to
employ those skilled and trained
workforces as that phrase is
defined is that correct.
Representative community.
Thank you Mr chairman this kids
and trained workforce is is what
in in the next definition of a
skilled and trained.
Junction workforce under the
supervision of a certified
technician and that would
certified technician is.
The request of the construction
industry.
That correct.
Thank you Mr chair I don't doubt
that the request of I'm certain
construction industry I guess
what I'm wondering.
If if the point of.
Including that definition G. on
page three.
Of a skilled and trained
construction workforce of if the
point of that is to make sure
that that these the specialized
H. fax systems are getting
properly installed in their
being properly maintained.
Then why the seventy percent why
don't we make a hundred percent
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative
may I have my I'm witness
Graeser rosh respond please.
Just please big Mr chairman and
and Representative lane
What the focus is on the seventy
percent is that to have a
industry recognized.
Individuals that comes out
a training program and that's
what that says.
Thank you Mr understand it says
I I just want to know one why
did why would you seventy
percent why not why not a
hundred one hundred ninety five
one hundred sixty if I can get
some help in understanding that
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Stapleton and
Representative line in the
committee the when you look at
the skilled trained workforce
the key part there is that what
you're doing is making sure as
as was acknowledged by Mr land
that the technicians that are
doing this are highly skilled
and trained now the question as
to why the seventy percent what
you're ensuring there is that
you have a good amount of your
workers and a high percentage of
them that are heavily invested
in the community and heavily
invested in the training
programs that have been
Representative and knowledge by
the state are moving forwards to
use those skills in the
ventilation systems I think you
would have date the part of the
issue here with the seventy
percent is that you are making
sure that you have allowances
and recognizing that yes not
everyone and every company has
gone through this program
completely but you are making
sure that the work force that's
involved for the most part has
been completely properly trained
by a recognized organization.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
is a rush through shadowing
mistranslation.
Mr Chairman representative line
its route are you see.
Yeah thank you thank you Mr.
Mr chair at you know it's
interesting that we talk about
making sure that these companies
are invested in the community in
that building.
Or at one of the ancillary
purposes because it I guess one
of my biggest concerns I think
this actually does the opposite
of that and and here's why I
would say that.
Mr chair my concern is we have
these rural school districts who
have
local contracting companies who
would otherwise be qualified to
do the H. back work but because
we've chosen this arbitrary
number of seventy and I haven't
heard a good reason as to why
that number seven zero was
chosen.
That these rural school
districts are now going to have
to pick from a handful of
companies who are right who
aren't even located in their
school district we're gonna have
to pull for more metropolitan
areas and so I I fear actually
for the investment in the
community if we want to use that
phrase because I think this is
doing exactly the opposite is
true that is it's requiring the
school districts the to take
those dollars and then place
them in the hands of companies
that are located in their
districts even though they may
otherwise be qualified.
And so I just you know maybe
maybe there is a reason for the
seventy but I think this is at
the end of the day and role
school districts more than it's
going to help them.
And you know I I guess I'll
just.
Leave besides the cost is always
this statement is that you know
I feel like.
This is such a great deal and if
we could just amend or do
something other than defining
skilled and trained construction
workforce if we can get around
the seventy percent being
graduates of restaurant
operations program I think you
probably have full support.
But we seem to be picking
winners and we seem to be
picking losers based upon
arbitrary number I don't think
that's the proper role of
government and so with those
comments thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Baldonado is.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Stapleton for this bill and I'm.
I'm gonna.
Some of the broken record
because I'm gonna restate a
little bit of what
Representative Lane just just
went through
yeah I looking at this bill I
meeting the couple months ago
with the.
The gentleman that runs the
maintenance division for billing
public schools and at that time
he mentioned of the eighty or
ninety.
HVAC units or whatever it was
that they maintain for their
school district that they have
won one unit they can handle the
the high end filters that we
were calling for except for and
it was you know what a big deal
that it was gonna be several
thousands of tens of thousands
maybe millions of dollars to
retrofit you know just the one
school district.
but I get it that this is this
is
you know a critical piece of
getting schools open you know I
ran a bill that that died in the
health committee the other day
you guys didn't get to see it
unfortunately because some it
was assigned to health first was
an educational first and
Representative Sweetser
Representative metrical Sanchez
on the bill on but it's
unfortunate that you know it
occurs to me that this bill
should have had that same
pathway because you know we're
talking about health first but
but I guess going through the
comments and listening to the
public testimony and and then
the the expert witness that's on
with those Mr route
you might have partnering with
with some of the things have
been said it was just one
comment just a few minutes ago
that said that these folks to be
invested in our local
communities.
Well you know.
Mr was school district you're
not gonna have enough you know
highly qualified seventy percent
you know partnership workers on
a on a crew to be able to get
this this kind of work done and
so to the points being made by
some of the public commenters is
that you're gonna hamstring this
whole set up work for this in
the slow drawn out process Mr
miss John Baker who spoke on the
bill and public testimony she's
from our most recent one to
county democratic chairwoman but
runs an HVAC Bill of the
business for with her husband
and is it made mention that that
they could support this bill to
if that definition in on page
three of the lines.
Six items need is what it was
yeah hi line six of course the
skilled and trained construction
workforce
she also makes the point that C.
N. M. us into the Mexico
community college here in the
heart of Albuquerque has a
phenomenal program to train
these young men and women to to
be professionals in their
business and I get it that I'm
not a professional needs B.C
business and I understand that
there are there are guidelines
for clean air and ventilation
and and you have to have the
right Schemel those comments and
all those sorts of things and
it's it's not it's not
just a simple calculation paper
but it's also not rocket science
it's also not impossible to
teach people how to do this for
I mean it's it's good technical
work it's it's it takes a good
hat but this bill unfortunately
that piece
makes out to be that you can
only hire a handful of people
throughout the state of our
handful businesses and maybe
this is been asked already but I
will ask a specific question
to that point Representative
Stapleton Mr chairman how many
companies exist in New Mexico
that have at least seventy
percent of their workers that
are graduates graduates are
registered apprenticeship
program we know that number.
This is Mr Chairman I do not
have that figure for you.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
will tend
I don't know I can't see the
gentleman's face anymore Mr
route could be still on.
I was.
I didn't catch exactly Mr
request what organizations do
you rent and Mr Chairman
representative of the by the not
of the reason I don't have that
before you I would have to get
that we figure from the
workforce solutions department
because as you can see you had
some people on there that says
well yeah we have apprenticeship
program what we don't like I
said this bill and so I I I
would have the the
apprenticeship program in
coordination with the workforce
solutions center is what would
be able to give me that that
figure.
From all the work for well the
apprenticeship board to know the
actual figure and I don't I
don't know if there's anybody on
here I'm listening that have
that number that either from the
print on the apprenticeship one
of the work force solutions
center so that's the reason why
I said I can't give you that the
total figure because I don't
know.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative and I was
starting to ask the gentleman Mr
recruit what what organizations
he represents I see some stuff
in the background but what
exactly do what what do you do
what are you guys Mr Chairman
and Mr route.
Mr Chairman representative
Baldonado I thank you for the
question yeah the organizations
behind me is what I represent I
am the director of training for
the national energy management
institute and national energy
management institute is funded
by the two other organizations
behind me which is the staff now
which is just sheet metal air
contractors association which is
highly referenced in the
standards through the New Mexico
mechanical code and then also
the sheet metal air rail and
transit workers.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Stapleton Ms to refer that
answer I guess it occurs to me
that you know in statute we
already have
you know a framework for for
licensing for sheet metal
workers for HPC providers is
that is that.
Standard that we working with is
that sub standard and what why
is it that this is so
specialized that only you know
the most gifted can do the work
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Thanks Lou Mr Chairman
representative and press.
I'm would you be able to expand
on.
And why we have to have
Technicians that are certified
to do this work.
Well in that so much industry
certified but qualified highly
skilled and qualified.
Mr Chairman Representative
Stapleton yes No most of my
career has been spent taking
measurements and the thing about
taking measurements and when
we're talking about the
technicians that are recap
requirements here to do this
kind of us spent verify that the
existing HVAC structure is
function and working.
You need to make sure that you
have someone that is highly
skilled and certified so that
they have something that they
could lose because if I go ask
any building right now and say
do you take care of your
building most buildings will
tell me yes I do however what
we're talking about here and the
difference is that I'm not
building a table when I take
these measurements meaning you
can't look at it Sir and say
this is a great table works well
you're having to take my
expertise and that the
measurements that I took care
flow velocity and readings
across the system including your
pressure components that those
all make sense and if you don't
have that baseline assessment
that's accurate and you're not
giving that to a design
professional and they don't have
accurate readings then they have
to make a lot of assumptions
when they're making design and
what that results in is that
then you get improper diagnosis
is an improper a quick request
for what should be done in the
system and ultimately that means
that the tax Boller money gets
wasted and so from the very
beginning you need to make sure
that you have someone like to
tap technician a certified
technician and taking these
measurements put together that
baseline assessment that is
extremely accurate and up to
date with what's actually
happening in the system.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and and Mr
route
and and I get that I'm not
trying to not trying to take
anything away from industry
understand that it's very
specialized at I've.
I've been in the home before
that it wasn't wasn't done right
you don't have a cold I in a hot
spot eccentric etcetera and and
that that's a problem I just
can't get my mind around the
fact that.
You know.
That we with this piece of
legislation we're trying to do
to implement this we're trying
to get this you mean the
conversation start sounds like
this is going to take years to
to accomplish this doesn't sound
to me like this gonna happen
overnight in let alone one
building at eight schools the
the entire campuses of of of of
of where the children are
learning
you know for example in in in in
twenty twenty today's America
with this vaccine that we're
dealing with you know the FDA
made up of an emergency approval
to get this thing to market to
and as everyone knows the status
find a warm arming get that
vaccine and it right that's what
we're we're talking about now
but an exception was made for
that for that specific purpose
and I just a just a first me
that said maybe we could you
know soften that fits that
seventy percent maybe maybe
fifty or forty percent I don't
know but I just I am hearing
industries that that that's sort
of workforce doesn't even exist
in the state and so you know to
just to go in sprinkle around
you know big dollars for this
project and say Hey we need to
get this stuff done but we're
not really that serious about it
because you want to make sure
that only the right people get
to do it and so I just an
expressing frustration with the
fact that they really want to
support this bill Mr Chairman
representative
yeah I it's it's this is going
to be hard for me to the cast a
yes vote on something that I
think is just half a statement
that we can reconsider
you know that that that section
of of the of the legislation is
definition so thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Williams
Stapleton and thank you Mr
route.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow please.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank Representative I think
that Representative Lane experts
express my greatest concern and
just during questions and the
comments that were being made I
went ahead and taxed of the four
superintendents from southern
New Mexico area as well as
secretary mccamley
Representative Stapleton said
that representative can we might
have the workforce numbers and
he does not and then each of my
superintendent said that there
approved contractors who they
currently use would not meet
that requirement and that they
would not be able to implement
this and so I'm not getting
answers as to who I wish that I
thought I and I apologize I
thought I'd say it was with
construction industries division
and I didn't understand until is
testimony that he was with the
construction industry commission
and so
I it is it can can the expert
witness route can you tell us Mr
Chairman Mr route at how many
companies an echo have a
workforce that is seventy
percent graduates of the
specific apprenticeship program.
Mr Chairman representative
doubt.
As Representative Stapleton said
I do not have those numbers
right now for you as a national
expert I don't happen with me
right.
Mr Chairman Representative
Stapleton I am getting my phone
is getting blown up for people
who saying that you do not have
to be a princess or an
apprentice graduate to be
certified that is one pathway
but it is not the only pathway
to highly qualified certified
trained and capable is that
correct Mr Chairman.
Expert witness Rick.
By.
At.
In between the inspection and
the installation because you
seem to be focusing on the
assessments or identifying the
need versus the implementation
of the system.
Mister Mason.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative down
to answer your question so let
me I mean I think the final part
first is that you know when
you're doing a program like this
and you're looking at the
recommendations of past reg
first you're going through when
you're doing an assessment to
verify where your existing
systems that.
And then once you verify that
you put together And suspect
report you hand that report over
to a design professional design
professional then makes the
assessment as to what can be
done to make the greatest use of
the existing HVAC infrastructure
the money that the taxpayers
have already spent the school
districts already spent and then
they can look at what additional
permits need to be made or can
be made with reduced assumptions
and working with the school
district on the available
budget.
Now to answer your question as
far as your first question could
you go ahead repeat that for
what your first special.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Representative Stapleton and
Chris.
That.
Do you believe in our state our
state has determined that you do
not have to happen the printed
strips you don't have to go
through an apprenticeship
program to be certified
qualified were to install these
use you have to go through the
process of getting an air
distribution licensure
certification whatever I'm I'm
looking on the site right now
it's called air distribution at
the service specialty it's an
installation specialty so I'm
getting confused we've decided
that there already they already
meet that standard and the
superintendents from my area
which is southern New Mexico far
away from Albuquerque are saying
that they do not have a company
in the works that is approved
with the state that has seventy
percent of the workforce
graduates of an apprenticeship
program so I'm trying to
understand because you seem to
be focused on the assessment
that not just anybody can assess
the need but the state of New
Mexico has defined is not
defined apprenticeship as
publication of getting certified
and being qualified and and
capable of implementing the the
installation.
Mr Chairman representative del I
thank you for that clarification
as I that makes a lot of sense
to me of what you're saying as
far as you know the
clarification there and that do
you need to have someone that's
actually bomb for an
apprenticeship students and once
again I'm going to go to the UC
Davis report and if you take a
look at what they found and this
is going through the assessment
process and also the
installation process is only
fifteen percent of the units
actually provided the minimum
ventilation and why this is
important is because a lot of
our previous standards of what
we're going for had to do with
comfort.
And where is these units may
have been providing comfort what
this report shows is that when
you take a look at panelists
which is extremely critical when
we're talking about airborne
pathogens at that point we need
to take this up to the next
level and say look it's not just
about a matter of if somebody is
comfortable in the room it's are
they say is the staff say our
kids say and for that I would
argue that yes you need to take
this up to a level to make sure
that the person is properly
qualified to do this.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Stapleton I guess
after back to you Chris because
you're the expert witness and
the only people qualified to do
that are the people who have
seventy percent of the workforce
that have graduated from an
apprenticeship program.
So the question is are those the
only people that are what I
would say is that sure is it
possible someone else's but in
my willing to bet might get on
that now I need to make sure
that anybody that's doing the
work in this classroom knows
what they're doing and want to
across the program is the car
mechanics that can take a look
at my breaks that haven't gone
through any school or training
yes it's possible but when I
take my car from a great so when
I drive my kids around in I make
sure that's done by a certified
trained and skilled mechanic.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative.
I guess I'll keep going you
Chris because Stapleton on the
phone and does it does EPA did
they release K. twelve
assessment process and have you
are you familiar with the CNN
program it's not adequate to
follow the EPA process for K.
twelve assessment.
Mr Chairman representative doubt
once again the focus here right
now is on the measurement of air
flow what you're moving towards
and what some of the callers
move towards with indoor air
quality that and that is a
totally different assessment
process of what indoor air
quality technician would do if
you look at what's required for
ventilation verification and you
go through the Astrup emic task
force recommendations for what
to do that really doesn't fall
under the line of what an indoor
air quality technician would
typically do and less they're
specifically trained to
ventilation and ventilation
verification which would include
not only ventilation filtration
and thermal Health which means
both humidity and temperature
now are there some might use
technicians will also been
trained as tap technicians to
take care hello absolutely and
for those ones that have that
certification I would encourage
them to bring it forward.
Thank thank you Mr chairman I I.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Stapleton I
don't.
I guess the whole point of it if
indoor air quality is it not why
would you look at.
If not for air quality control
then why look at installation I
I'm not I'm not understanding
and how many graduates do we
have the specific apprenticeship
program and do we know if they
work throughout the state they
located in metropolitan areas.
Representative Dow as I answered
the same question to I think was
Representative Lane
a representative by the not all
I think was about the metal I'm
Mr Chairman representative Dow
as I mentioned you had Baker are
somebody else on the air A. B.
C. that said we have an
apprenticeship program is
apprenticeship programs across
the state maybe not necessarily
in the location you live and
maybe there's one up in areas
but I would have to get the
total number possibly from the
apprenticeship board because I
don't have that number of I
don't know how many different
organizations have
apprenticeship programs in the
state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Stapleton if we don't
know how many people have the
apprenticeship program at the
certificate went to the printer
program.
And we don't know how many of
the companies have seventy
percent of their workforce I've
having been graduates of the
apprenticeship program how do we
know that we have adequate we're
getting workforce to complete
the job in this a merchant the
time frame.
I'm Mr Chairman Chris.
Mr Chairman Representative
Stapleton Representative doubt
as I mentioned before I do not
have the numbers for New Mexico
as national expert.
But I believe those numbers can
be can be obtained sorry.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative and and
someone earlier I think it might
have been Stephanie
had mentioned that these dollars
are already appropriated and
that they are making their way
to the school districts is that
happening through Senate bill No
that that there is Senate bill
or is it
It is this bill required in
order for the school districts
because we're getting asked for
capital outlay our our schools
are asking for funding that are
replacing the funding and Senate
bill nine answers is a separate
allocation or the COVID money
where's the money coming from
and why is this bill necessary.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so to your first
question this money is coming
from the federal comment relief
dollars on that senator Heinrich
was able to secure in December
and then also we anticipate that
there will be more federal
dollars currently paid the
language that you see there is
from PED's current program on
what they are doing so Pat
already has the money the reason
why this bill is really
important is because if we don't
put this in statute then we can
Our priorities can shift moving
forward which would then mean
that our ventilation systems and
the expert to it correctly
assess the systems on that may
not stay in place while it is
right now that we have a big
movement on it but there are
different priorities that come
up at different times and this
will just make sure that we have
this as a priority moving
forward.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Stapleton so
basically it's it's something
looking forward beyond COVID in
the on the re opening when it's
not as urgent as as it as it
could be.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it's for right now for
COVID and looking forward.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative attended the bill
doesn't have will school still
get money to directed effort.
As a as a provided by COVID
funds federal funds.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee if the bill doesn't
pass then we will continue
having nine experts assess the
ventilation systems and we will
have re entry of schools where
they do not have the experts and
currently assessing them and so
you will be wasting taxpayer
dollars and claiming that US you
have schools that are safe for
re opening so this is also to
make it more fiscally prudent
and more transparency and being
better with your public tax
dollars.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Stapleton so I'll just go to the
alley at the analysis so this is
basically because does any
lawsuit which put in the public
school facility authority and
they do different rankings for
different school districts you
do not trust that process.
Because this removes that
process according to the
according to the F. I. R. we are
going around what has been a
multi.
Decade process of going to the
public school finance authority
in accordance with his any
lawsuit to rank and prioritise
and this product we are not
gonna fall that process anymore.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative now
that is incorrect because this
this is created a fund that
would be able to work with all
public schools to receive the
federal balance of the COVID
nineteen stimulus plan that is
outlined I'm through with PCSO
C. P. S. and PED to guarantee
that many school districts will
be able to implement I'm a
better assessment of the
ventilation system all of these
I'm.
I'm departments within the at
agencies within the state will
be collaborating together and it
does not take away from this
only last so and what exists
there.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you representative I think we
all share the same intent of
getting high quality systems
into our schools getting our
schools re opened making sure
that students and staff are safe
and I I don't know if you
consider it currently Mr
Chairman representative but I
think that what we need to do is
propose an image that says just
skilled workforce means a
workforce that's licensed and
certified by state or national
organizations I think the
hardship comes with this
accreditation and the seventy
percent being a graduate of the
apprenticeship program when
that's not the state or national
standard of what we have in New
Mexico right now so what is
wrong with skilled workforce
needs a workforce licensed and
certified by state or national
organizations.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The reason for the seventy
percent is because we would like
New Mexico trained and New
Mexicans being the ones to
actually do this work otherwise
you may have had a state experts
come in and do the work we would
like New Mexicans we have many
New Mexicans who have gotten
trained and will continue to get
trained and so in our rural
communities there are New Mexico
trained in New Mexicans will be
the ones that are going to be
hired to do this work and Chris
you Mr chairman thank you
representative then would you be
willing to defy just to
prioritize New Mexico resident
businesses why not just private
we do that in other bills we are
we prioritized minority we
prioritize women we prioritized
New Mexico residents but we
heard the folks that do this
work in New Mexico New Mexico
residents and associations
representing New Mexico
businesses saying this language
prohibits them from being a
participant how bout New Mexico
resident.
New Mexico resident business.
You don't need to put your hand
up for the for any of the
experts you don't need to put
your hand up if you're willing
to just give it some weight time
and and then go ahead and
respond.
Mr chairman thank you for the
clarification Mr Chairman
representative Dow I you know
this really comes down to when
you start watering down the what
the workforce standards are and
what the requirements are to do
this work are you sure is anyone
I'm certain respect that if you
put a lot of money out there
that you're gonna have a whole
lot of people coming and saying
that they are well ready to do
the work and that they can do
it.
And if you just say that you're
nationally recognized what what
does that mean I can I start a
certification tonight with
someone that's nationally
recognized the state that and so
I believe when we're talking
about New Mexico and we're
talking about Representative a
New Mexico we're saying that
people gone through an
apprenticeship program that's
recognized by the state of New
Mexico so you're involving
existing state agencies an
existing state precedence to
establish who's qualified to do
this very important work.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr.
And Chris with all due respect
you're not defining his
qualifying who's qualified your
defining who's eligible and
there is a huge difference in
that we had industry folks
throughout the state who do
great jobs in our construction
industry you are clarifying and
limiting who is eligible not
who's qualified thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Chatfield please
your down on the bottom of the
road here was Mr thank you Mr
chairman I really I think I what
I have more of a statement in
the the question I spent many
many years on the.
On the school board of a very
small remote district all of you
guys know that and it's nearly
impossible to get contractors
out there and when you did get
him out it's a.
It's cost a lot more money and I
think by restricting that that
pool and the price will be
enormously higher and it'll be
down to.
Just a very very few that will
come out that for and and do the
work so it makes it really hard
to even get the work done so I
just have to be no this thank
you.
Thank you representative I'm and
and Representative Stapleton and
and experts in hearing a lot of
issues but things that are not
necessarily on resolvable from
the committee I think it's going
to take a little bit of
clarification about process
about some of the people that
are eligible to do this work and
certainly service saying
rural and urban areas so I think
at this time what we're going to
roll the bill and I would ask
you sponsor and and the experts
to really kind of reach out with
some of these
some of our members that have
expressed some of these concerns
to see if some of these issues
could get resolved and then like
with other bills we can bring
this back as soon as possible to
hear again I mean not everything
can be resolved and we won't
always agree and what I think we
all totally understand that but
to the extent that they can be
resolved and clarified for the
members I think would be passed
on but for now we'll roll this
bill Representative Stapleton
did you wish to to have some
closing remarks before we the
move on.
Representative.
Mr Chairman.
I did hear the concerns of some
of the members and I.
We'll work on the bill thank
you.
Thank you representative on.
So that concludes with the
rolling of that bill that
concludes our our date today so
I hope you all have a nice rest
for the rest of your Saturday in
a nice restful Sunday and then
we will get back to work on
Monday at our regularly
scheduled time of eight o'clock
in the morning so did anybody
have any comments questions
concerns before we break.
All right with that I'm I'm
assuming that was a good by
Representative going okay cool
all right look at that.
Okay happy Valentine's day
everybody and enjoy the rest of
your afternoon enjoy the snow be
safe hi everybody.
By.
I.
Thank you in the first.
You're welcome.
