Representative Ladda.
Representative Ladda.
Representative Lente.
Morning I'm here.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Stapleton.
Representative Switzer.
Here.
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Can't hear.
Chair.
Here we do have a case but we do
have a quorum all right good
morning everybody and welcome
I hope you all had a nice
weekend so we will go ahead and
jump right in it into house bill
eighty three so I will turn
things over to our vice chair
representative Garrett
Well I'd get started so give you
a moment wait time to pull up
the bill in the analysis.
For a get started with the
presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman and Romero
our first bill to date is house
bill eighty three to change
graduation requirements for high
school the bill Sanchez chairman
Romero who will be speaking to
it and chairman Robert you have
the expert witness Dr Alan
Bernstein is that correct.
That is correct thank you madam
chair thank you and with that
let's get started.
All right again good morning
members
This is house bill eighty three
so house bill eighty three is
changing the high school
requirements for graduation very
broadly all start out in the the
project is really to
I brought in and and give
students a lot of flexibility
and a lot of choice in the types
of courses that they can take
it's also meant to be flexible
enough to where students have
the ability to really shift
gears between
a a career track and higher
education tracking anywhere in
between
and that's really the get the
guiding principle of all of
these high school changes so
To delve into a little bit of
the changes
So in English the major emphasis
is really on communication
skills technical riding
And and and the literature on I
think those are a lot more
encompassing than the than the
current standards offered in
English requirements as far as
mass Massey is goes from four
credits to three credits
and and algebra two is taken now
as a A. as a requirement for
students to me one thing I
should mention as as I
understand
and I can sense that some some
ears perked up with that is that
what we're leaving in place in
this bill are on the next step
plans for students to complete
from eighth to twelfth grade in
in helping students guide their
coursework from the time that
they start high school so a lot
of these changes in that
flexibility also
Is is places are a lot of
responsibility continued
responsibility on our guidance
counselors are teachers in our
administrators to to help guide
students along their their
educational mission.
I think the the the list of
courses that are offered you
probably noticed
especially in mass there's
construction or applied
mathematics I think that through
a lot of the testimony we've
heard through Ellie S. C. the
past couple of years is that
students are really looking for
and and we as an education
system are really looking to
incorporate the trades and and
certainly all of the skills.
Excuse me and content such as
mathematics into these trades so
in these requirements part of
that flexibility as well goes to
speak towards students
desire to take ownership over
more.
Our work and the things that
they are studying in high school
and I think there's a lot to say
about students being able to
have that flexibility to have
that choice and to have that
sort of buy in into their
classes as opposed to
To having requirements I think
states are starting to move away
from strict requirements for
high school in moving toward
toward this choice model and I
think that super super important
the lab sciences you'll also
notice that we're keeping the
three units the same however
including in trying to be more
inclusive of
Various types of of different
course work for the sciences
that is also very career driven
computer sciences botany
things like that culinary arts I
mean one thing I want to add
with the sciences I see some
faces already in some reactions
culinary arts those of you that
have or have not cooked in
various ways will notice that
you know the amount of I like to
there there's a block fat she
salt acid that talks about the
sciences and cooking and being
able to master those four
ingredients in order to to be a
good crop can using those to
appropriate degrees I would
argue that that's very much in
line with the lab science the
thing to keep in mind with these
requirements as well as school
districts also have a vetting
process and these courses have
to be cleared by the PED so it
won't just be a wanton culinary
arts class
It also has to be department
approved meaning that they're
meeting on standards for a lab
science so I think that's
important for the committee to
keep in mind as well.
I'm moving on to the social to
social sciences and social
studies.
Excuse me The New Mexico history
requirement from the current
statute will be dropped that's
something that's a middle school
requirements and I think that as
far as the social social studies
in high school what we're really
trying to do is show the
trajectory of students from
they're local to their country
to the world and then we're also
increasing the government and
adding civics to the government
requirement on to really start
getting students to think about
their place and and their
involvement with the and
specifics themselves so them
getting involved in in social
studies so that's where you'll
see that government credit
bumped up to one full credit as
opposed to the half credit there
is now.
I'm physical education is more
inclusive ROC ROTC
marching band may also
substitute for it PED credit
And then I think the other
major changes and the big change
is the substitution of capstone
class in students being able to
with the guidance of a educator
in the field be able to
participate in an independent
study to work on a particular
issue of their interest in a
particular field and to be able
to substitute that class for a
quorum requirement
so capstone involves this sort
of research and then
a a presentation and portfolio
of the work presented so again
this is a way for students to
really have slide in and to do a
deep dive into a subject area
that is of their interest
I think that's that's it that's
a pretty big deal in a in a
major shift from where we're at
now in being able to provide
these services to provide the
sort of student buy in into
their education I think will
prove a lot more effective than
blanket requirements for
students one thing I will say in
closing is that we have
currently twenty four credits in
order for students to graduate
this bill would be twenty three
on and part of that is to make
sure that
of.
While school districts have been
because of the current statute
forced to a seven day seven
period school year which is
tremendously difficult for
students and I think by being
able to have a six day when I
went to high school it was six
day R. six credit
class per year it was a lot more
manageable and again you'll have
a lot more time for actual in
depth study and work for
students
and with that I'll turn it over
for some brief comments from my
expert Dr Bernd State good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
this opportunity I'll just make
a few points to add on to what
Mr chair just said I want to
point out that the last time we
looked at our high school course
taking requirements was in the
middle of no child left behind
in two thousand and seven it was
a bill from Representative
Sheryl Williams Stapleton.
Excuse me at that time what we
did is we narrowed the course
taking choices because everybody
in the country was looking at
pushing all high school
graduates into college and it
was a phenomenon not just here
in New Mexico but across the
nation and if you look back at
that bill it really was all
about high stakes testing and
very rigorous course
requirements.
The unintended consequence of
the way in which we narrowed our
course taking patterns in high
school was to leave out a lot of
kids who wanted to go into
career and technical education
it pushed out a lot of our
electives in high school and it
made algebra two kind of a gate
keeper for future success where
as other math classes might be
more apple Google to the choices
that kids have it really paves
the way for districts to create
options for students based on
skills relevant knowledge and
their personal future
aspirations it okay ground
floor.
It opened.
Meeting for kids to make choices
with the guidance as Mr chair
said of their counselors I want
to emphasize if you think that
does not mandate that the
district create more course
options it gives the district
the opportunity to develop
courses over time and based on
the capacity of the district to
offer more choices for students.
I also want to point out that
student engagement is a huge
factor in graduation rates and
one of the things we want to do
in New Mexico is increase our
graduation rates.
I've had some people ask me
about the health requirement in
APS I want to point out that
health is a mandatory elective
which sounds a little oxymoronic
but India's and still is
available at the high school
level because we believe that
health is a very important part
of developing as a young adult
and going into life and then
I'll just point out that
capstone classes which are very
growing in popularity are really
wonderful opportunities for a
student to create a project that
is a culminating activity of
something that they are
interested in and the research
says very clearly that by
developing capstone classes we
can create student centered ways
that supports the whole child
their cognitive development it
focuses on deeper learning it
meets the demands of of today's
society it can be culturally and
linguistically connected and
grounded in collaboration among
students staff families and
communities and it's really
based in this idea that high
schoolers are very sophisticated
in Albuquerque were working on a
capstone class and we as we were
working on it in collaboration
with the district one of the
things we talked about is some
day capstone classes will be so
popular that will have to rent
the convention center for all of
the high schoolers presenting
their capstone projects to their
peers their family members and
their communities with the with
the I. that this kind of small
cross curricular project can
really add to their ability
later in life in their work and
in college.
Thank you very much for the the
the time you've given each.
Madam chair will stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you and with that we'll
turn into participation from our
attendees I want to remind you
that you will have two minutes
and then you'll be muted please
have your first and last name
and if you have an
organizational affiliation put
that in the attendees box will
start with those who are in
favor of house bill eighty three
so if your in favor
please raise your hand.
I now and we'll start with that
Dr Dennis Roche from the
superintendents.
organization Dr Roach.
Thank you madam chair I I don't
have a doctorate but thank you
for the promotion and the last I
am the president of the New
Mexico school superintendents
association I actually had a
great conversation with the
chair about this bill and there
is a lot for superintendents the
like in this and that are
provided platform calls for a
revisiting of graduation
requirements particularly in the
map arena because we agree that
I'll defer to is not necessarily
the appropriate track for all
we also what partner we're
pleased to partner with Dr burns
dean's organization and others
in calling for a revisiting of
high school redesign in our end
partners platform earlier this
year so we are excited to stand
in support of this bill in my
conversation with the chair
though I did offer one
particular piece of advice or
requests and perhaps the
committee would be willing to
consider it we love that there's
lots and lots of flexibility in
how students demonstrate
competency in math.
That's on page eleven and so as
a result of that plex ability we
don't necessarily believe that
we should reduce the overall map
requirements from four to three
if I if we keep that for we've
got the flexibility to allow
students to choose our computer
science architectural
construction map filled
financial map lots of
flexibility we don't actually
need to water down from forty
three but with that one change
we would stand in very strong
support of this bill and we
appreciate the chairman's work
on finally revisiting graduation
requirements thank you madam
chair.
Thank.
Our next speaker is.
We may Ortiz for the New Mexico.
Mexico school board association.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee billing a RTC
Mexico school board association
on their legislative lies on
it's a pleasure to be with you
all this morning we appreciated
the options provided in this
bill we support this bill it
broadens the career pathways for
high school students which we
love it also provides
flexibility for alternative
demonstration of competencies in
meeting the graduation
requirements all we agree with
the superintendents regarding
its a good idea to consider
maintaining the math
requirements we appreciate the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and we stand in support
of this legislation thank you so
much.
Thank you next.
Our next speaker is Sean Powell.
Thank you Mr chair
representative on Dr Chantal
president of eastern New Mexico
university here in Roswell I do
want to stand in support of this
legislation we have an early
college high school on our
campus and I particularly like
the career technical education
focus that this bill allows for
high school graduation credits
so again thank you for putting
this legislation forward in
order to support of it thank
you.
Thank you doctor how experience
Dr heather Bassett from APS.
Good morning can you hear me
good morning my name is heather
Bassett I'm with Albuquerque
public schools and we want to
stand in support of house bill
eighty three and the sponsor we
think the sponsor for bringing
it forward and we appreciate the
efforts to move towards
flexibility in local control for
districts as they create
graduation requirements thank
you.
Thank you doctor.
Our next speaker is science from
any New Mexico.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the board Steve see
on use government relations
director for a need to Mexico
and on behalf of our members I
just want to say that in the New
Mexico stand in support of this
bill these changes are very
positive and necessary step in
developing a school program for
students that provide expanding
and it academic choices for
students to graduate it also you
know it's already been say it
also provides districts more
flexibility to design a variety
of pathways for students to
graduate which is ultimately you
know the goal so we sincerely
thank the represented for us
sponsoring this bill and
expanding echo and support for
this for this legislation thank
you.
Our our next speaker is Barbara
Pierce from the board of
education of the PS.
Good morning madam speaker madam
chair and members of the
committee of I'm Robert Peterson
I'm a member of the APS board of
education and I really speaking
today is a retired teacher and a
parent.
This bill is so exciting to me
because it opens up many
pathways and avenues for
students to explore what they're
interested in I think it's
really critical to see that it
doesn't lower standards what it
does is really give students
access to information to math to
science concepts in a different
way from what traditional
curriculum may offer and gives
them an opportunity to really
demonstrate what they know the
capstone.
Our teachers are are really
exciting to me so thank you
For presenting this bill and I I
really strongly support it.
Our next speaker is actually
long road F. TV Mexico.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
actually long with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico I don't want a repeat of
what was already said but Dr
Byrne Steen very eloquently
Give you insight in our into our
position on the bill we think
the sponsor and with that we
stand and strong support thank
you madam chair.
Our last speaker in favor is
Eugene Schmidt.
Yes James can you hear me yes J.
Farmington municipal schools
superintendent I also stand in
support of this bill like many
others it recognizes the real
and genuine opportunity for kids
to find ways to engage in
learning that is relevant to
them through career pathways
through career and technical
education as a as a substitute
for core math or English it just
creates a way to keep kids
engaged in school and is
relevant to them and for that
reason I stand in support.
Thank you
are there any other people that
want to speak in favor.
If not.
Excuse me
Mario Atencio you have the floor
yes good good morning thank you
chair and members of the
committee my name is Mario
Atencio M. A. R. I. O. T. T. E.
and louder Mario can hear me.
Yeah you're very soft okay good
good morning thank you
as the elected leader of the
Korean star leak chapter house
in northwest New Mexico.
ours our community is is a
feeder school for Cuba
Independent School districts and
now we we we strongly support
this bill as high tech high
stakes testing it is is a is is
rather a detrimental to
learning that we see that we
need to have to happen in our
communities and so as the old
elected vice president of the
Torreon Navajo Starley chapter
house
we we stand in support of this
bill and be half of a and just
for the committees notice of
supporting legislation coming
out of the Navajo Nation council
will be forthcoming supporting
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr Atencio with that
will go to anybody in opposition
is there anybody in opposition
of the bill.
Okay I'm.
As well as snail.
Your turn good morning thank you
chair and members of the house
Education Committee I am and
policy all I am executive
director of the society of
health and physical educators
New Mexico I am also a parent
teacher and coach most days in
that order shade New Mexico is
against house bill eighty three
as written well I appreciate the
school and student choice as a
parent and a teacher as a
proponent and advocate of
quality health and physical
education we can not support
health and Pete to continue to
be marginalized headed against
electives and and not given
it's to health education has
never been more if needed in
schools the focus should be on
more not less I appreciate that
certain districts still support
as we've heard from the
Springsteen but this needs to be
a statewide support of quality
health education
also shape New Mexico can not
support any substitution first
but for the physical education
requirement there are no other
courses or activities that meet
the necessary content standards
there are many substitution is
currently in place so re written
to really make sure that the
venting system is in place so
that students do have access to
quality health and physical
education not just
in middle school but also to
continue that through high
school thank you for your time.
Our next speaker is Dr Christine
or.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and Mr
chair for introducing the bill I
am doctor Chris more and I
and speaking for myself on this
I was very much I was working
for the public education
department when the health
education requirement was put
into statute it was never
intended to be an elective
course although I do not oppose
the entirety of the bill and but
I do oppose the areas in the
bill around health education by
making it at and the required
elective which is as misprints
king said an oxymoron there's no
such thing is required elective
course it needs to be a
standalone
it needs to be by putting it
there that you get an extra
elective if you take the course
in middle school is an incentive
for districts to start offering
that course in middle school
that don't already do that that
is not okay the youth risk and
resiliency survey shows that
when students enter high school
there risky haters increase.
exponentially in high school
from middle school we cannot not
have health education in high
school expression the now with
COVID and all of the issues
you're having around mental
health and with their student
suicides they begin to
exasperated in high school we
have to have that prevention
education I'm recommending that
on page ten there be an
amendment to this bill that is
clear that one half unit of
health education be required if
on the language has to say is
determined by school districts
like it does with PED to allow
the ability in the school please
note if you take it in middle
school it shows still shows up
on your transcript as a point I
credit not as in elective credit
so it doesn't give an
opportunity for another point I
elective if you take it in
middle school
so I'm respectfully asking that
that that the committee and the
sponsor consider that amendment
to the bill also I'm in
agreement around physical
education if we are going to
allow for such.
Thank you doctor work for your
comments that was two minutes
thank you our next speaker is.
Karen Gaudry alt.
Good morning.
Good morning thank you I'm a
doctor Karen good Rowe I'm a
parent to children in New Mexico
public schools I am a teacher
educator in the state of New
Mexico and I am the president
elect of shape New Mexico I am a
proponent of students having
choice in their education
however I oppose this bill as
written with respect to health
and physical education.
There is a large body of
research that indicates that
physically active and healthy
children perform better in
school.
ROTC and marching band are not
sufficient substitutes for
quality physical education
programming
and they do not provide young
people with the knowledge and
skills necessary to engage in
physical activity for a
lifetime.
reductions at this time and P.
E. and health have significant
negative implications not only
for use health but also families
eyes support and agree with the
others who have spoken
specifically about the health
education requirement being met
in middle school quality health
and physical education
programming should be a
requirement for high school
graduation thank you.
Our next speaker is Patty
Nelson.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Patsy Nelson and I'm a former
school nurse and school based
health center director at both
middle and high schools and I
respectfully request you
opportunity with house bill
eighty three to make the high
health education graduation
credit required at the high
school level instead of allowing
it to be offered at the eighth
grade level it appears that no
other high school graduation
requirement baby met in middle
school which begs the question
about why health education is
singled out to be allowed at the
middle school level we know that
students who are not healthy
have difficulty learning and
students who are not educated
tend to be less healthy health
problems whether due to physical
or behavioral illness or injury
are a main reason for poor
school attendance a key lesson
learned from the pandemic is the
need for health literacy
prevention should be taught at
all levels elementary middle and
high but the graduation
requirement should be taught at
the high school level I request
that you respectfully request
that you eliminate the option
for health education credit to
be given at the eighth grade
level which would ensure that it
is given at the high school
level and therefore you may need
to reduce the number of
electives to seven in high
school I also request that you
require reconsider the options
to meet physical education
understanding that physical
lifelong physical activity
benefits the body and mind
rather than simply the options
that allow moving the body each
day while engaging in ops
optional activities at high
school I do support the
flexibility in the bill and as a
member of the league of women
voters though I am not speaking
for them today I'm speaking
personally but I applaud the
increase in civics education and
the flexibility allowed in the
bill thank you madam chair and
members of the committee for
your.
time.
Thank.
Our final speaker will be
Elizabeth Dixon.
Are you there.
I.
Elisabeth.
Can you hear me.
You okay there you.
Yes wonderful thank you for the
opportunity to speak this
morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Dr
Elizabeth Dixon and I'm speaking
for myself well I want to thank
them sponsor for revisiting
graduation requirements as a
former public health nurse who
has worked in school settings
providing health education and
as a researcher who has studied
the need for health education
across New Mexico schools I'm
concerned about the language in
this legislation that might
decrease or reduce the
requirement for health education
for graduation more specifically
I propose the language
suggesting health education
should be an elective credit or
incentivizes health education
credit in middle school and high
school student health is
empirically links not only to
their educational rig
performance and successful
completion of high school but
also to students social
emotional success as mentioned
before by other individuals the
youth risk and resiliency survey
data gathered by PED each every
two years has demonstrated
increases and risky behavior for
New Mexico youth year after year
health education in the school
setting mandates time and space
with trained teachers and staff
where students learn how to care
for themselves reduce their risk
an illness for injury and also
have shown to have been healthy
impact on their families and
their communities as students
share what they learn at home I
think that H. B. eighty three
provides an opportunity to
actually strengthen language in
our current law and I
respectfully encourage the
committee to reinforce the
health education requirement in
high school for graduation and
actually require health
education in middle school thank
you for your time this morning.
Thank you doctor did some and
there are no more public
comments so with that we'll go
to the panelists are first hand
was from Representative Williams
Stapleton.
Thank you madam chair and good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee
I just have a maybe one or two
brief questions and the overall
question is I guess I'm
wondering if there's somebody on
the I'm here from PED.
But my question Mr chairman
and perhaps you will you of
expert witness can answer it
In regards to computer science
and other our often seated in
the bill and had been in the
past elective courses and
language had been placed in
prior to today in regards to
these type of courses being able
to be given as credit for high
school graduation and was never
implemented by PED I'm so a lot
of the times it says Department
of prole but Department may
approve it but if PED does not
put the regulation and policy of
the rule in place then it
doesn't go far away I'm on this
quite a few things in here that
are relevant to the tools
science to maths
and to other areas I'm not
considered elective I'm also
considered full credit so I was
wondering if the expert witness
Mr chair or somebody from PED
can respond to that.
Dr.
Would you like to respond and
then I'll ask that John Cena
from PED.
I'm.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm not an expert on
what PED has and has not done
my response to the
representatives question is that
this provides an opportunity to
complete work based on changes
that have been made in the past
and I'm sure
Somebody from PED can talk about
it but we do want computer
science and that was a bill that
was put in place.
I don't know two years ago I
can't remember exactly but I
think all of this gives us an
opportunity to complete work in
partnership with PED so that we
can have full.
descriptions of courses that
meet our standards.
Thank you doctor.
And John saying from the public
education department if you can
I meet yourself and speak.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Stapleton I just
wanna make sure I understand
your question is this about.
Whether or not we would
implement the provisions of the
bill if it were enacted or you
have concerns about other
provisions.
That has not been enacted or
that use that you have not been
active.
Madam chair Mister chairman
You have.
Both you have.
This bill that was enacted
before that was before it put in
place and never been enacted
because PED never follow through
to put the rules and regulations
in place specifically with
career technical education
classes and electives that could
be counted as credit for high
school credit what.
Computer aided drafting
engineering classes with all
smacked those teachers have a
minute.
All have a math degree and
teach in engineering and yet the
same time those kids can get the
credit for on the other
computer science classes
considered elective.
Also can be considered so much
credit also I am spreading
financial literacy is being
taught
by teachers will teach elective
classes because they have a
degree and and.
Eight hundred license and
Education but those kids could
not get the credit so my
question to you going forward
with this battle my hope is that
PED would go forward once this
bill is and sign that the
implementation in the enactment
of the law would take place
because it has not taken place
in the past.
Madam chair Representative
Stapleton thank you for the
clarification I want to I want
to point out a couple of things
and I'll make sure I follow up
with you to make sure that we
that we address your concerns as
far as I as far as I know the
CTE courses for credit that that
is possible the department has a
procedure by which districts
would apply to get particular
courses approved for course for
core course credit so there is a
process by which districts can
do that.
Computer science can also count
as a as a math course as long as
students meet the other two
requirement that was part of the
original the proposal.
and I'll follow up on the
financial literacy poorest
course as well I I don't have
details about that right now but
I can follow.
And then last name sorry last
year I do want to say that
obviously the department would
work both with the sponsor and
and the legislature as a whole
to make sure that we enact
whatever provisions are passed
and signed by the governor.
Thank you Mr Representative
Stapleton what lawyers do you
have any more questions no miss
madam chair I have no more
questions I just want to say
that because of the changing
times of the change in
curriculum and instruction and
the what the future going
forward of what our needs of our
students are I think
this bill has some improved
changes in many of the aspects
of the different various course
offerings that is listed I I
can't talk about the ones that
people oppose in I can only
speak to the ones that I see
that has become imperilled and I
think from my graduation
requirement built of this one
there has been major improvement
thank you.
Thank you and this order will go
Representative Gallup
Representative he's out
Representative Roybal Caballero
and the representative Lente
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman and I also do want
to thank Representative
Stapleton for getting this ball
rolling and just bring it to our
attention over the years in this
bill is there's so many elements
to it that are exciting and that
are that do provide flexibility
at the school level and allow
students to pursue pathways that
are more relevant to them and so
I like like ninety five percent
of it but I think you know where
my sticking points are are kind
of a big deal and so in less you
can convince me otherwise I can
you first of all I just need to
know the difference between a
diploma of excellence and the
alternative duration of
competency because.
Why do those flexibility in
pathways not already providing
at how how are we not are you
providing this flexibility
through these deployments of
excellence versus the
alternative demonstration
competency and a certificate I
don't even know all right
Ways that people are receiving a
completing their graduation how
is there not flexibility
already.
Representative Dow I'll allow my
experts to ex one eighteen.
Representative Dow members of
the committee
I'm going to give you what I.
I hope is a full answer are you
hearing her.
Can you hear me is that okay yes
we can hear you okay so I'm
there are different ways so if
you didn't change anything and
of course taking options of high
school they still have different
ways to earn a diploma and one
of the ways that we put in place
in the past and Mr center might
be better able to answer this is
I think S. and one of the things
other than passing certain tasks
you can do is have an
alternative demonstration of
competence which I think is
somewhat akin to the capstone
class that we're recommending in
this bill.
I'm I'm not sure what it takes
to earn the certificate or
diploma of excellence I think
Mister CENIC can probably answer
that best but the difference
between how you graduate.
And how you get your courses.
is what this so let me go
backwards how you get to your
final senior year the credits
you accumulate along the way as
you get ready for graduation
that's what this bill changes.
How you are able to graduate by
that final exhibition of of
competence is not changed in
this bill that it currently
exists for high school graduates
and I I really hope that that
was clear and maybe somebody
could cleared up even more.
Want to add anything more to
that.
Share Representative I believe
W. secretary Warniment may also
be on the call that you may be
able to speak to this a little
bit more clearly okay.
Can you raise your hand place.
Okay she's sorry about that she
said she was watching on the
webcast is going to she's going
to sign on to she gets right in
broad terms about how that works
we we did we did allow a little
additional flexibility around
graduation requirements of this
year
to to make sure that students
have a variety of options and so
some of the things that were
previously called the turn of
them demonstration
demonstrations of competency
were allowed to be used as a as
essentially a of a primary.
Primary demonstration and so
things like we're working with
some organizations also develop
student portfolio portfolios
ways that students can
demonstrate competency outside
of things like end of course
exams or standardized
assessments.
But I really think that the S.
W. secretary Warniment gonna be
able to clarify that a lot
better she's just jumping on.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair.
Okay do you have more questions
for Becca Dow while we wait for
separate W. secretary Warniment.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I guess what I am because
I've helped people with an
alternative inspiration of
competency so say it that teen
mom who didn't finish her last
semester is usually out of work
to for some elective they were
able to attend a math test they
were able to show a work
experience to get elected or
work experience credit they were
able to be duly enrolled as a
non they they had not graduated
from high school so take at in
my case and early childhood
class while they're working at
early childhood get an elective
covered get that get a work
experience covered and
demonstrate their attendance at
at.
Math proficiency either energy
ET attendre ever and then they
are eligible for an alternative
instruction competency without
taking out over to you so I'm
kind of jumping ahead my thought
process is that our current
graduation standards allow this
flexibility if if the counselors
and our career advisors are adds
intentional now as they will
have to be in this bill in
making sure that students know
an expectation of going to
college is out of work to if you
are not going to go to college
we have these alternative
pathways I'm a little concerned
about the moving out to per two
and students believing and
parents believing that their
students are college bound but
I'm hoping I miss Sanders maybe
I misunderstood I'm not
understanding why we have to
change the math Gretchen
requirements.
In order for people to already
have it because it's my
understanding that alternative
demonstration of competency that
diploma certificate is exactly
the same those anywhere except
college that the pump excellence
goes it I just need someone to
tell me if I'm wrong because
this isn't my my world and I'm
just not sure if I'm
misunderstanding.
So soon.
Madam madam.
Madam chair and representative
I was all taken a bit of a stab
it at your question
Is that I think with that with
the mass standards and and all
refer to the Ellie S. C. houses
of this may have competing
studies about how
the the algebra two requirement
and one saying that it may may
lead to what you're suggesting
suggesting it may lead to an
that
a lack of college preparedness
for students however the other
study on by the A. C. T. says
that these sorts of requirements
lead to a watering down of
curriculum so that students may
be able to retain that class for
their portfolio I think what
we're really trying to aim at
with the bill is and certainly
with the science requirements is
is that the subjects science
math are interwoven within one
another and really expanding
that student by and so that
they're really getting the most
out of their math classes and
that it's applicable probably
the number one thing that I hear
from students is that their math
classes are are a little bit
divorced from from some of the
things that they're learning
practically and I think with our
mass credits and certainly with
the science credits we're moving
toward that practicality to
capture student interest in to
really engage them in their
coursework
in and I I will say that this
does not mean that students
cannot take more mass should
they choose they can certainly
take more baths and that's why
we we kind of emphasize that
sort of flexibility and and that
that ongoing monitoring of
students and and the credits
that they're taking so that
students that are geared one way
or the other that the classes
that they take aligned with the
goals that they have in mind I
think that's a that's a super
important part of the bill it's
really that we're trying to have
and create more time for that
student buy in but also the
structure.
around in the parameters around
it to be able to be stretched no
ways that students and students
guide.
Representative doctor pre order
on the call Dr Stewart did you
want to add something and I'm
yourself.
Good morning madam chair and
Committee it's great to see all
of you this morning I'll just
clarify in terms of graduations
two prongs that are required
first seniors in New Mexico so
the first prong has to do with
course requirements which this
bill does address so thank you
very much Representative Romero
the other problem has to do with
demonstrations of competency
which is what Mr doctor
Bernstein at was addressing so
both things are really important
in terms of seniors and a
comprehensive sort of look at
what's needed for seniors to go
forward and connect pose with
their post secondary
choices has to do with actually
both problems so if you could
clarification is there sort of
overlapping but also to
structures in place right now.
Okay
Representative Dow.
Thank thank you thank you madam
chair thank you you Mr chairman
Romero and of Dr those are
amazing the earrings I love them
I'm and so back to math
theoretically help me I'm still
trying to understand
theoretically right now we have
to work for math credits Kerins
and students can already opt out
of algebra two is that correct.
After work.
Madam chair representative so
it's.
That's correct so they can
already opt out and then be
radically one of those mask what
courses could be computer
because we passed a couple years
ago that it could be a better
course in replace of amount of
course is that correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct once the outdoor to
is completed it can be one of
the four.
Okay okay and then in a capstone
Mr chairman madam chair Mister
chairman in the capstone course
could also replace math courses
is that also after algebra two.
Madam chair representative to
the capstone is a new addition
to to the requirements with this
at all so obviously since we're
getting rid of algebra two madam
chair is that
there would need there would not
meet the requirement for for
algebra two in order to complete
a capstone.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman and okay I
feel like I just lost down can
you guys hear me.
Yes okay.
Mr chairman so.
Thank you.
I guess.
Mr chairman and madam chair
Mister chairman my question is
and what I've heard most from
folks have cited they are about
these changes but also the
concern in the map reduction
have you considered an amendment
that would require a financial
literacy or something that
covers credit in place of
so that people are still getting
for math credits and if not why
is that not a consideration.
Madam chair and representative
as we have stated before is that
I think the interweaving of the
science and math credits is
sufficiently work
covers those bases I will say to
your to your suggestion of
financial literacy and and you
know other sites such courses I
think through a lot of
discussion we always hear about
requirements requiring
a lot of states are moving
away from requiring and
specifically requiring certain
classes for students because
we're finding more more that
students are more engaged when
they see themselves in the work
and have that sort of economy to
choose
we hear a lot about local
economy and here we go student
at Tanami at the most local
level I think that's that's
really white caps lakes is still
and I think that's why
we haven't considered that
amendment to this point.
Representative yeah thank you Mr
chairman and then my last
question is in regards to I
don't I don't I just make sure
are you are we leading towards a
six period day instead of seven
or does this change anything in
regards to the number period
than a day.
Chair and representative I mean
it may lead to a six period day
on for those districts that have
gone to a seven period day and
again in order for students to
really be able to focus on the
class work that they have at
hand and have the guidance and
time necessary in order to to
work on what they find most
necessary.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair Mister chairman up on my
questions.
Okay thank you next is
representative he's still
followed by Representative
because I you know.
Thank you madam chair
Really can I I innocents are
like the bill with a few
exceptions
Mr chairman.
One of my questions is why was
New Mexico history excluded from
this bill.
Madam chair and representative
that's a good question so it is
currently in middle school
requirement and we have U. S.
history as part of middle school
requirements as well that's why
the standard start off for U. S.
history in high school at a
reconstruction to modern day
because they carry over from
middle school is is kind of that
pre colonial period to the civil
war so in that I know some of
the work that the department and
and W. secretary are not meant
to or or Mr send I can speak to
it as well as on their currently
redesigning the standards and
and part of the U. S. history in
the way personally I teach US
history and I think the way the
department is going to is to
really in bad in in we New
Mexico history in to US history
so that New Mexico has its place
within the broader US history
narrative.
Well Mister chairman I wouldn't
have a problem with that madam
chair I wouldn't have a problem
with that until we get to
changing US history and I guess
that's my problem Mr chairman
and miss madam chair.
I'm concerned also like.
The other.
Makers have said I'm concerned
about the reduction of the math
credit is this really going to
prepare our students.
And of able to go on to college
because I think that they will
listed the analysis I got from
the council of university
presidents I don't know if
you've had the opportunity to
rate that Mr chairman that is
says easing New Mexico high
school graduation requirements
particularly in math could
adversely affect students
college readiness and resulted
increased need for remediation
thereby creating additional
costs for both institutions and
underprepared students.
Says high school students could
avoid taking math classes that
would prepare them for critical
college courses like calculus
which students must take in
their first or second semester
in order to complete most M.
degrees in four years do you
have a response for that.
Madam chair and representative I
do I mean I'll and I'll preface
it by saying that it's
interesting that
the the council of university
presidents is weighing in on
this issue however in reference
to L. S. C. expanding higher
education they came out on
clause I propose to it because
these are very much the issues
we in the interim can start
really delving into because
they're recognizing the link
between secondary education and
higher education so what I will
say specifically and say and and
I've pointed this out in my
opening as well as that we have
competing studies on whether or
not requirements we need to
prepare students for higher
education we've had this algebra
two requirement now for almost
ten years and and whether that's
been affected or not that's
something that that cop has and
answered either I think
again in these requirements and
by expanding it we're making
where we're doing a better job
of interweaving the sciences
along with mask and and were met
also making massive integrated
into
Career options in these cells
Well Mr chairman and madam chair
my question is if we're going to
limit that algebra two what is
going to fill that gap for the
students if they do go on to
college to be able to get that
stem degree within four years
what is going to be the basis
for them to be able to go into
calculus without having to get
remediation because that class
does have to be completed in the
first or second semester of
their college career.
And madam chair alternative.
Madam chair representative I
mean that's the weight of these
next step plans is that students
are really definitely stand
bound for higher education is
making that plan and with the
guidance of counselors and there
educators states to to really
work toward accumulating the
necessary math credits and and a
lot of cases that may mean above
and beyond so this does not
preclude that from being an
option this.
I can give stand by and and say
in the types of classes that
that they're going to take.
Madam chair Mr chair.
I I'm concerned about if any of
our students are going out of
state to attend university
colleges or universities I
understand that.
With the state it will be easier
done with the readiness of the
schools to be able to face.
College leaves me with a lot of
concern.
I'm going to I'm gonna quit
Kickin that dead horse okay
as far as your lab classes go
can you tell me how you came up
with the culinary arts part of.
And Madam chair representative
you've pointed out something
that I've got a lot of questions
at some pretty well versed in
doing this or at least have
become you can be the judge so
as we know with the with
culinary arts I mean currently
it's an elective credit however
on those if you had that enjoyed
cooking baking things like that
no it's it's particularly
interesting and those of you
that have lived in different
climates I'm sure can can attest
to you've ever baked bread at
altitude it's a lot different
than doing it at sea level and a
lot of that has to do with
Keaton vault so I would argue
and I do argue and maintain that
that the without going into to
the weeds about it is is a
culinary arts can very much is a
lab science and again this and I
will remind the committee is
that districts you know have to
submit
And and approved their course
curriculum so if somebody if a
culinary arts teacher does
demonstrate that they are using
using measurements that they
have added
the science elements that
they're teaching chemical
reactions with fifty and they're
cooking and then the district
would be able to approve that
course for a lab credit but I
would still maintain and and I
would actually reference the
book again fat salt he in acid
in order to to really delve into
hell culinary arts can very much
be a lab sciences pent up in the
sciences as a.
Mr chairman and madam chair.
Whenever you're talking about.
Culinary arts is this going to
be in the home activation or is
it going to be a totally
different classroom now that is
going to be provided by our
local school districts in the
high schools in the high school
ram.
And Madam chair representative
so this would be something that
again these are just possible
options for school districts to
choose so if there is a
particular teacher
that that is demonstrating
interest that has the licensure
in order to do there's a demand
within the school would say is
to really be able to highlight
that in two and to put into
action just like at atrisk
heritage academy we have a
wonderful culinary arts teacher
and they do pretty amazing
things the students
So again it would it would give
the school districts that sort
of flexibility as well in the
courses that they provide for
students far as in this case a
lab.
Well Mr chairman and.
Madam chair I do a reprieve
share your responses to that my
daughter is an executive chef.
And the this is not offered in
her high school she literally
had to go to culinary school and
worker but off to get to the
point issues that now which is
now shut down thanks to all the
special orders that are taking
place but.
It seems to me like each school
district now is going to have to
go back and re evaluate all of
their curricula.
And have more availability of
the bigger realm of classes that
are going to be offered to the
students that are.
Either want to go into a
technical field or to a
university said college setting
and I'm getting mixed results
because I have contacted my
school superintendents and.
I'm getting a mixed feeling here
it's basically.
Okay I'm concerned my concern
there will be for the math
credit and I just want our
local.
School boards.
The ultimate control over what
happens in their district
because once again I will point
out and I'm gonna be very
adamant about this one size does
not fit all in the state of New
Mexico what is good for
Albuquerque public skate school
systems may not work for like
Arthur school district so I just
want to leave you all with that
thank you very much for your
responses madam chair and Mr
chair that's all.
Mr representatives will be first
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Lente in the Representative Lane
followed by Representative
Chatfield.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair for your bill I
have but some of the questions
have been raised already but I
want to get a little bit further
clarity.
Excuse me.
First though I'd like to commend
you on the whole community I
mean the whole student choice
which is aligned with what all
of the data in the last few
years have been indicating to us
and that is that in order to be
able to increase student
interest and increase student
graduation students I have been
articulating over and over again
that they want to have
substantive curriculum that will
lead them in that direction of
their choice and of of of of
their future the feels they want
to pursue whether it's higher
education or whether it's trades
or culinary arts whatever so I
think this choice model and
giving students on the
independent studies are
necessary in order to make those
choices will probably will not
probably will most likely lead
to successful futures and that's
the model that I think that
we've all been looking at very
closely on that note though I do
want to ask if
in the.
Curriculum choices that will be
provided.
offer it will madam chair and Mr
chair.
Will the list of curriculum
include and I'm gonna go back to
I think it was Representative
Dow question will it include
financial literacy in.
Well the choice include
financial literacy madam chair
and representative yes it
maintains the statute that as an
elective financial literacy
be offered as an elective in
it's a requirement that school
districts to offer financial
literacy.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair I
just wanted to make sure and
emphasize on how important it is
especially for our young
you know I use my son as an
example he had financial
literacy since he was in middle
school and it sparked interest
and he became a finance major in
school and that's when he
graduated and and now he's a
successful young businessman and
it's very important because that
was part of his choice that
tracked him through middle
school high school and then went
to his college degree so thank
you madam chair Mr chair another
question I wanted to ask you and
it's been noted in the FIR as
well as in the LESC analysis the
whole issue of dual credit madam
chair Mr chair could you
explained
how.
Removing or reducing I I'm not
quite sure if it's a removal
human reducing of dual credit is
going to impact the existing
programs that we've been
elevating
at the community college and
university level.
Madam chair and representative I
I would defer that question on
the beginning to drive and see.
Dress that please.
thank you representative and
madam chair.
One of the things that the high
school teachers are saying is
that
it should be a choice not a
requirement to have dual credit
class and it's part of
rethinking what we did in two
thousand and seven when all of
us and public education across
the nation because of the no
child left behind law we're
really pushing everybody into
college and limiting career
choices to those that require a
college degree and as such we've
really seen
you know
A problem with skilled trades
we've seen so it's still there
as an option and those pathways
are still built it's just not a
requirement as online classes
could have been taken and that's
no longer a requirements
and so what we wanted to do in
this is take away some of the
things that had been required in
the past to loosen up and allow
flexibility in the future.
Thank you.
You madam chair and thank you on
the Springsteen so all how the
next Associated question to that
and I'm referring again to the
questions raised in LA a C.
analysis and FIR how.
Will this in fact on impact the
The savings that families
receive if it becomes an option
and and
not a requirement does that have
any impact financially on the
families.
Madam chair and Representative
and Mr chair.
Madam chair and and
Representative I mean that.
I I wouldn't know the answer to
now I mean I think it's it's up
to these colleges and
universities also to recruit
students and to coordinate with
with their school districts to
to capture those students and
let them know that but things
like dual credit are still an
option for students in Advanced
Placement is still an option
for students so so I think
you're if anything at least at
this point that's for sure is is
making sure that there's on that
sort of dialogue between the
district and in the universities
and I mean I will say again it
said that I think that sort of
work is very much in our purview
especially in the interim is to
look at these issues because
again we're acknowledging this
connection between secondary
education and higher education
and I think you bring up some
good points.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair I
think that's incredibly
important because we don't want
to have a a gap in it virtually
created at
in a pathway that has been very
successful so we have to provide
that continuous oversight in
question and ensure that we
don't unintentionally create
other gaps when that wasn't the
intent of what we're trying to
do and I appreciate madam chair
and Mr chair us being able to
monitor that and and ask those
questions during the interim
finally on the question of the
New Mexico history madam
chairman Mr chair I understand
exactly what you how you
addressed it in terms of
transitioning the periods of
history through that middle
school high school
A past so.
Will reducing the.
Our.
The curriculum and any way.
Reduce
the.
Skills and knowledge and
offerings of are rich
indigenous and Hispanic history
does that in any way cut back or
reduce or restructure that to
where they will the students
will not get the maximum
correct it benefit of the
curriculum and you missed in New
Mexico history in particular.
Madam chair representative what
what I would argue to this point
is that the inclusion of a full
year of government and civics
involved then it's kind of the
culmination of our students
being active participants in on
their current.
Point in time so so I see the
New Mexico history credit is
something that's that's all over
from eighth grade but the
trajectory I think that we're
designing for students is really
that all they start
understanding.
History and historical thought I
mean I have my masters in
history and they start
understanding their history in
middle school it branches out
gets wider wider wider into
world history but then the
emphasis on government and
civics is very much their role
in the here and now all things
that we're doing here at
governmental level and and and
working in that sort of way to
to understand Representative
history and and work and and get
involved for the future so I see
this as a part and very much in
line with that sort of
trajectory.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair and I offered these
questions on behalf of several
individuals that reached out to
me via email so I wanted to make
sure that
there you know they they have I
hate they have the benefit of my
understanding so that I can
answer them so I really do
appreciate
Your answers and do appreciate
again on the whole connection of
of the choice models and
emphasize really the community
based on community centered
model which has been a proven
model in education for for ever
it seems but we failed on in
many instances to incorporated
appropriately and as such I
think we lost touch we we forced
our students to lose touch with
what is important to them as
well as to their communities so
Mr chair and and madam chair
thank you very much that's.
For me.
Representative
will have a representative Lente
followed by representatives lane
Chatfield and Baldonado
representative Lente thank you
madam chair and thank you Mr
chairman for bringing this piece
of legislation I just want to
share with you a comment that
this independent study framework
of the capstone framework is
currently what the Santa Fe
Indian school has in place and
it has been of from my
observation extremely popular
with parents and and communities
and tribal leaders where I have
also been a mandatory to
participate in this type of
independent studying cast on
framework where professional
mentors are brought in and and
work with the student in
a in a defined topic here to
support that student and it
creates a.
A great career exploration
creating a passion and and
really a best interest in school
and in a career path and so is
that have a community based
education that is reinforced is
been a great success at the
Santa Fe Indian school and it's
that type of of great success
that again fetches those type of
numbers that Indian school
creates that ninety plus percent
graduation rate it creates that
eighty five eighty five eighty
percent rate of acceptance into
a university and so when the
students perform or participate
in this capstone for independent
study type of framework their
focus at the Indian school has
been you know like language
revitalization for their native
languages water rights water
quality tribal government
economic development cultural
environmental protections these
type of really passionate things
that that these children are
into and then it creates this
pathway for them to go into a
career it's not just just a
passion for them in life and so
to have been part of that has
been a blessing to mine and so
when I think of this being
expanded to our state's public
areas you know I I think of
those that maybe may not be a a
Santa Fe Indian school could be
those rural communities where
you know animal husbandry or or
farm and ranch economics and how
to how do you intervention make
money of those type of focuses
can be extremely beneficial and
will provide that type of local
authority so that our schools
and our children and our
families can have that ability
that to learn what is important
to them and for us then to be
able to support them in return
hopefully create this come up
this type of cyclical success
stories so with that Mr chairman
madam chair thank you for the
opportunity to to bright provide
the shortcoming thank you.
Representative Representative
Lane.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman Romero for bring
this bill at I think one of the.
One of the things are the
aspects I appreciate most about
this bill is the philosophical
approach to really of putting
our students and and by
extension their parents more in
control of their education which
this is gonna up you'll their
future as well and and I see
this is getting away from what
would be an otherwise top down
cookie cutter approach so I
definitely appreciate that
One of the questions I want to
ask built around this concept of
capstone courses and I I also
like this concept
I think it will add not only
some flexibility but some
excitement and creativity into
our high school students but my
specific question madam chair is
there a cap on the number of
capstone courses that on
intended.
madam chair and and
Representative Lane defer to my
experts
I'm looking over the.
Madam chair representative and
members of the committee the way
in which
capstones are able to be offered
says that they can be
of core class if the teacher is
highly qualified in the area in
which they are intended to get
credit so it allows for junior
or senior to get credit in a
capstone class if the school is
able to offer it
again it would require each high
school to be able to develop
that and have somebody who's
highly qualified in the area
that they're getting credit for.
I don't see anything in the bill
that would tap the number of
classes I think it's more a
matter of each high school's
capacity to be able to offer the
opportunity.
And madam chair and
representative that's a that's a
very good answer so on page
twelve yeah I mean I think it
would be limited by time and the
availability of staff since its
eleventh and twelfth graders
engaged in capstone class.
Thank you madam chair thank you
chairman Romero as this this
bill moves along and and I do
support this bill and tend to go
for but as this bill moves along
that might be a a suggestion
that I would make is is not so
much even put a hard cap in the
bill but maybe just add some
language that gives school
districts the the option to if
they want to limit the number of
capstone courses per subject
area maybe something along those
lines.
and then the other suggestion
and and you know I I think this
is an important one for me is
this idea of financial literacy
I believe that teaching our
students personal finance
concepts things like what is
what is credit card debt what
does it mean to finance a boat
what is it mean to
Representative verses by a house
what is retirement how do you
actually do a tax return you
know one of the the means that
always flies around April
fifteenth is.
You know I'm sure glad that I I
learned how to do parallelograms
that comes in handy this
parallelogram season
and you know it's just a rip off
of you know how much we as a
people don't even understand our
own income tax system
and so to the extent that we can
teach these practical rural life
concepts like investing like
charitable giving all of these
things that that really make a
difference in a student's life
and and and in my mind these
these are practical tools that
actually can help students get
out of poverty and not just to
say that across it if they can
put these things into practice
at age eighteen nineteen twenty
twenty one and allow compound
interest to do its work it's
it's amazing the difference in
the connection of students live
and so the other thing I I would
request is that you know
financial literacy
become you know if if not
required now certainly required
elective and I know there's this
does this juggling you know how
much do we make required and how
much to make optional.
But the reality is that that
we're choosing a certain was
that are required I'm and we're
not getting away from that
baseline approach and so I would
submit that that financial
literacy personal finance
concepts or being that should be
in incorporate that baseline
approach thank you madam chair.
And madam chair if I may respond
because I think he brings up the
pretty good suggestion and and
financial literacy and and I
mean are statute are in our
proposed changes kind of keep
the strong statutory language in
place that school districts are
required to have financial
literacy as an option you don't
see that too too much in terms
of elective classes that that
districts would would have to
maintain that and offer the
class for students I would say
two and and that in any of these
requirements certainly
as we move toward kind of this
model wealth less requirements
is truly embedding those into
the the content and and skill
standards in our math classes
because that's that's a super
important place where students
can see the practicality of the
things that they're doing in
class and certainly when we talk
about the one that I always I
always talk about so the the
returning members will probably
already know this already but
you know I'm a social studies
teacher and and when it comes up
about media literacy right well
that's my whole job that's what
we're doing we're comparing
political cartoons news articles
social media posts and how to
interpret those and what do they
need and so basically the whole
subject in in social studies I
am doing in my colleagues and
social studies are doing media
literacy
every single day for students
and that's something that that
I know math teachers are betting
but something that I think
moving forward as we look at
that the content standards and
sees truly embedding into all of
these areas of mass.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your your answer general
manager at no further questions
thank you.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair
Mr chairman I really appreciate
you bringing this bill I whole
heartedly supported.
I think there's been a lot of
good things brought up with
almost go to remain silent but I
think there's something that
this bill does it has it but the
has the light has been shined on
and that is a the visible
graduation rate statewide I
think we have a very poor
graduation rate and I say that
students often times
They they look at the the
requirements a look at thousand
would too and I think I you know
I want to be a builder I want to
build houses I don't want to I
am I have no intention of going
to college I don't want to take
algebra two I want to take some
other class but if they have
that option to set their own
goals a child wants to go to
college can set the college
track and they can can take
those courses that prepare them
for college but if they want to
build homes now they might set a
track that would teach them more
about carpentry and they in the
process of doing that they start
learning about angles and
measurements and all the things
that it takes to build a home
and in that process learning
mass they might want to open a
restaurant same deal they learn
about to teach all temperature
measurements all those things
but they see a reason for doing
that and and therefore they stay
in school and therefore they
they learn about a subject that
they want to go out and make
their living doing and otherwise
it might just save how will drop
out to work for for building
company I'm gonna drop thousand
and go to work for a plumbing
company and if they stay in
school they might also a choir
some of the skills and the maybe
even the the degrees that the
allows and I have that have
their own company some of the
most successful people I know
today are people that have a
plumbing company a carpentry
company I'm gonna building come
Wilder's forever some of the
people in the trades are the
most successful folks in another
day and I think we should
encourage that and encourage our
kids to the to see some reason
for being there school and so I
said I appreciate you and I
think you're bring this.
Representative.
Three more of people on the list
Representative Baldonado often
Representative Williams
Stapleton and Representative
Figueroa remind everybody it's
nine thirty and we have three
more bills Representative
Baldonado thank you madam chair
thank you on chairman for the
bill I'm gonna echo everybody
else's comments I do I do
support the for the legislation
I I really just and struggling
with that with going to three
credits for math
I I feel like you know if we can
amend something in there that
that still require that fourth
credit
maybe language in there that
says of a college prep type math
for a financial literacy class
something they give those kids
and those options and that way
we're still we're still.
In that regard to them in terms
of you know getting prepared for
for their launch into into life
but otherwise I I do like the
idea of of more local control
and and things of that nature
inside I hope that you consider
maybe amending and this
committee or maybe along the way
I believe you have another
committee hearing after this one
but up those are my comments I
don't really have any questions
Mr chairman or madam chair
Mister chairman and all probably
support the bill thank you.
Representative Representative
Williams Stapleton.
Chair I will wait for
Representative Figueroa I just
want to make a do pass motion.
Thank you.
Representative Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair for the bill
I would like to go back briefly
into the removal of the.
HB honors dual credit
requirements
knowing that we as a body.
House necessarily funded
institutions of higher and that
it taking on the dual credit
burden there's always been some
contention from them that
they're taking on the students
but they are getting the
financial support to pay for it
I'm wondering if we remove this
as a is the requirements.
Are the higher education
institutions gonna turn around
and say okay we're not we're not
going to offer this anymore
because we're losing money on it
and then our families who are
according to the analysis
saving ten million dollars a
year on dual credit having their
students start some college
while they're still in high
school are they going to lose
that opportunity you have any
concerns about that or any ideas
about how to prevent it.
Madam chair representative I
mean you you you bring up a good
point and something certainly
not to be taken lightly I think
bye bye dropping this
requirement for students and and
it's like I said it's going to
be up to the local school
district and to date the our
area colleges and universities
today to keep the is the is
courses a live in most effective
for their students and I think
it's gonna really prompt that
sort of
conversation
between the secondary education
and and and higher education in
our state I mean as you point
out the the higher education
institutions have been
Losing money on on their dual
credit program and I think
that's something that I mean
again I can't help but point out
how interrelated additional is
with with the one that I'm
sponsor for Ellie S. C. right is
that that's that's exactly where
we need to insert ourselves and
and part of my my consternation
with with not having control of
the budget either is that we can
try to figure out a way that if
this is the scenario in going
this route what the effects of
it are and what they're
happening and how we as a
legislature can truly seek to
resolve this so I think
as it stands now we can wait and
see what the implication is I do
not see it as so dire but should
it be that's where we need to
insert ourselves to to remedy
yet but I definitely see the the
the
the cause for for read fighting
this.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chair I'm going to go on
into the question of mathematics
that has been brought up several
times and I'm gonna say I share
that concern
this is a tremendous concern.
On page eleven where all the
options are listed for things
that could possibly substitute
as a mass credit credit it
boggles my mind that financial
literacy isn't even listed in
there I think that's a
tremendous oversight now like
many folks madam I think that's
a benefit to our students I'm
not necessarily saying it needs
to be added as requirements.
Is one of the horses that we
meet match requirement if we're
going to brought in that list.
General question about listing
the courses in math and science
that could meet the requirements
now if in the above for each of
those sessions and says that the
department had issues certified
academic content and performance
standards for the courses then
why do we have to listen at all
can't get any course submitted
to the PED here this means the
match requirement or this meets
the English Department PED go
through the course and say yes
it does now it doesn't
Why are we listing or limiting
ourselves that way.
Madam chair representative I
wouldn't say that we're limiting
in any sort of way because it's
including so it's to emphasize
the types of possibilities are
available
and and I think Mr send I could
you could you speak to the PED
oversight on on courses as they
currently stand and how you see
it working with the school.
Madam chair and Mr chairman
Representative Figueroa I would
defer to the W. secretary one of
them is much more familiar these
if she's still available for
comment otherwise I can give you
my understanding of it.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero you're exactly right
Representative Romero the
listing simply gives us a guide
and then we would have complete
that the house is based on the
content of the courses.
Thank you madam chair thank you
doctor Warniment
Next question then is about our
highly qualified teacher teacher
licensure
If.
The computer science course is
being used as a math credit
doesn't teacher has to be
endorsed in mass is a culinary
arts courses being used as a
science credit Justin teacher
need to be endorsed in CTE or
endorsed and in science in
chemistry
explain how this coordinates
with our licensure endorsements
system.
Madam chair and and
Representative I would defer to
to PED on this.
Madam chair representative would
you repeat the question I'm
sorry.
Madam chair and drive one of
these about Courtney's with the
teacher licensure programs and
worry about this is the culinary
arts is going to be counted as a
science credit does the school
have to find it teacher who's
licensed and endorsed in science
to teach the culinary arts class
now how does that work.
Representative yes and part of
me excuse me for that you are
correct actually so licensure
does determine and or aligned
with the course credit so we
would need to reconsider and or
look at those courses that we
would count as a science that
same math credit even a you know
an English credit and look to
see as that license covered and
or and complete that's actually
also part of the work in terms
of CTE so you're correct.
Okay thank you can see schools
having some concerns in a lot of
issues in terms of scheduling
and finding the right teachers
for the right courses they're
gonna have to know now why a
student is signing up for that
culinary arts class are they
counting it is a C. T. elective
or is this student needing it to
be their science credit in order
to put them with the right
teacher.
So I want to think about how we
go about that process moving
forward is a little bit
complicated I have a question
from a constituent madam chair
about.
The new NMAA endorses the sports
class and they want to know if
that would count under this bill
S. P. ET and I didn't know how
to answer them so I'm wondering
if the sponsor might be able to
answer that.
I'm madam chair and
representative as it stands I
currently don't know but that's
an interesting question of all
the questions we've heard to
date this is probably the one
that I have not heard yet.
Word of PED folks answer that
question.
Thank you madam chair no that's
also something that I take back
and bring forward.
Thank you dross constituent to
come up with a real stumper of
the question
Madam chair of question about
the capstone someone else's
already mentioned maybe
considering
L'image de Castro courses but I
think what a school can provide
will will create some limits
around there my question is
about for I do not see in the
bill any definition of the term
course up to a class in capstone
can replace of course subject
force for eleventh grader ended
twelfth grader four nine greater
is taking taking capstone course
as an elective.
Create a capstone.
The project is elective for
those who are using it to be a
core subject requirements what
was the definition of court
because in common practice.
My family's understand course to
be anything that is required or
not and elected is that the
accurate definition.
Madam chair representative yes
say I've I believe that's
accurate.
Okay then I want to confirm that
capstone course could be created
into potentially substitute for
or PED class or for this it is
classed.
Or for.
We are closer workplace Wayne's
world language requirement it
could be anything that is out of
that seven point five elective.
Session is that correct.
Madam chair representative yes.
Okay
This.
Caused concern but having enough
students to want to go that
route to build of course will
probably limited in and I was
jobs you madam chair and thank
you my last comment is just
about university requirements in
the.
Third we are placing on our
counseling departments in the
sensually honor teachers who are
doing these next step plans with
students to understand clearly
this process we already have a
graduation requirements that
don't align with university
entrance requirements so I as a
classroom teacher and constantly
explaining to my parents.
No this is not required for
graduation yes this is required
for entrance to the university
of New Mexico I'm I'm a world
language teacher.
So we are kind of running them a
little bit warm perhaps yeah
we're gonna have to be ever more
careful about talking to parents
and students about if you're
still considering college is one
of your options you have to keep
in mind these entrance
requirements these things you
should have for college and
madam chair thank you thank you
Representative for a bill that
brings a lot of options to
students and lot of choice.
Thank.
Thank you Representative I'm.
Sure I just have one question
and that question is about
health I am concerned because of
the major child and young adult
development issues a seventh
grader taking a required point
five as they enter or go through
puberty is very different than a
high school student.
Be a parent
shortly or right after high
school so could you just address
the concerns that I personally
have been a lot of constituents
have about requiring a point I
in high school as well as in
middle school.
Thank you madam chair I think Dr
Byrne Steen had offered to.
A quick preview of an answer so
I would differ.
The state of.
Thank you Mr chairman and chair
and the committee
I have some memory of
the debate in the legislature
around the requirement of health
and how it originally got in to
the high school bill which we
are changing through this piece
of legislation and
I I wish I remembered it more
clearly but the way that it
ended up in the bill was to give
the local district the kind of
flexibility they need it my
experience in APS and I
understand that this is just a
PS and not the rest of the state
but when I asked APS leadership
about the health requirement
they were adamant that it is
important to keep that in high
school for the reasons that you
just mentioned so it I think
what if I remember correctly
what that debate entailed was
allowing for every district to
figure out how it is best placed
for their community and it
doesn't negate having it in both
middle school and high school.
That's I think.
That's that's the best that I
can say that it's very important
and local districts need to
figure out how to best places.
Thank you.
And PED is there any comment on
that from either Dr Warniment or
Mr Cena.
Okay.
Thank you that was my only
question there's no other
questions from the members of
our committee so with that I
will go to Representative
Williams Stapleton for a motion.
Madam chair will but do passed
in house bill eighty three.
Representative Chatfield second
set
is there any objection to the
bill.
I'm at.
Madam chair yeah sure I would
have the secretary called the
roll on this okay.
Madam secretary can you please
call the roll.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
David Dowell.
No one I'd like to explain my
vote.
Entities now.
Yes.
Yes Representative Figueroa.
Nine.
Like to explain.
Representative les yes.
Representative Ladda yes.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative.
No.
Vacaville yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
yes.
There.
Yeah.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Representative.
Chair Romero.
Yes.
Chair woman.
Okay yes.
Twelve to three I mean eleven to
three.
The the thank you madam
secretary Representative Dow all
I will explain her vote followed
by Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman and I I hope you
understand I really like this
bill others just a few concerns
that I have and I think you know
one of the things that I've
learned is that we can work on
bills as they move through
committee and I one of those
folks you see it to see if there
were some questions and and
especially in this virtual
climate a no vote might be the
only because we get to just
voting unanimously on bills on
the floor which we do it you
know probably more than eighty
percent and I think that we
really have to talk about
financial literacy and would be
happy to work with you at make
any changes so I want to be a
test on the board thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Representative Representative
On the chairwoman okay
Right I just want to correct
that both that vote was twelve
to three.
Thank you madam secretary
Representative Figueroa thank
you madam chairwoman I would
reiterate Representative Taos
comments and just say I don't
have real concerns about not
having four units of mass when
we're broadening the definition
of what can count and I hope
that you'll consider amending
that.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
You have to pass
And our next bill will be house
bill eighty six.
Right thank you thank you madam
chair if you would continue I
was speaking a lot and had a lot
of water I need to take a
restroom break plants but if you
would continue we have
Representative Lente and I will
return shortly thank you madam
chair and
Yes house bill eighty three it
will take to eighties six
shortly Representative one Kate
well now pre well now that house
bill eighty six thank you madam
chair good morning good morning
members if you would please
madam chair I have three expert
witnesses in the ten days
bracket if you would please the
attendees raise your hand so
that are sure we can let you
into a panelists mode Janice
court many please raise your
hand she Center on hope the
raise your hand Kimball sick we
picked you up the right hand.
There should be three madam
chair woman.
And
As you do that you let me know
when you want me to be gay.
Okay.
I am promoted two of them who is
your third one let's see I I
think we're still with missing
Janis.
Danisco many.
I'm looking for
she's she's there and the
attendees list.
Is it jasmine yeah I know man it
it's jazz the genesis.
Going yes raise it.
Okay.
Okay.
To
three panelists.
Thank you madam chair and I want
to first begin by stating that
house bill eighty six is a piece
of legislation that the
continuation of introduced
legislation that I had in the
twenty nineteen legislative
session as well as the twenty
twenty legislative session and
again with both of those.
Built in both years each time
passed out of the respective
committees unanimously but this
year House Bill eighty six is a
continuation of a bill I
presented last week which is
part of the tribal remedy
framework again either developed
by tribal leaders staff parents
students school administrators
teachers and business
professionals and has been
endorsed by the Navajo Nation he
create pagination the Mescalero
Apache nation and to the all
pueblo council of governors via
all tribal resolutions and so
house bill eighty six again as
he's part of a series of
legislation to address the
findings in the consolidate
lawsuit of Martinez Yazzie
versus the state of New Mexico
and so house bill eighty six
again is focused on tribal
libraries and really the
extended students services
aspect of the findings in of
Martinez Yazzie the first tribal
library was established in
nineteen seventy four and a good
no problem.
And do today's own state
assessment a quarter of of
households lack access to
internet in their own home and I
will have Kimball address how
that's even more pronounced in
tribal communities where that
number has grown to you know
more more than probably like
three quarters of people do not
have access to internet within
their own homes and so I have
often said in time before we
speaking about remedies to the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit is that
our state's failure our
constitutional say in the year
to uphold the right to an
adequate education.
That is expensive and tribal
tribal libraries have responded
and have a long history of
legislative efforts to get a
sense of the school needed for
community libraries and
technological access and again
this is been made very
Knowing very very well known
to Yazzie Martinez.
Really we were talking about
this three hundred Martinez and
we're especially talking about
this pre COVID and so what what
Yazzie Martinez and COVID has
has illuminated is definitely
the lack of infrastructure from
extended student services
building from a room from a desk
to the internet infrastructure
within those communities for our
children to continue to learn
and so in some cases as an
example given many of our
communities have no internet
access have no broadband
infrastructure have no tribal
libraries or even.
S..
A rural building or a building
itself to allow their students
to continue to learn so as the
example I gave last week was
when those children leave their
respective school leave then
that would be to learn the lead
then the place that they then
that internet price for just.
With the tablet this is rural
New Mexico and so when they
leave that and hop on that bus
going back home our rights back
home they then leave and have
the inability to continue to
learn access internet access
learning access the the the
ability to continue to compete
like their peers do within more
urbanized areas of our state and
so what that leads to is is then
the decline of our ability to.
Compete with our peers the the
inability to perform
scholastically and then the
Representative high rise of that
drop our rates and other factors
that come along with the with
with our inability to have those
types of resources or luxuries
as I might want to call them in
our state today and so we have
to be able to change those set
of priorities we have to be able
to to say that you know internet
access at this point in time in
twenty twenty one should not be
able to re it should be one of
our human rights that we provide
to all of our citizens so that
they have the ability to
continue to access the outside
world which allow them to become
more successful and so that lack
of access ten years ago was
described and referred to we
have this super highway that we
are going to access throughout
the entire state but honestly
within tribal communities within
rural communities no off ramps
tribal communities were ever
built on the super highway and
now in this Yazzie Martinez era
we have now considered to be a
digital and constitutional
catastrophe and so.
What's also what's so remarkable
about the work of training
librarians that they've had the
comprehensive recommendations
that previous legislators and
the legislature asked them to
develop recommendations like
those that have come out of the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit the most
cost effective investment was to
invest in tribal libraries
the best and educational
resources with in.
And with with the ability to
have those technological access
is and so up to an as early as
the June twenty twenty report
from the state broadband
education plan and rural
broadband assessment which was
prepared by do it for New Mexico
there is a section
specifically related to tribal
communities and it recommends
that the most effective
investment to create these
community condo what's that
tribal librarians Representative
have recommended to us the
legislature over the several
years but we have not been able
to listen to them to prevent
that today nearly forty percent
of our students are minimally
participating or not at all in
their scholastic work that many
of them have dropped off and
said if I don't have a jet pack
if I don't have the access if my
mom can do to McDonald's to
finish of support what am I
supposed to do I'll take the F.
but instead of taking the F. I'm
just going to give up and so.
They don't want to give up.
Because they have no access they
want to work but our inability
to help them it's facilitate
their ability to connect like
everyone else has has developed
and created their inability to
have access inability to to
continue to perform work and
then there after their feed so
we have unfortunately set our
own students up to fail and that
is on all of us and so when I
look in the mirror I have to say
it's my fault and when my wife
goes out and she goes and takes
jet packs to the public it's who
still yet a year after being put
on on of a virtual platform for
learning.
Children are still corner saying
I don't have a jet pack I need
access and we're having to go
and deliver these to the pueblos
that is heartbreaking because
you know these children just
lost a year off of their ability
to continue to learn and so when
you read the motions when you
read the the evidence we read
the reports it all points to one
to two to one aspect is that.
The pandemic has taught us
numerous lessons and without our
our ability to provide our
students especially in tribal
communities that ability that
space that infrastructure to
have to allow them to continue
to work.
We're setting them up to fail
and so with that being said
Madam chairwoman I do have a
three expert witnesses that that
I would like to have you allow
them just a little bit of a time
to to talk I would like to
introduce first Janice who is
directed the director of the
Laguna public library she has a
masters in library science she
is the former president of the
New Mexico tribal library
association and has been working
with another one of my experts
as visionaries really of the
tribal librarians all and so if
you would please Janice allow
her a minute to speak Madam one.
So well we have excuse me so we
have.
Another hour we like to stop
eleven to allow our our our
committee members to have lunch
we still do have other to other
bills to go through and I know
we have a lot of public
testimony so please keep it
brief
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee at the
twenty th that my name is Janet
Quinney from the public we're
gonna
thank you for the opportunity to
share brief history of tribal
libraries and the work that
tribal Adrian Representative in
the nineteen Google Correa
patchy muscular Apache and
Navajo Nation.
New Mexico library have been a
vital resource in tribal
communities in nineteen seventy
four and if you have heard one
of the first tribal library was
established at Laguna pueblo
with the support of the the
volunteers list of condo who
with the late great at the time
and from the public figure out
what's the one of the first
tribal eight billion at the time
it was located in an old house
and all her work with the New
Mexico Levitz Association laid
the foundation and with one of
the first stated delegate to a
White House conference on
library and.
In nineteen seventy four the
library training in American
Indian did and in nineteen
seventy five the public of
Laguna Santa Domingo at
commencement of the funds so
that the Clara there any Cochiti
payments and be aware establish
libraries with like the eight.
With support to the New Mexico
admits Association and the state
library eight other tribal
embraced established with like
three eight and health in
whatever building that were
available at the time in those
communities and work budget by
federal resources.
In nineteen seventy six the New
Mexico state American roundtable
with created under the New
Mexico at the station and it was
there right the name of the
native American library special
interests the budget cut now
thank this has been a critical
part of the development of
tribal a based in New Mexico
today now state continues to be
a shot Association extrapolate
grand and supporters of tribal
at the.
LESC also supported the
establishment of the native
American libraries project in
nineteen ninety four with
Senator let the and the state
library and then what they
should do the first major late
later later named the tribal
labor rates program which now
that the New Mexico state
library thank you so let's both
PC Care five hundred thousand
dollars to the legislature to
fund tribal libraries with the
first computers and limited
internet access
the tribal libraries program
also includes a tribal lead
based program coordinator
position which has played a
vital role in New Mexico library
development I consultation with
twelve Los Navajo and Apache
tribal let me say to develop
industry in light J. and library
services to the community
unfortunately to date the
position is currently vacant and
the bill.
We.
In two thousand eight the New
Mexico legislature passed
legislation to assess the needs
of tribal library with that
assessment the tribes were
included for the first time in
the general obligation bond
process this is made possible by
the late because the house
representative then the hot
Representative graduated magna
Lena.
This was and still is largely
for minimal program support what
deeply appreciated appreciative
of the inclusion and the general
updates involved both for
program and have of late this is
not on the scale that often
infatuated with axes and provide
top ten million dollar project
it is more on the average of
less than forty thousand dollars
over a two year period to tribal
library.
With multiple sources of grant
fluctuate largely restricted for
programming and materials only
tribal lead based exist and
function with an average yearly
budget thirty to forty thousand
dollars thank you what amount of
the G. of on for all of the
current try very tribal
libraries with eight hundred
thousand dollars statewide.
The average cost of a light
right there just the one in the
gonna is that two hundred fifty
thousand dollars for the library
to the function of the public
had contribute two hundred
thousand dollars for the
majority of the New Mexico
tribal a very not the case so
often that part time or one
person libraries in two thousand
nine the New Mexico legislature
passed house memorial fifty nine
and direct a study and
assessment of operational and
that they need to recognize that
there was a significant need
from the previous.
The needs identified were
operation of funding for staff
salaries and utilities funding
for facilities expansion and
upgrades need for tribal
libraries created a condition to
be still reduce funding
restrictions and professional
development training needs that
we are still need that we are
still wanting twelve years later
to help us provide library
services in that community.
By two thousand thirteen to
level a state and national
interests that could focus on
the infrastructure needs in two
thousand fifteen with another
legislative request the New
Mexico state library
and that tribal libraries
programs led an effort in
partnership with the university
of New Mexico school of
architecture's indigenous design
and planning let the first major
comprehensive facilities
assessment the findings
concluded that the majority of
the tribal libraries for health
facilities not designed for
library the major work in all
directly related building as a
result of the Legislative
extensive efforts to fully
understand the scope of the need
for New Mexico high but tribal
live right over the course of
twelve years house bill eighty
six if the humiliating it effort
at this joint partnership
between the tribes of the
library the tribal language
programs and the legislature
prior to two thousand eighteen
Yazzie Martinez decision efforts
to fund tribal library
technology based.
On the separate prevention is to
fund new construction expansion
and renovation with technology
at.
That in two thousand eighteen
congressman Ben ray lu Han but
the commissioner Jessica
Rosenworcel visit accidental
public tribal library judges the
digital divide tribal a
brilliant yeah I do I compared
the impact of broadband
connectivity to the arrival of
the railroad ovary and Chico.
That efforts have been made to
secure resources to match you
make that for fiber optic lines
into the Rio Grande quicker and
with the help of Kimba the club
went to us the chief technology
technology director at the Santa
Fe Indian school who has led the
effort you would hear her
overview later the New Mexico
state library has been a
supporter and genuine partner in
a fifty four year effort and
more intense the during the last
twelve years.
We are grateful for the support
I was not born with the first
library became a reality that it
has been my passion to build
upon such a basic element of our
lives that we cannot live
without.
The highlight of our efforts are
recognized in two thousand nine
and two thousand seventeen by
the location of tribal archives
libraries and museums in the
famous public community library
and the look at a public library
actively with the guardian award
for like three institutional
excellence award while this
recognition what for every a
complex if you could please
strap up your comments for this
so that we can move on because
we have two other panelists and
and people that wish to speak
and we also want to get to our
other bills so we can respect
the time of everybody on this
list thank you.
Okay what I'm finishing up I
want to thank Representative
Lente at all efficient for all
of your support she during the
effort that advocacy of my bill
eligible Liberians thank you I
hope this because to provide
some context
To have the appreciate how long
we have labor to help secure
support for tribal lately thank
you
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Janice for that
For that presentation I I do
want to have just Mysteron hope
provide any background if in
fact we have questions that are
related to some library aspects
but.
But in in in in the interest of
time I would like to then go to
Campbell who has a background on
the internet infrastructure
aspects of why this is so
important for native American
Mexico so Kimball you would
please again respecting time
thank you.
You're on mute.
Okay thank you representative Mr
chair I'm gonna turn off maybe
Oakes I'm having internet issues
but I'll continue speaking my
name is Kimball secure quick to
and the Santa Fe Indian school
chief technology officer and
I've been helping tribes expand
internet access in the pueblos
for actively for about ten over
ten years some of the Indian
school serves nineteen problems
the Navajo Nation into Apache
tribes in New Mexico for us
addressing the homework gap
requires us to solve the digital
divide on twenty two rural
tribal lands and likely some of
the least connected areas in the
United States in fact the two
thousand and sixteen FCC report
found that up to sixty eight
percent of tribal lands rural
tribal lands do not have
broadband connectivity pre COVID
the tribal libraries where the
public students went for
computer and internet use since
few homes have computers and
those computers rarely had the
internet during the COVID the
libraries are closed but their
parking lots have provide wifi
we surveyed our families know
that forty four percent of our
students don't have internet
this number grows if you
eliminate the slow DSL
connections that don't meet FCC
standards and the mobile
cellular users.
The limited number of high speed
options and the cost of families
are the barriers for internet
adoption the jet packs thrown
out during the COVID are nothing
more than short term bandaids we
can too many schools poor
tendons and failing grades are
pervasive during remote learning
on the other hand this bill
provides a long term solution to
tribal connectivity by building
two important regional fiber
optic links or as Representative
Eli to refer to tribal on ramps
to the information superhighway
it extends the recent efforts of
six pueblos that connected six
tribal libraries into schools
over a hundred and twenty mile
fiber optic network this work
proves that it's tribes we can
be our own solution to the
digital divide and we can
successfully partner with the
state including New Mexico PED
do it and PSSA.
We also apply that this bill
plans beyond infrastructure to
support educational programming
including workforce development
through the creation of a
regional pueblo education
network up.
Where individual libraries and
schools are to off are often too
small to have dedicated IT
professionals were to install
suggested cybersecurity measures
the public education network
consolidate these critical
services aggregates demand for
volume purchasing and creates a
platform for collaboration
twenty three states of state
education networks New Mexico
isn't one of them yet these are
models that have shown success
the effort to create the public
education network will also lay
the foundation for a statewide
education network serving all of
New Mexico students finally
COVID revealed to fall into the
digital divide especially for
low income communities we can be
sure however the educational
technologies will not return to
pre COVID times and that the use
of internet enabled mobile
devices on and off campus will
only grow thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for any questions.
Right thank you all so we will
go to we have some eager beavers
in the audience similar all
hands quickly because I haven't
gotten to the instructions yet
so please wait people.
All right so we'll go to the
audience there are no I'm so the
role of this committee is that
if you do not have a last name
we need a first and last name so
people please refrain in the
audience from raising your hand
yet we will go to you but
You need a first and last name
to be called upon you all have
up to two minutes but I would
ask you to please be brief in
your comments and do not repeat
people that have gone before you
please again we have two more
bills
and we need to get through them.
By the end of this morning okay
so with that being said if you
are here in support of house
bill eighty six please go ahead
and raise your hand.
You do need a last name.
So we do have quite a list so
please keep it very brief.
Extraordinarily brief please so
Pearson please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
person style I am the first to
the governor for the public back
one thank you for allowing me
the time to share the public
position on H. B. eighty six act
much supports the bill because
it addresses a critical need
that exists in every tribal
community across the state which
is the need for tribal libraries
and what they provide right now
the tribal library acting as
tired looking building need a
major repair we need a building
that provides our students with
the kind of services and
possibilities that libraries in
every town and city across the
state offers its young people
and its communities additionally
we lack high speed internet
connectivity and almost all of
our homes act one the only place
our students can access reliable
internet is the library in order
for them to do homework after
hours our students once in a
parked car in the library
parking area and forcing us away
for child to learn lastly a
library can do many things for
our community and our students
it could offer place a study
placed to be tutored a place for
language instruction a place for
distant learning or anything HB
eighty eighty six can provide
the funding and infrastructure
to support student access to
education I ask community
committee to support this one
time investment in learning but
they do pass thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
this concludes my comment thank
you and governor.
This is.
C..
Okay yes.
Please not be repetitive you
have a.
Sorry good morning chair members
of the committee my name is
jasmine yep I am from the public
view mess and I also am a member
of the tribal educational I and
and I'd like to say for the
reasons stated already that the
tribal educational I and
supports house bill eighty six
thank you.
Great thank you jasmine.
Paul Gibson.
Please be very.
Yes
Chair Romero vice chair Garrett
thank you for this opportunity
to offer brief comment well my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy an all
volunteer organization with
twenty five hundred member
statewide as we do each year we
have identified a number of
bills we support and this year
we have twenty transformational
bills of which HB eighty six is
one in the interest of time I
only want to say that the expert
witnesses and bill sponsor
clearly laid out how badly
indigenous communities are being
harmed by state failure to
address the it's historic lack
of educational and learning
infrastructure it is time to
address this failure I know we
have budget constraints but we
also have revenue revenue
remedies that would more easily
allow us to address the systemic
racism involved in our failure
to address the needs of
indigenous populations we take
our democracy this twenty five
hundred members strongly support
HB eighty six and thanks thank
the sponsor for introducing
thank you.
Great thank you so much.
Hi and please be brave.
Chair rural thank you very much
good morning.
Members of the committee.
Again my name is removed and
chairman of the board of
education test but was in
support.
Of HB eighty six we do not have
a library at test public.
We know the importance of.
Supporting our children and
their educational needs this
would become a hub if we were to
build one we would complement
the schooling the education that
they get our public and day
schools I sponsored by the
bureau of Indian education and.
We would also be able to provide
that much needed connectivity
for our children.
Thank you Mr chair today.
Right thank you Mr.
Gallery Bellson please good
morning the parade.
Good morning this is Valerie
thousand I represent forward to
it yeah the action and that is
in the public library in regards
to infrastructure R. as Janice
stated we house our libraries in
whatever building is available
so on we house our librarian was
a housing unit for government
and tribal employees back from
the seventies I support the need
for internet besides children
families come in is job searches
take food handlers losses all
kinds of classes that are
available on the internet we
provide where one hundred
percent equitable that means we
don't turn anyone anybody away
so I support H. B. eighty six
thank you.
Right thank you.
Steers CNN's good morning.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Steve
see on his government relations
director for any in New Mexico
and for the sake of time I'll be
very brief on behalf of our
members alike to say that new I
need to Mexico stand in support
of this bill this bill up places
our most disadvantaged students
at front and center and that's
the right thing to do we thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward and we stand in
support of HB eighty six thank
you.
Thank you.
We'll go to Karen.
Karen good morning please be
very good morning chair on their
own members of the committee
Carolyn lock with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico chapter education is
the fastest way out of poverty.
And for this and so many other
reasons including Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and the comment
pandemic we standing very strong
support of the of HB eighty six
thank you very much great thank
you so much.
Right so we'll go to Jennifer
The list Ms good morning
Jennifer please you hear me.
Yes you.
Thank you chairman Romero and
committee members my name is
Jennifer Garren and I'm the
librarian at Santa Fe Indian
school as a former high school
teacher at Santa Fe Indian
school the current library and
and a member of the LESC I have
seen first hand the importance
the critical importance of
tribal libraries and the
services that they provide to
support our native American
students this has been made even
more clear since the switch to
remote learning and March twenty
twenty but it will definitely
remain true even once we return
to in person school I stand
strongly in support of this bill
and of increasing for funding
for these vital community and
education centers thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Good morning Colleen.
Good morning chairman Romero
committee members and
representative Lente Navajo
technical university is in
strong support of house bill
eighty six I am the university
president and I know first hand
the needs in our communities for
libraries to help serve our
community members we are in
support of that we also have a
strong early childhood multi
educational program that has a
total enrollment of seventy nine
students even in a pandemic
environment our students desire
to get proper prepared to go
into the classrooms the
foundation of these programs is
to create the educational
workforce that is culturally
relevant and culturally
responsive while maintaining
strong early childhood and
pedagogy and it's our desire to
serve as one of the indigenous
curriculum and materials
development centers for our K.
through twelve partners we have
a strong Dennis studies program.
And are working on our first
Ph.D internet language culture
and leadership so we want to be
able to provide the materials as
a Navajo grandmother an educator
I want my children my
grandchildren and their peers to
learn that they are valuable
part of this society as told
through the indigenous lands
there is value in our stories
and in our indigenous ways of
knowing and it should be part of
education as a whole finally are
so institution has made very
strong efforts to provide our
students with the devices the
laptops the phone in internet
plans to get them into their
hand so they can continue their
education but they are
challenged by access to the
actual network so many of our
rural students are left out H.
B. eighty three eighty six will
be an investment in the effort
to serve all New Mexico citizens
including the indigenous nations
thank you very much.
Thank thank you.
Right Jason.
Chair members the committee
chairs that
as the registered lobbyists with
the New Mexico technology
council we stand in support of
house bill eighty six
specifically looking at the a
critical investments are this
bill makes and high speed
internet access and
telecommunications office
specific areas we do understand
the need specifically because of
COVID and pose COVID the need
for the infrastructure so we
stand and support thank you for.
Thank you.
Robert.
Good morning please be very.
Yes my name is Robert at your
and I'm not.
One of the leadership
Albuquerque interface an
organization made up of seventy
and face nonprofit schools
we're very much in favor of
house bill eighty six
expanding broadband availability
into that native Americans it's
important for education as well
as telehealth and the economy an
estimate from a longer view
Cornell University our in a
study on the economic impact of
expanding broadband had one very
interesting
outside and that was that the
those kids those children
educated locally tended to have
a huge impact on creating
businesses and jobs in their
local communities and expanding
that economy this bill will help
make that happen on New Mexico's
pueblos tribes in reservations
we are very much in favor of
that thank you chairman thank
you.
Thank thank you.
We.
Good morning.
Rick you are on but you are
muted your two minutes is begin.
Well.
We may have to remove you and
going to the next one but will
come back to you.
Jeremy good morning.
Warning terms of the committee
agenda we keep distributing
learning speaking on behalf of
governor Chevy of Santa Clara
pueblo I just to keep it short
Santa Clara public supports this
bill thank you chairman.
Great thank you welcome back
Sir.
So we'll go to Austin.
Us good morning.
A good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Austin we
are geared with Nate Education
project and and the majority
vote and we stand in support of
HB eighty six for all the
reasons already outlined because
native students deserve a right
to a safe and equitable
education.
Right.
Thank you all right so we'll go
to you action we.
You could personally identify he
maybe.
Hi good morning chair and
committee my name is Sanjay
player GM I am Taos Pueblo and
Oakland the coda mother of three
I support house bill eighty six
for the fact that in twenty
twenty I was able to participate
in an inaugural T. will language
class online he was.
I don't know what happened.
Sorry about that yes yes you're
back with us okay so I was
saying to will language is an
under written oral language and
the town's public education and
training department has been
able to garner support of the
tribal council and tribal
officials to expand this effort
I can tell you that in addition
to learning foundational words
and phrases we started with our
core cultural values of respect
to love service to community
resilience and listening I can
also tell you that the red will
education centers in desperate
need of classrooms offices for
Matt this our teachers strong
internet and curriculum
materials in speaking with
patina Santa division director
there were seventy five
registrations with fifty act
language learners during this
pandemic the class was taught
for one and a half hours a week
one day a week we know that
language learning requires four
to twenty hours a week.
Over four to five years these
learners are at language
warriors and the this effort is
the future of the Kewa language
teacher pipeline I respectfully
stand in support of house bill
eighty six and say talk to the
sponsor and team for this
visionary legislation thank you
right thank you.
All right Rick are you back with
us.
Mr chair can you hear me we can
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm ripped me
of representing transform
education in Mexico and the
center online poverty we support
house bill eighty six and the
flow of economic support for
instance infrastructure that it
provides both equally and
equitably thank you so much Mr
chair members of the committee
nice talking with you right
thank you.
All right mark.
Please be brief.
Mr chair good morning members of
the committee and like to first
thank Representative my day for
bringing forward this
legislation as a as the last
couple years I represent
something to mingle although
some of on some of those the
Santa Fe Indian school I'll just
make a quick note Mr chairman of
the FY are.
Excuse me mentions how little of
money went to of native American
libraries in the last previous
years that it also mentions the
potential for so much money to
be funded in this area through
the cares Act to we don't know
what those requirements are
going to be and how much money
will leave a comment we waited
too long and there's too much
you need.
Of for Indian libraries and and
infrastructure facilities and
that's why this piece of
legislation is important to get
funded now thank you Mr
chairman.
Right thank you.
All right Joe.
Good morning Joe.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members I'm Joe
Sabatini I am the.
The co chair of the legislation
committee The New Mexico library
association an active member of
the LESC over the last forty
years other medication to be in
almost all of the tribal
libraries because we hold our
meetings there and rotating so
buildings can facilitate
providing service in the house
bill eighty six the bulk of it
is about constructing libraries
I'm.
Tribal tribal communities.
building can serve or it can get
in the way most of the
libraries serving tribal
communities are.
Forty sixty even ninety years
old they're repurposed former
schools or whatever.
they were designed H. actively
can get in the way of the
providing the kind of service
that Jennifer Bellson mentioned
last Friday.
An innovative creative staff can
overcome these deficiencies but
if the building doesn't work.
For what you're trying to do is
then that needs to be addressed
remember these numbers are not
only of providing public library
and internet access services
they also are active in cultural
and language preservation and
maintaining archives of for
tribal history and government
the investment the to make of
the return on the investment you
make through house bill eighty
six in in providing adequate
facilities for these libraries
will be outstanding in its
result I thank you for.
The opportunity.
Thank you all right and then.
Good morning year two minutes.
Good morning this is Claudia B.
harmonies once again sitting in
and that Martinez's office good
morning Mr chairman and
committee members.
hickory Apache nation is in
support of the H. B. eighty six
and we would also like to thank
Representative Lenti for
sponsoring this bill.
Thank you great thank you
Claudia.
Norman good morning please be
very.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and thank you
to the panelists those are
sitting there with
representative Lente on house
bill eighty six.
I'm not to belabor the point but
just to sort of highlight the
fact that.
What the experts have stated and
the rest of the people are
making comments of stated is
that past efforts internet
connectivity in rural and remote
communities particularly native
communities through the digital
digital divide and the state's
efforts have been both of
failure.
We cannot continue such
piecemeal efforts as the state
has done or through other
efforts to try to keep.
Native communities on par with
what the rest of the state is
receiving.
If we continue to do so the
success of our children will be
a failure.
So the question becomes how long
do we turn our heads and
continue the inequality in
equity that exist through the
lack of internet connectivity in
our rural and remote communities
especially in our Indian
communities affecting our Indian
children not only in secondary
but in post secondary education
as well as in the trades and be
on and I fail to say my name is
Norman creati I come from the
pueblo of Zuni I'm a former
governor for my tribe I am
currently working as a tribal
relations liaison at the
university of New Mexico health
sciences center center for
native American health and thank
you very much for giving me this
time.
Great thank you so much Dan.
Good morning please be for
morning Mr chairman thank you
and members of the committee I
am Dennis are representing both
the pueblo of Santa Ana and
Intel corporation both of whom
strongly support house bill
eighty six and thank the sponsor
for bringing this forward thank
you.
Great thank you.
Jason.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on.
My name is Jason W. so with
Navajo technical university in
the vice president operations.
The pandemic and the lack of IT
infrastructure has impacted
tribal nations in New Mexico in
a negative way educational
performance gap has always been
a concern and to say that
concern is compounded even more
access and quality of education
to our students is being lost we
are falling further and further
behind the rest of their peers
in New Mexico many in the
eastern our travel agency
chapter houses.
Which served as tribal libraries
and home users it became
apparent that the connections to
the internet or fragile and
easily overcome with users the
traffic and malware tribal
communities unlike tribal
communities our tribal
communities unlike traditional
communities are spread across
the vast Navajo Nation homes
often located in remote areas in
and around basically a canyons
therefore Navajo technical
university public tribal college
on the Navajo Nation strongly
supports house bill eighty six
and its ability to address the
I. T. infrastructure to develop
the capability to offer tribal
digital black libraries
resources thank you.
Great thank you and I did resist
State the urge from the
representative the sponsor to
limit your time for having a
cowboys helmet.
But I resisted thank you Jason
all right.
Miss sent the NMAA good morning.
Okay good morning good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to take us on the on
this.
On behalf of Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president the nationalized
administration.
Who strongly supports house bill
eighty six for all the reasons
stated and would like to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward thank you.
Thank you.
Yes please good morning please
be very.
Hello this is Dr Curtis Chavis
with the carriage children's
learning center
in support of house bill eighty
six the carriage children's
language.
The carriage children's learning
center supports house bill
eighty six thank you thank you
doctor.
Good morning.
Good morning good morning
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney at
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the occupants in
the US Martinez case we think
Representative twenty for his
tireless advocacy on behalf of
native American children and
families The New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty strongly
supports this bill in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit the judge
recognized the access to
technology and related
infrastructure are essential to
a constitutionally sufficient
education the court also found
that the state had not provide
enough enough resources for
technology infrastructure to all
students in four groups
identified in the lawsuit
including native American
students this bill will invest
in critical community based
infrastructure and ensure that
needs students have access to
the internet and educational
programs within their home
communities that are necessary
for sufficient education The New
Mexico Center online poverty or
Justice Committee to pass house
bill eighty six thank you.
Thank you.
Jolene then it's.
Good morning.
A good morning my name is Julie
manas and I'm the librarian at
the southwestern Indian
polytechnic institute here in
Albuquerque and I just wanted to
say that of we are definitely in
support of the house bill eighty
six we with library instruction
online I was able to see that
there were a lot of students
that would tune in from their
cars in various locations just
to get some of their education
done and so the digital divide
this is a term that has been in
long use I graduated in two
thousand seven with the library
degree and you know it was a hot
topic then what's fourteen years
later and I would just like to
give a special thanks to
representative Lente or your
fortitude in keeping this alive
and going so thank you very much
thank you.
We'll go to drew.
Good morning Mr chairman my name
is drew Center and the
registered lobbyists for the
public has led to Santa Clara
San Felipe a okay one gains any
and for the reasons previous
state that my clients all
support this legislation we look
forward to working with the
sponsor and the legislature and
how to best implement the
legislation thank you.
Thank you so this Colleen Bowman
I think memory serves me
correctly we had already heard
is that correct.
Well I'm looking for some sort
of verification.
That is already heard from me
thank you great now I appreciate
calling.
I don't have a good day.
All right.
All right so we will lastly here
from Gail doctor Gail check on.
Good morning chair thank you
committee members from my of
being able to to speak this
morning I am Gail the network on
I am a family practice doctor
and professor at the university
of New Mexico school of medicine
I am from the Navajo Nation and
I fully support house bill
eighty six a small dilapidated
trailer on the Navajo Nation.
Full of books is what helped
carve my path to becoming a
doctor had I not enter that
building to read my first
all right Bradbury book
illustrated then and just
opening my mind to the
possibilities of where I am
today what is is it helped get
me here so I fully support house
bill eighty six our children
need books but now modern day
libraries I think can offer so
much more so thank you very
much.
Thank you.
So we do have a couple other
people that had to raise their
hands slides thirty three you'll
need a first and last name
please
if you could change that.
Patricia or ace.
Please briefly.
Good morning my name is Patricia
crease and I am chair for the
key what cares language program
I am an exuberant support of H.
bill H. B. eighty six I think
representative Lente for
sponsoring get
I supported it I support the
bill for all the reasons that
have been previously stated that
as we continue to and entered
the.
Digital age more I see our
tribal libraries serving as a
New Mexico.
proprietary.
Servants C. created by and for
tribal students and tribal first
thank you.
Right thirty thirty good morning
the rule is you need to have a
first and last name please.
I don't know how that if you're
there
that is really strange my name
is Clarissa said Duran I am from
as your New Mexico and thank you
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you to all the presenters
for the knowledge you've
imparted today I am the founder
and principal of T. two twenty
thirty two you act right.
Which is an incubator for
grassroots organizer to the
development our organization
promotes equity we know that it
is crucial that libraries be
established and fully funded and
our public and indigenous nation
high speed internet access is
key to are you opportunities and
so G. two twenty thirty two
you'd actually is fully in
support of H. E. eighty six as
am I our Iran thank you right
thank you so much I'm so we have
one last in this is going to be
the final person I will allow
from the audience to speak.
Tracy please briefly good
morning
members of the committee my name
is Tracy Charlie and I'm the
sampling the education manager
right
library managing for other
reasons stated we only support
house bill eighty six.
Thank you thank you so much.
All right so we will come
welcome do we have opposition.
Okay so we have no opposition.
So come to our panel so
Representative Williams
Stapleton is first on my list.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
chairman.
Lente for bringing your bill for
what I think probably this is
the third time maybe that we
have brought this bill before
the Education Committee so and I
know all Mr chair and
representative Lente help
critical and important the bill
is and just let me
Say Mr chair representative
Lente Mr chairman let day that I
have my that's intermittently I
usually have my
Video off mainly because of my
location of where I live and
that if I keep it on all the
time I would lose out and being
fully participants in the
committee so I apologize to some
who think that maybe they can't
hear me they can't see me
but
Mr chairman and chairman
Wednesday.
When one looks at your bill.
I'm might I I am strongly in
support of the bill I'm strongly
in support of the need and the
services and the educational
infrastructure that is needed
for the native American
Community.
I just want to share a little
bit of something we've yet to
see whether or not
when going forward going forward
you can look at how to structure
this bill in the places that it
should be when you look at the
battle and he talks about
Creation to the Indian Affairs
Department for library internet
access and educational resource
center projects Indian nation.
I pueblos it takes into account.
In my opinion and I could be
wrong so correct me.
Infrastructure needs across
Indian nation.
I'm not sure how the studies
into the infrastructure alright
of a policy that is already in
place but native Americans and
then and it is a bill that
appears to be going from
committee probably two
appropriation I'm in in the bill
it talks of a total amount of
funding many of those items
listed the majority of them seem
to be projects and so I am not
sure if it would come under the
appropriation it comes on that
the infrastructure.
In terms of native American
needs well if it comes on the
capital outlay and then we have
a C. we was going to say see
we've a group of members that is
carrying legislation for
internet broadband I'm asking
also full funding for the whole
state my question is how many
body mention to you how all of
these in requests for the Apache
nation Moscow lateral
all these different groups and
the pueblos how does that fit
into where
the rest of the state is going
with internet service.
I'm.
Well you blend into that to get
some of that funding what is
your funding for internet for
the
pueblos and all the all the
other tribes Navajo Nation and
everybody else is supposed to be
separated out I am not sure
about that in terms of
telecommunication needs I
realize that some of it must be
appropriated dollars and so must
be project dollars that comes
from capital outlay but in your
start the title of your bell you
don't have a language of
anything that talks about
educational resources.
Educational projects and in in
the.
It was on page four and five.
Talk about curriculum and
materials.
Materials and the development of
a sent the development of the
center is infrastructure needs
curriculum of materials is
appropriation needs so somewhere
and I don't know for sure your
doctor others will know more
than me you might need to have a
language just an amendment as
you move forward that say
educational curriculum and
instruction needs because a lot
of it some of it right to that
and that Mr chair and
representative Lente is all I
have to say
we need to pass this so move on
with that we need to get it done
it's been three to four years
you'll be in on the target of
trying to make it happen and so
we need to get these projects in
place what we need to figure out
the best way and another area
that I thought that you might be
able to look at funding for it
is all the kids federal dollars
that PED is going to be getting
how how is that going to tell
you to level one nation and all
the other pueblos getting some
of that money to help with some
of these projects thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representative Lente.
Thank you representative
Representative these L..
Mr chairman thank you very much
chair Lintang good morning of.
Representative Williams
Stapleton I work on the same
lines as far as the FIR goes and
the bill that we are talking
about on page four and.
Thank.
Okay we're talking about
curriculum and materials
development and then also on
page.
I talking about the curriculum
materials part of it one thing I
always read the FIR I want to
see what this being said there
that might be not in.
Continuity with what your bill
does it Mr chairman and Mr
chairman on page five of your
bill line to you are talking
about childhood practicum and
all the FIR on page seven and I
don't know if you have that in
front of your must do you Mr
chairman.
Chair.
Mr chair and representative.
Okay well on page seven of the
FIR.
I find it real fast I have it
all highlighted here.
We're talking under the
technical issues on page seven
D. A. notes the bill includes an
early childhood educator
training center at the Navajo
technical university the
language in the bill those
states it would use for B. is
for early childhood practicum of
the you might need to have an
amendment there an amendment
there.
Another thing I picked up on
the.
By reading that FIR and it is
quite if so how many pages eight
pages.
Of.
To the FIR.
Down towards the bottom under
fiscal implications.
Quite a bit of money has been.
Given out but it also states.
Balances have been fully awarded
in past years with multiple
applications denied can you
explain that for me.
Mr chair and representative
cruciate that so on page two it
mentions that tribal
infrastructure Fund Act dollars
and I think this is to your
point we're.
We're awarded.
What is nice about it in the in
an affairs department there is a
fund called the tribal
infrastructure fund which is
utilized to to fund projects
specifically more related to it
to water lines sewer lines
electrical lines large growth
large budget projects that
tribes each year compete with
each other to try to fund those
large to get high and so
in any one year you will get
multiple applications from all
the tribes in the state and then
so what that means is that
multiple multiple applications
are they do not.
because there's just not enough
money in that fund to fund these
years.
And that Mr chairman and
chairman Lente of.
If that is done through capital
outlay though and and that's
what I'm assuming that these
were.
The oversight that is either in
place or is lacking there of
might be the cause for these
projects being denied is that
correct.
Mr chair representative so the
tribal infrastructure fund was
set up to help again with those
basic infrastructure needs I
will communities and so
unfortunately what this has
turned into in regards to you
guys to this bill and a self
hospital eighty six tribal
libraries and and broadband
infrastructure this for our own
communities and for I think
everyone else is optics from an
outsider looking in this is
becoming an Indian problem in
Indian problem in a way where
now native Americans like they
went out in September Fund now I
our task on their own to say
okay you want you want our help
business you want to say you
want the state to help you out
and find out where you should
get these funds from because
it's your problem and not our
problem you know yeah and and I
hope that makes it Mr chairman
and Representative because at
this point in time this should
not be.
Tribal libraries or brought
attention should Indian problem
this should be and it should be
and it always will be the
constitution obligations
providing an adequate education
for students to which now
because of the lack of
infrastructure within those
communities our children are not
learning and so to that point Mr
chair representative I hope I
hope that should some light
without being
unclear about about your
question Representative.
Mr chair and representative
chairman Lente.
As far as.
This particular bill is
concerned so I understand what
is going on here but whenever I
see you to match money that is
not being utilized.
and that that is taxpayers
dollars and it should go back to
those communities but whenever
it's not being utilized.
And this reverting back there's
a problem there Mr chair chair
Lydia do want to point out is
and I do I do get what the
tribal nations are facing and
with the lack of.
Any sort of.
Internet service for broadband
service whichever because
whenever a ship a real good
friend of mine share close the
show leverage former
representative from the Navajo
Nation for her and I taken first
you would have to go to the top
of the mountain to even get
phone service yes I do get that
but it is prevalent in my neck
of the woods as well the young
kids that go to school at penny
asco.
Of.
They have no phone service they
have no internet service there
we have large areas where there
is no internet service where
there is no.
service down in the southeastern
corner as well so I do it how
difficult this is because I do
want all of our kids to be
educated to the best of our
ability is legislators to get
that job done and I'm not
disputing anything that you have
here of the one thing that
really jumped out of the rating
yes.
FIR page seven.
Under the technical issues
again.
This year and it is in direct
contrast to your bill on page
four of.
The bill nose CA notes the bill
specifically eliminates limits
broadband infrastructure
connecting Indian nations tribes
and pueblos to the Santa fe's
Indian schools pueblo education
network to fiber optic broadband
and I see that.
Sometimes that's not always
possible.
Is that going to be more cost
prohibitive or more cost
effective if you go of lighting
the fiber optic cable as opposed
to the wireless distribution of
the networks.
Mr chair representative
appreciate that notation on page
seven of the F. I R. and so at
this point in time exactly right
I mean at this point in time
perhaps laying fiber optic lines
and dig in the trenches laying
in covering it up is so cost
prohibitive that and it's maybe
at this point a past practice
that maybe.
It be then looking at satellite
or some other option that may be
more cost effective but at this
point time what we know is fiber
optics and if there comes a
point to where throughout all
this throughout this legislative
session and everybody has
seemingly everybody has a bill
on broadband expansion and
broadband this that and the
other if they compensate you
know a more cost effective way
would be just to do satellite
fiber for satellite internet
access.
Right let's do whatever we can
point being is that at the end
of the day All I Want is that
our children to be able to open
their laptop open their their
their own book and have that
access so that they can do their
work just like anyone else in
the state and I'm not
disagreeing with you what I want
all of our children in the if we
have if we are.
It's very experiencing what we
have to speak experienced in two
thousand twenty going on and two
thousand twenty one I want all
of our children throughout the
state to be able to access the
internet services will get the
education that we as legislators
are bound to provide for them
one of the things as far as
leaving the fiber optic cable
you're gonna have to get right
of way easement you're going to
have to hire crews to dig dig
blinds and things like that and
I can see that might be a
problem that fix might need to
take place in your bill and that
like I said if it is in contrast
in page four of your bill
another thing what about
limiting the cures money will
that be applicable to this bill
that you have before us today.
Mr chairman Mr chair let today
Mr chair representative is out
that's a that's a great question
and and I'm gonna make a
transparent honest with everyone
on this committee and and in the
attendees this is that last week
I had a phone call with the
public education department to
which they have a line item
tribal education travel
really framework and I thought
that we were going to go into
your budget themselves and gonna
do any how that money is
planning to be spent this that
and the other but really it's
still that thirty thousand due
to which they have yet to be
able to expose to to me as a
legislator how they intend to
utilize their budget and and
their line items and so here's
that's coming down I have no
idea I have no idea in terms of
the state but it's in the budget
how is intended to be used so I
I think there there is a need a
good passport wanting to work
collaboratively with each other
but to a point we have to be
able to still work our line
protected we and then at that
point in time when information
is shared then I will have
better information for in this
case Representative Isabella Mr
chairman I don't have that
information.
To my knowledge.
Mr chairman and chairman led to.
Was any funding for this
particular bill for this project
included and helps built in and
it's not was it is do you have
any sort of explanation.
Mr Mr chair representative so as
I mentioned there in the
administration's budget request
there is a line item titled
tribal remedy framework to which
there is some mention of some of
the aspects of this bill with
any but there is no detail as to
how exactly these align with
each other and so
you know this is still get a
work in progress.
And.
It is well if if I make color
that a little bit as well as
that the administration through
PED is getting forty million
dollars of this cares Act to
money with with basically no
constraints to it so should they
they could also provide a
project like this.
Just a color things a little bit
Mr chairman I appreciate that
comment and terminal intake I
think it would be meeting up on
you to really push this issue
through PED that that money does
go to help the students
throughout our state that do not
have access.
I am in support of the need to
hear I do understand that but I
think there needs to be a couple
of amendments made issue go on
through the line with this I I'm
real serious about this you need
to be in.
One that one is is the
department of cultural affairs
analysis also states.
Regarding the wireless versus
fiber optic so I think that
you'll need to be on the same
page there in my opinion and
also of the language calling for
the.
Practicum verses of.
I have to look back on.
On page five of your bill
whenever.
It is talking about that put an
actual LFC it might be.
Our.
It.
Right.
So it's got to be one of the
other or if it means but that
needs to say about very minor
changes but before you go to the
next committee which will be I'm
assuming appropriations thank
you address those concerns that
I had Mr chairman and chairman
limited thank you very much for
answering my questions that's
all Mr chairman.
Thank you representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this important bill
again of which I totally support
I do agree with the questions
that Representative Ezzell is L.
pointed out I think I would take
the most seriously especially
the language I'm not limiting
yourself to fiber optics because
there's emerging technologies
that may be more appropriate
that are already being tested.
My question then would you
partially answer is have you
consulted with the legislative
finance committee and house
appropriations about some of
these issues.
Already.
The legislator that's something
I'm learning to talk to the
manager that said you had a
chance to do that because there
is F. C. C. money there is a
native American broadband money
coming federally and that cares.
And what was their response if
you were able to consult with
them previously.
Mr chair and representative gear
that's a great question you know
this is not a new concept this
is not a new bill this is a bill
that has been presented in front
and is made it to appropriations
both in twenty nineteen and then
twenty twenty and with the
passage hopefully of this bill
again this year in this
committee in twenty twenty one
and so by all means that this is
not news to anyone in the ticket
price for this one time
injection of infrastructure
investments in the communities
is often times met with the with
with.
With the confusion and so with
that being said I have met many
times with the members of of LFC
with the LFC staff with
appropriations that and so did
this is still yet that
formulation of how do we get
this kind of money invested back
into the communities especially
when we have this over line
lawsuit that is telling us you
need to be able to invest these
taxed monies are invested money
to make things better and so
well I am the voice of this kind
of evolution of where we need to
be going you know the the
embracing of this type of
concept or the embracing of this
type of investment
You know we have has been met
and I'm gonna be honest has been
met by saying well what you know
by LFC staff for instant we've
invested and you know X. amount
of billions more dollars over
the past several years and and
this that the other end and
we're doing this and that and
the other there's more money
here that but that doesn't mean
anything to that child that is
on the reservation that still
has no internet access has
nowhere to go to continue to
work and that means nothing to
me as a legislate tore as I'm
looking for dollars specifically
associate to making sure this
type of work gets done within
those communities and so well
they're they're they're full of
messages to try to
prove what they've done in the
past I want to consider as to
how we make fixes to the future
and so to your point Mr chair
and representative
you know I have this is not new
this is not new and I had those
discussions and we are still
working through the process sees
of making sure that people see
this and can see the validity in
this type of investments because
not only am I as one legislator
looking at this as being done as
is necessary or as the people
that have that have
Maybe at this morning but the
courts again the course at you
know they they they're waiting
for us to make some type of
investments and so you know
we'll see what happens Mr chair
and Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you representative Lente
and as one of the attendees said
we can't we can't do it
piecemeal and have it happen
twenty years from now so thank
you for bringing forward I
supported and I work with you in
any way to get the money thank
you thank you thank thank you so
we still have two on the list
with two other bills to go so
please keep keep the questions
in the responses brief please
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
legislation forward once again I
had the honor of joining the new
in the past as a co sponsor of
this legislation and the reason
being Mr chair representative
for all the reasons that were
all the attendees and those that
testified gave testimony on
today the incredible importance
Mr chair and representative I
want us to note again that the
Appropriations would be going to
the Indian Affairs Department
and in line of all the questions
that were asked about the
details I think it's important
to note that the idea is that if
it goes to the Indian Affairs
Department they have the
administrative and management
obligation to be able to look at
how these appropriations are
being distributed but also
leverage in the manner in which
to make those investments as a
representative has mentioned
grow but I also want to make
note Mr chair and representative
that we is a legislative body
have an obligation we have an
imperative obligation under what
long standing on laws that
indicate that we've got to
recognize tribal sovereignty
that we've got to recognize on
self determination within tribal
sovereignty and Mr chair very
importantly that we have to
remedy and this is where the
impact of comes in Mr chan
representative that we have the
imperative to respond to a court
order and that imperative leads
in the direction of having to
not only sufficiently fund but
sufficiently provide an
education and all of the
resources necessary in order to
provide that education and
that's why we have to look Mr
chair representative at this
piece allegedly at legislation
in its totality and looking at
it in its totality and what it
means in terms of making
structural changes that will
prevent the continuous history
of disproportionate in despair
at funding at this that are
tribal nations have faced in the
state of New Mexico so Mr chair
representative I think we need
to look at everything we do is
and equity in practice and we've
got to make sure that that is
how we institutionalize it
within our structure so again Mr
chair representative thank.
You for bringing this forward
I'm fully supportive as I have
been on throughout the the years
of of from being it being
introduced thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Mr Representative Brandon you
know I have to be honest and
tell you all I spent time
yesterday travel in the north
wind up to Los Alamos and then
came down to Jimenez and then
down at some receive federal.
I'm gonna tell you that
there was comfort in not to
understand somebody else's area
in and look at it from a center
perspective and I can tell you
firsthand that what Mr
Representative Lente is talking
about is synonymous in the north
in is exactly what I have in in
my community it's exactly the
the same people that I look upon
and yet we rub right up against
each other he matters in in New
Senator zero to make two
cultures come together and live
among these other and yet we
fail to understand the great
depth of responsibility as
legislators that we are all of
the rural area have this great
need and from my.
Edges brother here for
assistance with obstacles costly
thrown in his way this library
issue was my first goal my first
dream as a legislator in the
only way I made it for rationing
is funding equipment and capital
outlay personal capital outlay
in which and the time that I
came in was available Mr
chairman and and and now to know
that it's going to flourish in
this year and then what it cost
me to put this in there.
At a force of money will in
spite of all that I saw all my
indigenous brother coming and
while I saw that I circumvented
but I totally agree there's not
much more than I can say is
legislators of this committee
but that we have a great was the
responsibility to address these
folks that are no different from
the north and no different from
how Martinez Representative
Lynda is Yazzie and we can not
let this battle go to the
wayside for any reason that we
do not see that same picture
because I believe the store west
it is the same picture it's just
the fact that we have to reach
outside of our politics and do
what's right for work eight
dollars from to be most utilize
and that's for our kids having a
better way of living through
education being the salvation to
a better way of life thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr Lin
representative Lente for what
you're doing and I support that
calls and I'd love to do the
same in trying to find funds to
finish my library with books and
the multi cultural capacity that
we so does so truly deserve in
our state of New Mexico to hold
on to our heritage from all four
corners of our state thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank thank you representative
and so I don't have anybody else
on my list so before I accept on
further action on this I would
just like to say thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward
I mean and and I am hearing from
a lot of people that there are
alternatives to explore ways of
trying to do this that that may
be possible in order to do
So Mr chair motion for the past
thank you Representative and I'm
in the middle of.
I understand okay okay thank you
so if you could keep that motion
next time until after I finish
talking I would appreciate it
And so.
And then I lost my train of
thought and I'm.
I'll go with the motion
Representative Stapleton with
the past motion second by
Representative read is there any
opposition to the do past
mission.
Seeing none.
You representative thank you Mr
chairman thank you members.
So we'll go on
House Bill.
One thirty so again we're
pressing up on time so if these
bond server Sanchez is.
We are a Representative Trujillo
good morning morning how are you
guys doing all right so do you
have any experts that I need
thank you I have to ask for.
On the best my level and what
the staff the faster.
The.
I'm.
Because of their ego.
Okay.
Mr chair members the committee
if we can get a second so that
they can come in for.
Okay Representative they should
good morning panelists please.
What is Mr chairman this
instance house bill thirty with
his the school gifted education
requirements of what this bill
does.
Is the thank you a lot of
standards because that's how I
mandated the federal individual
with the civil resistance
Education Act and the universal
screening and.
Seeks to provide with the.
If the patient valuation VS with
hi dean kid
effectiveness of the gifted
students
the gifted programs the school
district and charter school
would create
Comment the business for the
appropriation house bill one
thirty five school districts to
adopt policies and procedures.
All universal screening and have
I long students to receive
academic acceleration that
investment.
It also asks that we value eight
annually with units that could
mess of gifted the
identification of services.
the.
House bill one thirty five twice
exceptional students of for
those of you with the patient.
Don't always identify those
types exceptional this helps
clarify that Mr chairman if you
don't mind I hope.
Will allow my expert witnesses
to also address the committee.
Please briefly.
Since we have a tech okay there
well.
Mr Melinda's followed by Dr Paul
Parker.
What.
You also yes good morning.
Yes good morning and this.
Yes yes.
Good morning I would like to
start off by introducing myself
my name is Andres Melendez and
I'm a parent of a gifted child
as well as an advocate here in
southern New Mexico I currently
reside in chaparral New Mexico
which is district fifty three
and Mr Madrid is my
representative I am also the co
founder and currently past
president of south central New
Mexico association for the
gifted I am here today ladies
and gentleman because house bill
one thirty would decker directly
affect my daughter Caillaux and
other students like her.
In two thousand nine kilo was in
kindergarten and a student of
the gaps and school district.
kindergarten teacher nominating
kids to be tested because you
still get the qualities
unfortunately my district had
strict testing policy which will
not begin any assessments
necessary to identify her.
As gifted until the second grade
however my daughter would will
be on the second grade and was
president of the in the fourth
grade.
Meanwhile I had approached her
teachers and principal at the
beginning of every school year
and that every parent teacher
conference before that as I
mentioned earlier can't Taylor
was tested two weeks before the
end of fourth grade and we were
told she was in fact given that
a week after the school year was
over my daughter is not the only
student in New Mexico that has
had to wait years before being
identified as gifted and
therefore passing HB one thirty
is necessary there's a need for
change in current legislation
and this bill has it I feel in
its current form H. B. one
thirty can help fix some of the
loopholes in gifted education in
the state of New Mexico I've you
H. B. one thirty as a giant leap
forward.
I would provide much needed
opportunities for identification
and services for college
students in New Mexico this is
an opportunity to not only
develop the talents of New
Mexico children but to do it
with accountability and in a
cost effective manner this bill
has the potential to reach all
children regardless of race
creed religion and most
importantly zip code.
It's really satisfies the
current equity issues
surrounding gifted Education the
New Mexico public schools and
that's why I'm excited about HB
one thirty.
I would like to think of
Representative three oh for
bringing this bill together and
bringing four and I would like
to thank everybody on the house
committee and of course a
spokesperson for metal thank you
Sir.
Thank you all I also have a I
support from.
Dr Parker.
yes hello everybody my name is
Jonathan Parker and I am a
professor of Education at Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore
I study gifted Education and
equity within
a gifted education if it pleases
the chair I know you're running
long here I'm I'm just going to
sort of cut to the chase here
and then I will stick around if
there are any questions from
that from from the committee
members
so why a gifted education why
improve the situation for gifted
education within the state of
New Mexico I was really struck
by comments that representative
Lente and Representative
Chatfield made this morning
talking about the graduation
requirements a lot of the
examples that you gave are
really what we're talking about
right we're trying to help
students find their passions as
early as we can and then provide
them with sort of the most
direct most enriching
experiences possible so that
they can go out and really enter
the work force have careers
support their families
contribute back to New Mexico
Society and their neighborhoods
whether it's to be the best
rancher they can be the best
veterinarian build the best
houses or go work at a place
like Los Alamos that's what this
bill I think is really really
about there there are are to
specific aspects that I want to
call your attention to because I
think in in both of these areas
this bill would make in New
Mexico a national leader the
first is the
the mandate for universal
screening that is a very well
studied strategy that we know
that if it gets used it tends to
provide.
Low income talented students at
a much much much higher rate
like three to five hundred
percent more than if you use
other identification strategies
it is a major opportunity poster
and then the second is the
inclusion of evaluation
monitoring and reporting
no one build statues for people
who put in really good
monitoring provisions to bills
but it monitoring is so
important and the best example I
can give is an unnamed state
that loves to brag about all
they do for gifted education but
when we actually talked to
principals and superintendents
what they tell us is never
evaluated it's never monitored
it's never audited so do I take
the money yes do I use it to
help the help gifted students
not so much so I think having a
very careful evaluation and
monitoring and reporting sort of
the three legs of that model of
of that monitoring stool is a
critically important and SB one
thirty.
Wisely does that I don't know of
any other state that has those
two things at the state level it
would really move New Mexico
forward
I have other thoughts but I know
that you're running long so I
will stop their thank you for
letting me speak to you today.
We call this the first time with
us this bill forward if you've
never made it past yes committee
for all right never been
scheduled to be the same.
I'm hoping that today that will
all consider.
The case.
This is that this bill based on
from the LSS and by the
Comments made by my all.
All.
And the is it I think the
question.
Right thank you for the
presentation so
those on the attendee list if
you are in support of house.
Thirty.
You would please.
All right so please be as brief
as possible do not repeat the
presentations that we've heard
but you will have up to two
minutes
so Chris.
Good morning
Members of the committee my name
is Christopher van I am the
president of the New Mexico
association for the gifted a
teach plus New Mexico fellow and
a teacher and Gallup McKinley
county schools and I'm glad that
this is taking a little bit long
because this allows me to speak
during my prep period so we
support H. B. one thirty for
three key reasons the first is
that aligns perfectly with the
next step recommendations that
in fact in the PED put together
over the course of the past year
the PED has recommended each of
the steps that are in the bill
second according to the FIR
report there is up to twenty
three point eight thousand under
identified or not I did I gifted
students the state.
These students are primarily
students of color and students
from impoverished backgrounds so
title one schools.
But implementing this bill we
ensure that those students are
given the opportunity to be
identified and we ensure that
what happened when I moved to
New Mexico to begin teaching
what I was told that Navajo kids
cannot be gifted does not
happen.
And then finally three we
believe that this bill has a
piece of fiscal responsibility
with that as noted of the LS L.
LTSE report for the bill
currently the only budgetary
coating that deals with
different aspects right there's
no differentiation between
special education funding and
given the topic so like Dr
Parker said.
We don't actually know how much
is spent on gifted and as the
report also says the PED doesn't
even know how many gifted kids
are are in the state.
This bill rectify those issues
so I encourage you to support
this bill and New Mexico stands
ready to answer whatever
questions you have about gifted
education state of New Mexico
thank you.
Great thank you Mr so much for
joining us on your prep that's
one of the nice things about
working remotely as we can have
teachers join us in between
there but they're trying to
catch a breath.
Steve good morning good morning
Mr chairman members of the board
I'm Steve stand is government
relations director what they
need to Mexico and on behalf of
our members we stand in support
of H. B. one thirty any New
Mexico supports legislation that
increases and maintains
appropriate support for students
with priority needs such as
special education get.
An English language learners
this legislation places students
at front and center and this
fundamental philosophy is
perfectly aligned with the
values of thousands of our
members across New Mexico simply
put it's doing the right thing
for our students we thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and we stand in support
of the G. one third thank.
Right thank you Steve Jeffrey
moon.
Good morning please be brief.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I stand in strong
support of HB one thirteen a
parent of gifted students in New
Mexico and gifted education
program coordinator with Santa
Fe public schools also impact in
a former president of the New
Mexico association for the
gifted speaking today as a
private citizen Yazzie Martinez
highlighted racial socioeconomic
cultural and linguistic inequity
in New Mexico schools including
inequitable access to advanced
programming
and our state believes in local
control and has accountability
measures for many programs not
so much for gifted and and
advanced education as Dr Parker
said one principal recently
summed it up when he talked
about his job he said don't get
me wrong Jeffrey gifted kids
matter but I don't get in
trouble if there's a problem
with gifted at H. B. one thirty
would require attention to
equity in quality of programming
at the state and district level
and I encourage you to support
that measures or investment and
gifted issues well and equitably
benefits students across New
Mexico.
Right thank you so much.
All right song tree.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee my name is Andrea GMM
member of the Aztec Indian
Education we and the parent
advocate I. am a parent of the
gifted indigenous student who I
did not know displayed
giftedness until he began
causing issues in the classroom
because of boredom I think my
and mag mentors for getting
through getting me through the
years long process of getting my
son identified in rich and
served with the academic needs
he requires right I support HB
thirty one thirty
wholeheartedly thank you.
Great thank you so much so we'll
go to opposition is our
opposition in the attendees list
for house bill one thirty.
I
see none welcome to our
committee.
Comments questions concerns
motions.
Mr chair representative Patricia
Roybal Caballero please.
Appropriate to go ahead and vote
to pass on house bill one thirty
now.
There's
by Representative Roybal kinda
you know okay Representative
Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam Representative
Trujillo and and your cue
witnesses a here this is a good
example of where there has been
a line itemize that has been
lost in years past we're
education is as I've been told
him from LFC well there's plenty
of money for special needs first
for the gifted program is just
language it's got lost over the
overtime in New Mexico I say
time decades because even my
kids at the same.
Gap but we were able to still do
well it doesn't make sense that
is a state we take care of
concentrate just on the special
needs because this is still a
special needs child of all ages
call to school and I think
that's one of the reasons why
we're still fiftieth in the
nation when we don't take care
of the full spectrum of the
responsibility of education so I
really support the effort of of
a the the people of Christine
Trujillo bringing this bill
forward as well as a on that as
well and this this is been a
long endeavor of his the as in
the go and I've supported all
along the way and tried to do
the best but I think this will
begin the set that process where
that line is put back in there
where we can see where money is
being allocated in which ways it
should be allocated in if it's
not it's still the main issue
that lies with a lot of our
districts throughout our state
thank you could chair and thank
you members of the committee
bringing this forward.
Thank you for the comments or
questions.
Right so I had a motion by
Representative Roybal coming
into.
Right a second by Representative
Garrett.
Is well we'll go to roll call so
Madam secretary if you would
call the roll on a do pass
motion for house bill one thirty
please.
Representative Baldonado no.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative dial.
Past.
Representative well.
When I would like to explain
more about.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying.
No.
Representative Ladda.
Yes.
Representative death yes.
Representative address yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
Yes sorry yes.
Was that representative of state
was in it was both
Representative Sweetser okay
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Yes.
Representative Gary.
Yes.
Representative doll.
Now what I'd like to explain why
the.
Okay.
Chair.
Yes.
So can I.
Thank you Sir bye voted ten to
five you have to pass on house
bill one thirty how we have
Representative to sell to
explain her vote first.
Mr chair very thank you very
much I have a gifted niece and
right now she is so frustrated
with school that it's not even
funny she breaks down and cries
and everything else but that's
beside the point I think that we
already have requirements in
place for this and inputs
mandate on the screen that are
not going to be.
Fiscally.
Able to do so Mr chairman thank
you very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow please.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
appreciate the bill I have a
gift a daughter and she was
named number able to recieve
gifted Services had she been
screened earlier she probably
would have and so in theory I
appreciate the bill and I
support the bill I do think it's
an unfunded mandate a big burden
on schools to have universal
screenings my personal opinion
is that child find already puts
this in place and that if we can
trust teachers on the high
school level and advisors to
make sure everyone gets the
right high school graduations
for their career path we can
trust our experts at the
elementary level to refer
children for child fine when
appropriate thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you representative all
right so you had to do pass on
house bill one thirty thank you
representative.
Thank you all very much Mr chair
members of the committee.
All right so we will need to
Representative sign Jana.
Dear Representative Garrett
Representative Figueroa.
Do we see them on the list.
All right Representative
Sariñana welcome back.
Are we expecting anybody else.
Representative Sariñana.
Okay Mr chair can you hear me I
can is anybody else needing to
join us I'm no my other my
expert witness is director good
told I believe she's already
oh nice perfect so if you would
please here the one thing
standing between us and lunch no
pressure.
No pressure good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am representative
Debbie seventy on the present
house bill one forty one.
The purpose of house bill one
forty one is to mend the
definition of education
technology infrastructure using
the public school capital outlay
act to mean the physical
hardware and Services used
interconnects students teachers
school districts and school
buildings necessary to support
broadband connectivity and
remote learning as determined by
the council.
The proposed amendment broadens
the definition to include
services like wifi hotspots in
prepaid subscriptions or service
plans in addition to physical
hardware.
It extends the recipients of
education technology
infrastructure to students and
teachers in addition to the
school district and school
buildings and when necessary to
support broadband connectivity
and remote learning as a chair
by the public school capital
outlay council.
In the bottom council so I know
issues with this proposed
Amanda Lang amended language.
Clarifies that the state public
school outlay acts currently
authorized up to ten million a
public school capital outlay
funds to be extended suspended
annually on education technology
infrastructure deficiency
correction initiative.
this statue currently limits the
definition to physical hardware
necessary to support broadband
connectivity projects school
districts and school buildings.
The bill also addresses the
difficulty students experience a
remote learning when the laptop
computer and internet access at
home and while many public
school students already had or
provided advice by the public by
the school district at the onset
of school closings for COVID
nineteen it is estimated roughly
twenty thousand students still
live in a household without a
computer and over sixty six
thousand public school students
live in a household without an
internet connection subscription
likelihood heard with
Representative will introduce
bill and I teach at grant middle
school and we're that we're now
kirke at the southeastern part
of the northeast heights we have
entire apartment complexes they
did not have internet access so
Representative Stuart and APS to
get a bus with the hot spot so
the need for connectivity is all
over New Mexico it's still there
and this bill will help
alleviate the problem.
Mr chair like to defer to
director gradual for any
additional comments.
Please.
Mr chairman I'm not sure have
additional comments but I'm here
for
for technical support and to
help answer questions.
Great.
All right thank you Mr chair and
with that I spent for questions.
All right so we'll go to the
attendees list is anybody in the
attendees list in support of
house bill one forty one.
Please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right so if you would those
of you raise your hands please
be brief so we'll go to Willie
more teens.
Good morning again Mr chairman
thank you we'll have more teeth
provided eight on for the New
Mexico scored Association and
the NMAA BA supports continued
funding for systems for
broadband and school safety
programs that are administered
by the Public School capital
outlay council this definition
addition to include physical
hardware and services for remote
learning is critical with our
within our current learning
environment so and it must be a
US support to sedition and thank
the sponsor for introducing
thank you right thank you.
So next we'll go to Steve where
apparently betting a hundred
with Steve today more.
Good morning Mr chair you bet
and members of the board CCI is
government relations director
Brady New Mexico for the second
time I will be brief
the legislation is is aligned
with our legislative goals
insurance student equity in
opportunity we know that as a
result of this current public
health prices it's become very
evident that quality internet
access must be guaranteed to all
students and especially for
students named in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit so we think the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward and we stand in full
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you.
All right we'll go to elicit
deal.
Good morning Alyssa.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is a lease deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and a
member of the legal team for the
Yazzie plaintext the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and I'm CEO
pini stand in support of the
spell access to technology was
the central to a sufficient
education before the pandemic
and it will be with epidemic is
over but we all know that right
now it's critical the remote
learning world kids without such
access can access is that they
should education at all this has
been highlighted in other bills
for today this issue
disproportionately impacts
students enrolled strokes and
districts serving predominately
native American students
expanding language to address
these needs this bill begins to
address the issue broadband
internet access to students at
home it surely a step in the
right direction thank you.
All right thank you.
All right so that opposition is
there any opposition on the call
for house bill one forty one.
All right.
Once twice welcome back to our
panel questions comments
concerns.
To make me cold call you.
Representative Trujillo please.
What.
All right so we have a due pass
motion for Representative
Trujillo.
Second by Representative care
at.
All right our summertime is
there any discussion.
All right.
So I'm.
If you would
madam secretary if you call the
rolling to do pass motion please
for has pretty much.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Dowdell.
Representative how.
Representative B. Val.
Yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative laying.
Yes yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
Representative Sir yes.
Christine Trujillo.
Representative Garrett.
Yes.
Chair.
Yes.
Fourteen zero all right so you
have any unanimous to pass on
house bill one forty one so
there are benefits to being last
I appreciate it thank you
Representative it's good to see
you again thank you Mr chairman
all right so for committee
members
on Wednesday Wednesday at eight
o'clock we will reconvene
however we will have a different
link as we are having a joint
meeting for one hour with Senate
education in order to hear from
the public education department
about school re opening so this
will be a one hour
we'll have a brief presentation
from the secretary and then we
will have Q. and a on as I'm as
you all know I'm I am constantly
reminding people of time but we
only have about an hour so that
means you need if you have
questions the very brief and
pointed but we want to have a
good collaborative discussion
about what this means for us in
our communities and our students
in our districts in our
educators and our districts okay
so it's imperative that you are
incredibly brief I would suggest
is homework coming up with one
good question that is short
sweet and to the point
If you hope to get on that list
we may not be able to hear from
everybody but I think it's an
important discussion to be had
and I'm sure that if you don't
get on the list to speak
somebody else will ask a
question specific to your region
or your concerns or or whatever
you wish to express on Wednesday
okay so that'll be forth coming
so please keep a look out we'll
try to make it as explicit as
possible because at nine o'clock
afterward we will reconvene in
our normal room to start going
through a few bills okay.
So we'll try to make that as
explicit as possible again this
is a at trial.
For for that hearing
Representative Roybal Caballero
please yes yes Mr chair just a
question of will we will we be
receiving the link from what do
we need to look out for so
Representative from Linda Linda
will be coordinating it with the
Senator souls the staff as well
so again we'll try to be as
explicit as possible but we're
all on each other's text message
so feel free to send text ever
even our.
Comfortable with in order to to
get that link if you are still
unsure Representative gear.
Mr chair that there are two.
That Linda sent out just to make
sure everybody reads the
amendments and thank you for
sending them out so quickly
Representative there's actually
three I sent out of our another
one I sent out
amendment for house bill one
hundred also as well.
Outreach I still have to do the.
The
Schedule for Wednesday and
that'll be coming out today.
Great thank you
I don't know if it's anybody
else but more amendments more
red flags no I'm just kidding
I'm.
All right and thank you to
Representative Garrett as well
for having the extra computer
and the sign for our public I
thank you innovative idea thank
you to Representative is L. for
working her shoulders on Friday
to carry that for us
but with that are there any
other questions comments
concerns.
All right well good work today
everybody I appreciate it good
seeing you all have a nice rest
of your day take care we'll see
on Wednesday.
