bomb coming at all.
Representative.
Representative Madrid head here.
Representative Stapleton and.
Representative Webster.
Representative Swetser.
I'm sorry would not allow me to
and maybe he and yet that's
okay.
Representative Christine
Trujillo here madam.
Chairman chip vice chair Garant
iert.
Chairman.
Here we do have a quorum.
I wasn't so good morning
everybody I hope you all are
doing well good to see you all
again just as a reminder and
I'll make announcements at the
end of our meeting today is that
due to schedule floor sessions
we will not have committee on
Friday but we will be back and
Saturday at he lived in to pick
up our business but without any
further ado we are on house bill
six so house bill six it should
be on the top of your your
Share file
but Mr speaker good morning.
Please when you're ready.
We can't hear you Mr speaker.
I'm W. did not question
hopefully okay good double
immunity I'm good morning
members of the committee I am
joined sporting right you're one
Lundstrom and Representative
Harry Garcia.
To present to you House Bill six
this is an LFC endorsed.
Piece of legislation to.
Once again attempts to eliminate
the impact aid credit the state
takes against federal funds
supplied.
And districts throughout New
Mexico in addition to
are no longer taking credit for.
The impact aid it also limits
the credit for a federal forest
reserves and for the lower house
bill property tax levy so that
all of the credits are being I'm
well what it does is.
Appropriations there already we
already did in the June special
session and have included in
house bill two for fiscal year
twenty twenty two.
Funds to make up for the lack of
credit so that other districts
will not see a reduction in
funding because of this and it
also and.
As the additional funds to go to
these districts be used at one
of several different ways the
purposes for the additional
funding would be.
What purposes related to the
Indian Education Act.
The school capital outlay act.
What school capital improvement
act.
The public school buildings Act
and the community schools act it
also has reporting requirements
to see.
How these funds are used by the
districts this is at least the
third time that I've been
involved in trying to undo the
impact aid situation.
This is.
A different slightly different
approach that we took last time
we hope that this will meet with
the approval of this committee
and its committees as well as
our.
Colleagues in the Senate so that
we can undo a situation that has
developed over the years that I
think is high time for nearly a
year policy to come to an end in
these districts receive the full
benefit of the funding that.
Both state and federal
governments intent on it also I
see we have Charles lease with
this he was involved in the
drafting of the bill from the
LFC as well so if there's any
technical questions I'm sure you
can answer them and
Representative Lundstrom Garcia
and I are happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Right did any of the others wish
to speak on behalf of house bill
six I went thank you Mr chairman
there's just a couple of things
I'd like to add to the speaker's
comments this morning the bill
also requires payment to report
health screen but hello schools
are budgeting this revenue.
On the statewide on the
statewide online financial
reporting system so that would
be accessible to everyone.
We feel that this bill helps
regarding the findings in the
twenty nineteen Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit.
Highlighted achievement gaps for
native American students and
noted deficiencies in
implementation of the Indian
Education Act.
We also had bring that they
bring this forward due to the US
department of education's
determination The New Mexico
failed its FY twenty impact Aid
disparity test and preliminarily
passed tested for FY twenty one.
Removing the impact aid credit
means the state no longer needs
to submit a disparity test
reduces uncertainties for pad in
setting the unit value or so
it's very important to all of us
but but what it does is it does
dictate where the funds would be
used
yeah we do have the funding to
keep all the rest of the
districts that may be impacted
by this within the general
appropriations act so without
with staff for questions Mr
chairman.
Great thank you representative
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the opportunity to speak this
morning on the behalf of this
bill in nineteen fifty president
Truman Center public law eighty
one tested seventy four in
reference to impact aid
basically what this is the
monies of impact they were
supposed to be distributed
amongst being of districts that
were federally impacted by of
the taxes on federal in lieu of
property taxes and federal or or
state land we were collecting
taxes in the end I didn't
understand this Mr chairman but.
When I first got into office
all.
It's superintendent only if you
want to ruffle feathers mention
impact aid and I didn't know
what he meant.
But and I don't know what is C.
G. meant that say to me say
equalization guarantee the state
and the guarantee is there that
equalization is not there that's
why in support of this bill do
we have a lot of of.
Districts that are not being
treated equally on on the
budgeting part of it so.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Great thank you in the speaker
you already to stand for
questions I believe so thank
you.
Great so we will go to the
attendee we have eager beavers
in the audience so lower hands.
Quickly.
Understand everybody's and see
to get in on the action however.
so I'm gonna start off with the
opposition first is their
opposition to house bill six you
can.
Okay so no opposition we'll go
to support is there support for
house bill six please indicate
by raising your hand.
All right so you'll have up to
two minutes in order to speak
once you're allowed in.
All right so we'll go to John
Thompson.
Good morning you're with us you
have up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
the time John Thompson here
registered lobbyists for Zuni
public school district and
central consolidated school
district Mr chairman we support
any legislation that advances
this issue forward and Mr
chairman we think the speaker
and and and Representative
Lundstrom of for their efforts
in this matter and thank you
very much for the time.
Great thank you Sir.
Norman.
Good morning Norman you have up
to two minutes.
Good morning thank you chairman
members of the committee I want
to thank the sponsors for
providing this bill up for a
vote for this legislative
session my name is Norman we
have to in the for former
governor for the pueblo of Zuni
I currently work at the
university of New Mexico Center
for native American health as a
tribal relations liaison and I'm
speaking on behalf of my grand
kids and my kids as well as
future generations of those in
the students that are going to
be impacted by the spill.
It is kind of the starting to
understand that since nineteen
ninety nine SUNY has.
Then in a struggle to equalize
impact Aid because we have no
land to create a new property
taxes and have been enjoying by
the Gallup McKinley county
school districts to ensure that
there is equitable education and
funding for native students just
as it is in all of the school
districts and I am in favor of
this bill and I thank you for
your time.
Great thank you for being here
Norman.
All right so we'll go to June.
Jim good morning F. two minutes.
Mr chairman members looking
Education Committee Jim Smith
registered lobbyist for Gallup
McKinley county schools we
appreciate speaker you often
hear Lundstrom and
representative Garcia for
continuing to support the issue
of impact aid as we hope to
return these dollars to our
native American students we also
find your approach to return all
credits including for preserving
half male to be good for the
entire state.
Elementary schools urges the
committee to vote yes on SB six
and move this on to the house
appropriations and finance
committee thank you Mr great.
All right so we'll go to lily
may.
Morning really more about two
minutes good morning Mr foreman
thank you have a it's a pleasure
to be with you all again I'm
willing they are to use the
provided what is on for the New
Mexico school board association
and we stand in support of this
piece of legislation to chairman
and just be a membership is
wrecked the impact aid issue as
one of our top priorities in our
conference this last December we
support a hold harmless
provision from any reductions to
district operating budgets as a
result of the US department of
education recent ruling on
federal impact aid distributions
we fully support this
legislation and we think the
speaker and Representative
Lundstrom for bringing this
forward we asked the committee
for federal favorable
consideration thank you for
allowing us to speak.
Thank you for being here.
All right so we'll go to drew.
Warning you have up to two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning members of the committee
my name is to set a registered
lobbyist for the public Zuni and
Public Enemy supports moving
forward legislation to address
the as a matter of impact aid
and registered committee to
invest about on to the house
Appropriations Committee thank
you.
Thank you dear.
All right so we'll go to Mary.
Good morning merry of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr speaker and
members of the committee and I'd
like to thank the sponsors for
this bill any in New Mexico I am
merry par Sanchez president of
NEA New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of house bill six
it is of the problem that has
long been needing a solution and
we like the way the bill as
written and would like to thank
the speaker and Representative
Lundstrom and representative
Garcia thank you very much thank
you.
All right so unidentified NEA
New Mexico I believe I know who
this is.
Good morning could you identify
yourself please.
You have up to two minutes.
Good morning yes I do have an
issue with that trying to put my
name on on on on on that list so
so good morning Mr chair good
morning members of the committee
I eat on behalf of our members
we stand and support and just
want to echo what our our our
state president just add so we
are in full support of this bill
and we urgent the committee to
vote in paper thank you.
Thank you say.
All right is there anybody else
in the attendees less that
wishes to speak in favor of
house bill six.
Okay.
Well you keep jumping on my
list.
Our good morning you have up to
two minutes please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee our thermal
lenders for the Albuquerque
public schools we stand in
support of house bill six as
noted it removes the seventy
five percent credit.
The appropriately specifies I
specific uses of those funds
when removed and we believe this
will move the state closer to
equity and it will also move
towards sufficiency we do have
confidence that the legislature
and PED will insure that the
stability of the SCG
distribution system remains in
place and for that reason we
support house bill six and hope
it moves forward thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee right thank you.
So not seeing any other hands
besides the one that hasn't been
lower.
Will come to committee so first
on my list Representative
Williams Stapleton please.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning members of the Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Mr speaker chairwoman
Lundstrom and you'll other
Representative Garcia and
tosylate I'm my question Mr
chairman this but Charles
Mr Chairman and Charles.
I'm the public school utility
conservation fund is that a new
fund being established so that
was always in existence.
Mr Chairman representative
that's existing statutory
language.
So then Mr chairman on page.
I.
I'm wait stopped six line six
way talks about the reporting
system so make it possible to
determine how school sites and
local education agencies budget
state equalization guarantee
distributions
pursuant to subsection H. this
is new language so how is this
different from what used to
happen before.
That's correct Mr Chairman
representative this would
require the school districts to
report on.
how they're spending the
equivalent amounts of local
revenues including impacted on
those five different areas the
capital outlay HB thirty three
SB nine Indian Education Act to
community schools so that the
school districts have.
Flexibility to determine how to
spend
There SCG on those I items and
this would include a reporting
requirement back to the state.
Is this language only up to the
school districts that's going to
be receiving this additional
impact eight.
It represents all local revenue
so that includes you know a
school district that has a
really high all school districts
that have the half mill levy.
As well as the forest reserve
they're included in this
elimination of the credit as
well so all school districts
will need to report on how they
are choosing to spend.
There SCG on those items.
Okay thanks and then
on page six way talks about the
accounting for the payments.
From the public school utility
conservation fund so this
impacted money goes into that
conservation fund first before
it is distributed according to
those five components to the
various school district is that
correct.
That's technical cleanup
language from council service.
that's not impacting the the
school districts do not need to
put money and energy efficiency
and renewable energy binding Act
that's money so that then that
money goes directly to PED M. P.
D. then we distribute it to
those school districts according
to the five components.
Yes the money that you
appropriate to the SCG.
Equivalent amount of their local
revenue we need to go to those
five components this energy
efficiency act is just technical
cleanup of how the state
equalization guarantee is is now
calculated.
If you two would continue going
through the chair.
I'm sorry sorry apologize Mr
Chairman this page nine.
H..
That to me please.
Jobs.
Mr Chairman yes.
I'm.
So this section Mr Chairman
representative is the section
that requires the school
districts the budget and in
equivalent amount of those local
revenues that we're no longer
taking credit for.
Under the bill and requires them
to budget whatever amounts they
want in those five different
other funds so that's basically
capital outlay that includes SB
nine tech type expenditures for
capital outlay HB thirty three
which also includes information
technology
income in addition to capital
outlay the Indian Education Act
or the community schools act.
Thank you I'm my final question
Charles is Office of the impact
of the school districts how is
that being taken care of.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative so
you put thirty one million into
the SCG this year so that's in
the base to offset the impact of
no more credits and they're LFC
recommendation
which HSC is working out right
now includes the remaining
amount
to offset I am basically a hold
harmless for all the other
districts so it's basically
paying for the the reduction of
the credits are elimination of
the credits and that's in the
budget as it stands in H. M. C.
right now is that I know thing
well is it a one time thing
that's a recurring
appropriation Mr chair Mister
chairman it's so we current
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you this to selling.
Thank you representative
Representative gear.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sanchez I totally support this
bill I have one very practical
question chairman Andreas
presented about the challenges
of holding districts harmless in
light of COVID and how we're
going to fund everything next
year but this might be for Mr
Sally do you anticipate any
issues as we integrate all the
hold harmless are measures
assuming chairman Romero's bill
passes and integrating all of
the
Issues from house bill six.
Mr Chairman
Representative care at the LFC
recommendation it includes
away for school districts to
budget for those students that
would be coming back in the fall
that are not currently and in
school in a way that the LFC
felt takes care of that
particular issue and then it the
LFC recommendation include
sufficient funding that would
not affect districts to
eliminate all these credit so
that puts additional money and
along with the L. AST budget
recommendation executive budget
recommendations also puts money
in but only for impact aid not
the other
that the other credits so the
LFC and LESC fully take care of
the essentially a hold harmless
provision so it doesn't compound
that issue that you're you're
raising Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr Sally
that's all Mr Chairman.
Representative Baldonado place.
Thank you Mr chairman I kind of
figured there'd be a long list
in front of me everyone was
impressions on the cell but I
just wanted to
check with that's probably a
question for Mr silly but but Mr
chairman and and Mr speaker and
and all those but on the bill on
page six the first P. lines one
through five or so it of those
retirement utilities clean
utility conservation fund.
And then the energy efficiency
renewable energy funding act
though those already exist I'm
not familiar with those terms Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chairman Representative
Baldonado yes those already
exist this is technical language
for how to calculate the SCG
Because it needed to be cleaned
up according to council service.
Okay so so so Mr chairman and
and members and then Mr Saly so
this is
this is a really
part of the bill it's just more
more more of a claim of section
and and that and that areas or
talk about Mr Mrs Lee that's
correct Mr Chairman
representative.
Okay that's that's the only
question I have thank you thing
Mr chairman thank you the
speaker.
Thank you representative
Representative Clint that place.
Thank you Mr chairman I like to
just cut off and realize that
this was so short Mr speaker
chairwoman representative Garcia
good morning thank you for
joining us appreciate the
efforts that were put into place
the past couple of years to try
to bring to light and bring the
closure the issues of the impact
aid concerns I understand that
this year this is I think the
one of three other impact aid
bills the two other in the
Senate and then this one here in
the house they're looking to
create closure and and I think I
think provide some type of
equity in regards to the impact
aid issues my my my question is
not really a question at all but
more of a well maybe we have a
question so.
For question one would be how
many districts will benefit
from.
These funds are from this bill.
Mr so excuse me I'm sorry I
recognize you.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
all districts have some form of
a credit to their SCG and school
districts and would benefit from
this.
So Mr chairman and and Mr Salih
that
all school districts in the
state of Mexico not just then
the the twenty three identified
native American also reported by
the.
Not not not just in the the
historically identified twenty
three native American school
districts.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
that's correct because all
districts have a half mill levy
that they're required to impose
and then some other school
districts have other local local
slash federal revenues that are
recognized in the SCG the forest
reserve being one.
Okay okay so so Mr chairman Mr
Staley that this bill then why
well it's directed at the impact
aid and then I know think when
we think what impact aid our
money then goes to like it's a
native American issue or it's
been a native American problem
this bill then would be a
providing funds and to other
school districts that may or may
not have a population or high
population of native American
students within the school
district.
Mr Chairman Representative
that's correct the vast majority
of dollars will go to the impact
aid districts that you've
identified because that's the
the biggest local revenue that's
recognized as the state
equalization guarantee currently
but all school districts have
some amount of of half Miller be
enforced reserves well and so
treat everybody's the same no
credits the local credits the
only credit this gonna be left
for the SCG our driver's license
fees so basically the SCG is
becoming daily one hundred
percent a state funded with no
local funds.
Okay thank you Mr Salih and and
finally Mr Chairman and Mr C.
Lee speaker chairwoman and and
Representative Garcia I I think
just based on on on that answer
that I didn't know that about
about the format of this bill in
regards to the distribution of
it all and so I I. E. as many of
you know that I have been
pushing a lot of the Yazzie
Martinez or Martinez Yazzie
everyone look at it matters
within within the legislature
and and so I I again would have
to caution folks when we talk
about impact aid dollars an
impact aid bills and matters of
impact aid that they not be seen
as a fix for of the any of that
Martinez Yazzie aspects of of
equity for our public school
districts that these are come to
completely separate issues that
if if if not for the the Zuni
lawsuit these and **** like this
impact aid issue would be as
highlighted as it is today and
so I don't think that it's fair
then Mr chairman Mr stateLee and
others that that that we framed
in the light where if if if we
passed impact aid that somehow
that distribution will then go
to help young Martinez Yazzie
because again completely two
completely separate issues two
completely separate forms of
funding to which Martinez Mr
Yazeed Martinez Martinez Yazzie
is a constitutional issue for
school funding for public
schools for those identified at
risk school category to children
at Joel within those categories
and then impact eight capital in
regards to to other aspects of
of inequity in funding for for
for capital and and other issues
so I appreciate that the
presentation thank you Mr
chairman thank you panelists.
Thank you representative
Representative SLU had your hand
up.
And madam vice chair will be
taking over and the bill to put
on Mr chairman thank you very
much my questions have been
answered thank you.
Thank you Representative you
sell okay so I I I did have a
point if I may madam chair
before I run off to the
committee is just a Mr Saly the
the money that offset the losses
how much is that and where we
getting that money.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee that is
there's already some of it in
the base budget for this year
thirty one million and then LFC
and LESC have recommendations to
put the remaining amount offset
the credits.
In the house bill two or not
House Bill to it's in the LFC
recommendation.
Okay and that'll be something Mr
Saly that that is recurring and
is that coming from the general
fund that's correct Mr Chairman
it's a recurring general fund
appropriation.
Right I appreciated I mean the
on the only point I'd like as
I'd like to thank the sponsors
for the provisions that they've
put in in the in the really the
hard working in putting this
bill together I said I think
it's a it's a lot different in a
lot more
clean and safe than we've seen
it in the past I mean I still
have the concern a lingering
concern that with the money that
we are using to back fill it is
is subject to to the
volatilities that we've seen
generally with the general fund
and it's just my concern that
even though we're talking about
roughly sixty million dollars
that it's still
We're trying the rest of our our
state equalization guarantees so
closely to the fluctuations in
our revenue
by I thank you all for for
bringing this forward I I do
plan on supporting it and I do
hope that we can work in the
inner at at working toward a
more stable a way of funding our
education system into the future
but thank you all for bringing
this forward.
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Williams Stapleton.
Do you have questions or did you
want to make a motion.
To make a motion but I do have
and and Representative so it's a
have a question is our way to
make my motion but I do have a
quick question that I forgot
based on the FIR madam chair and
and child so late on the FY off
within a
the LFC and the LESC it talks
about the funding this to the
fact that native American
children I'm not getting the if
the issue here I'm so.
How much is this and do we have
any idea how much the state is
on the funding needed children
by the LFC NDL yes he's own FIR
is.
Don't have a figure that would
suggest under funding I have a
figure that the impact aid
credit Sir where's about sixty
seven million dollars that's
eighty percent of all the
credits so you'd be putting an
exhibition of money.
Into the formula for those
districts and then they use it
on any of those items that they
feel are most important to their
districts whether it's capital
outlay Indian Education Act or
community schools or or emission
technology in madam chair
representative madam leader of
the it is page six and seven of
the F. I. R. show that that you
know gross dollar amounts to go
to each of the districts
to the districts that are on
this list that are
predominantly student
populations
that are native American our it
center consolidated school
district a little over seven
million dollars dual say one
point two million dollars Gallup
McKinley county eight point five
million dollars grant civil
one point one million.
so the the in seventy two point
three million and these funds
can go either to capital or to
operation
through the Indian Education Act
so I do think that there is the
the vast majority of the money
thirty five percent.
Are plus thirty percent five
percent for dual say ten percent
reserve any the vast vast vast
majority of this additional
funding is going to is going to
go to those districts that are
have been most heavily impacted
by the impact aid credit.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair and Mr speaker and so late
but but Mr seminary and may
probably Mr speaker all
sure what and.
It has been spoken all over
again about the fact that the
native Americans students are
not given the opportunity
to have materials
and waged in their language and
in their cultural language for
teachers to teach so I'm Mr so
let.
This funding would help what.
And we want to go through we
want to build capacity to
provide native language
teachers.
Mr Chairman Representative
Stapleton the school districts
could choose to put whatever
amounts of their local revenue
our what amount of that local
revenue into Indian Education
Act purposes which cover those
things they could contract with
tribes and the Navajo Nation to
help develop that curriculum
deliver professional development
to the the needs assessment as
well as the the other provisions
that were recently amended in
house bill two fifty in terms of
delivering those types of
services under the auspices of
the Indian Education Act.
The in and madam Mr and madam
chair and and we are stable also
I I'd like to point out that
it's not course there committee
hasn't finished work at but are
there is a substantial movement
any appropriations committees
minor expanding to address some
of the funding priorities
contained in that house bill
eighty five that this committee
passed earlier in the session
and there is a significant
component in that bill sponsored
by Representative Lente to deal
with the curriculum development
are in need of language
instructional materials so that
is a top priority within the
Appropriations Committee at this
point.
Which is in our department madam
chair thank you on that Mister
speaker in that case then madam
chair Mister speaker if the
state passed a law to I need
language programs and include
them in the bilingual CEO and.
That
step great step forward to
provided a fair amount of
support for these I'm native
language teaches and and those
native language students what Mr
so late is the native language I
information part of the
bilingual seal it just is it
just always a yes that Hispanic.
Mr Chairman representative
Stapleton I don't have an answer
to that question but I can.
Work with our analyst and LESC
to find out and get back to you.
Okay that'd be great that would
cause because based on what the
speaker just sent.
I trust you believe that.
They should be part of that
bilingual seal I don't know if
PED has anybody in the audience
that could answer that question
madam chair.
When might as that middle school
teacher we had native language
students working towards the
bilingual seal.
Is there someone else that wants
to say something.
Now.
Representative Figueroa is that
is a language teacher so maybe
she can give us for the inside.
Thank you on that point madam
chair yes.
Native language students are
there is a pathway for native
language students to obtain the
bilingual seal already in
existence it is part of the
bilingual seal legislation
passed in two thousand fifteen
but I might suggest because I'm
not familiar with the Indian
Education Act
the bilingual multicultural
Education Act.
Might be an additional act that
is sponsors would consider
adding to this bill in case.
Districts wanted to spend some
of their funds in that way.
Thank you representative.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
just wait to make my motion.
Okay Representative Sweetser you
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for bring in the
bill for which chairman take
brought up the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and we kind of touched
on how this bill addresses that
but I guess I just wanna
an answer to the question does
this bill in any way affect the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit and the
overarching issues that are
affecting the state right now.
Madam chair if I may yes
absolutely it does and I and I
want to make sure the committee
understands that if you look at
page nine or if we say that the
department shall require school
districts and state charter
schools to budgeted amount.
Of state equalization guarantee
distribution equal to each
school district or state charter
school local amount say as an
example of Gallup McKinley
county was a recipient of of
that sixty million say they got
twenty million I don't know
exactly what that number would
look like they are directed to
put that toward.
The Indian Education Act.
Public school capital outlay
act.
Public school capital
improvements act and the
buildings so we've identified
specifically with that local
contribution is to be budgeted
toward and if you go back and
look at the provisions in the US
C. Martinez lawsuit this
specifically talk about funding
programs supporting technology.
Of supporting
programs within the Indian
Education Act absolutely it ties
back to that.
It's not a silo approach it's
based on what we heard in the
lawsuit and our attempts to try
to relieve some of those issues.
Thank you for that Madam
chairwoman and madam chair I
know the lawsuit is periodically
revisited by the courts to see
if the state is making progress
towards efficiency so if this
bill passes and is signed into
law it would be part of what is
considered making progress
toward sufficiency that correct
so absolutely it is and that
that's the reason that we were
up able to identify with those
key factors are those key
factors such as putting more
money into Indian Education Act
is it wasn't just pulled out of
the air madam chair it was
because of what we heard in the
lawsuit issues so we're trying
to address those issues head on
with with these with these
dollars and go back into the
district that doesn't exclude
other things are identified in
house bill eighty five that's a
different discussion but this
discussion is about were
impacted is going why it's going
there and what we're trying to
achieve at the end of the day.
Thank you for that madam chair
and madam chair I just think
it's important for people to
realize that that this this
lawsuit is directing educational
programs and and I think the
people the public need to
understand there's multipronged
approaches that were we're
looking at to try to get to that
sufficiency court ruling that
that is set directing our
policies so thank you for that
madam chair.
Thank you I'm Representative
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to go back briefly to the
point that you mentioned before
on page nine I would hope that
the sponsors would seriously
consider adding the bilingual
multicultural Education Act
because it does specifically
articulate indigenous language
in the state of American
language programs and some
schools may want to build up
those programs with these funds.
just general information the
bilingual seal the state of New
Mexico bilingual seal is being
obtained right now by students
all across the state.
In native languages in Spanish
as a whole language but also in
second languages that students
are requiring through the school
system.
French Japanese Chinese it's all
happening.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Sally you wanted to add
something.
Just for the the benefit of the
committee madam chair school
districts I mean can and should
be drying down additional funds
through the the bilingual
multicultural Act through the
for the funding formula so
there's a separate component
that provides additional funding
that we hope that school
districts would withdraw downed
and that's the reason why it's
not part of this particular
bill.
Thank you si no further
questions we have a motion for
Representative Williams
Stapleton.
Madam chair I move that house
bill six do not pass that in
that okay we have a movie and a
second from Representative
Trujillo secretary can you
please take the role take the
vote.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Cadfael yes.
Representative Dalal.
Yes.
Representative is that all yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative.
Thank.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative or Bob coming at
all yes.
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes madam chair yes.
Fourteen zero.
We do have a due pass.
Chair thank you members of the
committee very much thank you
madam chair thank you very much
everyone.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr members of the committee.
Thank you for bringing this
magnificent bill
to us really appreciate it of
magnificent madam chair flattery
will get you everywhere.
Well so Madam I would say that.
You know last time I was in for
this committee last year on
similar bill I made reference to
the fact that for years I
avoided the committee because of
that experience to have under
chairman Rick Miera that was
somewhat traumatizing and that
have always been intimidated to
come for the committee.
I will tell you the perspective
of a presenter today is far less
intimidating presenting on soon
than being in the committee room
so please keep that in mind as
you calibrate the its house this
of your questions because you
know you can really amp up the
toughest of the questions a
little bit in order to achieve
that similar similar level of
that that frightening this and
intimidation being physically
present.
I'm back Mr speaker will show
you what you can do work on it
thank you madam chair if I may.
Garcia.
Madam chair committee members
thanks for all you're doing you
know there's been a long time
coming we still have a long ways
to go you know good for our kids
remember that at the end of the
day
being deprived of things don't
get we got water race started to
fifty yard line new buddies up
there to fifty what does you Mr
language did a lot of work to do
and I really appreciate you guys
thank you thank you Mr speaker
madam chair.
Thank you representative.
With that we're going to go to
our next bill house bill eighty
four we need a minute to change
our bills signed which is what
I'm actually doing so if you
need to stretch we have about a
minute while we get ready for
our next bill with
chairman Lente.
And chairman land K. do you need
anybody move to end thank you
madam chair that those those
rather quick yes I would like to
bring the men that that trunk to
a speaker Egolf as one of my
expert witnesses.
If I have a former but
Representative Rick Miera
brought over please if you can
raise your hand.
Send me a if I can have Dr
Christine Sims brought over
please please raise your hand Dr
Sims if I can have Melissa
Candelaria brought over please
raise your hand Melissa.
And if I can also have a on your
rooted please raise your hand
you'll be brought over as well
folks please don't be alarmed
that the these experts will not
be presenting that they'll just
be with me if there are any
detailed questions that I need
help in answering so.
Hopefully that that'll that'll
speed things Hey.
Yes I'm not seeing FIR in our
share file.
Okay.
I'm hold on for a second can we
have.
I'll check to see if it's there
okay thank you thank you madam
secretary okay let me make this
small for you.
This.
Okay is Melissa Candelaria.
And the attendees.
There have.
Madam chair if if she's not here
now perhaps we'll raise our
hands does come in and and if I
don't believe the committee and
on the floor at your pleasure.
Okay
madam secretary did you see the
FIR I'm I'm checking on it okay.
Last time I checked includes I
could find on okay thank you.
Okay we'll just give it.
Another half minute.
Thanks.
Are you do that merry.
Okay thank you and Melissa
Candelaria is with us now.
Okay merry are you uploading the
FIR yes yes thank you more.
with that we will start hearing
house bill eighty four short
titled the native language
education program unit take away
representative Lente thank you
very much of Madam chairwoman I
also want to thank the folks
from LA I see for the
presentation that was happened
Saturday session regards the
program unit discussions that
are are today
in short house bill eighty four
is an equity bill and I know
that in this committee amongst
all other committees that have
been to it seems to me that.
Minorities whether it's
Hispanics or native Americans
and African Americans we're all
trying to somehow win the
Olympics of oppression and it
shouldn't be that way it should
honestly be a matter of you know
we we we don't have to prove
ourselves or fight for ourselves
and that this is a Hispanic
problem for equity this is a
native American problem for a
the this is a an African
American problem for equity but
rather house bill eighty four is
truly a paradigm shift regarding
the approach that New Mexico has
taken to support their they're
at risk population of students
to which native American
students are a part of and so
what house bill eighty four does
is that.
It will advance equity by making
the state equalization guarantee
more inclusive of native
American students and so this
provides an overcome overcoming
inequities.
And requires the bowl bill so
this type of bowl bill is
necessary but the concepts
within this type of the bill
they're not new the concept in
this bill have been made based
on recommendations and
discussions by by LFC in in the
two thousand and six report to
the legislature it's been made
by by by advocates like the
learning policy institute and
many just experts and advocates
in education and the also
suggests that making funding
more equitable targeted and more
locally controlled is the key to
helping us success for these
folks that are at risk in this
case has to wait for native
Americans being that at risk
category so data shows.
and also publicly observed
through this pandemic that
native American students have
been deprived of resources to
succeed.
in the Martinez Yazzie court
ruling funding for at risk it
cited that funding for at risk
is both insufficient and it also
fails to reach the student.
That most needed.
The court declared the native
American students part of the at
at risk category so now in the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit native
American are included in the at
risk category of people and so
that means that we now need to
make sure that we are we we are
providing those resources to
those native American students
for their educational purposes
as we know.
The SCG is in fact the main
vehicle for funding education in
New Mexico it includes special
factors that direct resources to
students needs but not in but
not directly to native American
students currently asked at risk
program units are calculated
using low income students
English language learning
students and students with the
limited abilities.
Guided by the courts and Yazzie
Martinez house bill eighty four
as native American students to
that at risk index and while we
have been told time and time
again that there's been
increased funding to SCG
increase increase increase in
we're gonna throw money at it we
get right none have been
targeted at native American
students many of these
substantial factors and findings
in funding streams will bypass
native American children
altogether and while they're
ending proposals for additional
SCG distributions there is a
proposals for extended learning
program there's proposals for K.
five plus programs there's even
a family income index prospect
as well do it it is clear that
without house bill eighty four
systemic inequities in state
education funding will in fact
continue finally.
That's why I'm I'm I'm
sponsoring this bill that will
do three things in particular
one it'll include the native
American students in the SCG to
increased tribal capacity
control over how funding can be
best used to meeting their local
needs and their community needs
on behalf of their native
American children and finally
it'll create a dedicated funding
stream for native American
languages it'll put native
American languages on an equal
footing with other heritage
languages that are currently
there.
It will enable tried to do what
PED wants to do.
But I struggle to do meeting
that they will support quality
sustained language development
from the classroom to summer
school.
And again house bill eighty four
will make sure that public
school funding is not bypassed
native American children the
anymore that is that this truly
house bill eighty four is truly
a matter of equity and justice
and so that being said Madam
chairwoman and and members of
this committee I do again have
simply for questions and answers
to those questions that you may
want a more detailed answer on
have some expert witnesses first
I have with me doctor Christine
Sims who is an associate
professor educational and with
thank.
Yes Sir and in the American
Indian education program at the
university of New Mexico it is
also the director of the
American Indian language policy
research and teacher training
center that's a mouthful next we
have
Representative which should be
at Representative me it was the
longest serving chairman of this
very committee he served
eighteen years as the chairman
of ATC he was alright and and
really the the important part to
passing the Indian Education
Act.
The Hispanic Education Act and
also getting the American
languages into statute.
Next I have with me Melissa
Candelaria who is an attorney
with the The New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty and one of
the plaintiffs attorneys in the
Ozzy K. and finally I have with
me and your Rudiger who is a
senior writer and researcher
with the tribal education
alliance and with that being
said Madam chairwoman and
members of the committee we will
stand for any questions.
Thank you so much chairman lead
Lente with that we will first go
to our audience I want to remind
everybody who wants to speak for
or against the bill that we give
a two minute let meant and then
when you you I'm today we will
start with those in support of
the bill so if you are in
support of the bill please raise
your hand now.
And again we will mute you after
two minutes and I know some of
you are going to have some
profound things to say but do
you keep it short.
Okay our our first speaker.
Is some treat RPO J..
The whole good morning Cherry
committee my name is some tree
hi you need English I am because
public Peublo local merry to
Navajo we currently live in
Bloomfield New Mexico I wear
many hats with the most
important is being a mother and
as a product of relocation
policies that my parents had to
abide by I was raised in Los
Angeles not learning or having
access to our beautiful gentle
to win language in twenty twenty
I had the privilege of
participating in an inaugural to
will language class online.
where was able to learn
foundational phrases and core
cultural values I also learned
how to say my name and do what
with the fly you Madam E. which
means blue lake tree sinking.
When my grandparents and parents
are no longer living and I'm
blessed to have the resources
that my quibbles tribal
education department has
provided me even during a
pandemic especially since my
advocacy for cultural and
linguistically relevant
curriculum has fallen on deaf
ears and the school districts
that my children attend
unfortunately as tech schools
does not participate in PED's St
still of bilingualism by
literacy program for any
approved language for reasons I
do not know chair committee our
children are sacred and we need
to be thinking seven generations
into the future I believe house
bill eighty four will make it
possible for my sons to be able
to zoom in to a to a class of
their peers to hear learn and
speak the language of our
ancestors and obtained a high
school in which credit or dual
college credit I have read that
Ellie yes the bill analysis and
what it tells me is we have a
lot of work to do and to find
common ground in your trusted
positions of legislators I
prayerfully ask for your wisdom
and discernment in passing very
eighty four I think my public
test tribal government and
leadership for making a
beautiful gentle to a language a
priority and I think the
sponsors of this visionary
legislation.
Thank you some tree.
Our next speaker is Bill Jordan
from voices for children.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children and I really want
to thank Representative is land
day and Lewis and Johnson for
sponsoring this important
legislation and for their
efforts to address inequities
outlined by the courts in the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit this is
one more important piece that is
essential in creating a more
equitable education funding
formula and we respectfully urge
your support thank you.
Thank you our next speaker is
jasmine at the APS.
Good morning check.
Sorry that was my mistake go
ahead jasmine.
Good morning chair members of
the committee my name is jasmine
yep I am from the public he
agency and I am a member of the
tribal education allowance for
the real time constraints today
I just like to say that the
tribal educationally and stands
in firm support of this bill as
a representative twenty stated
this bill at the heart of it is
about equity and inclusion and a
specific look and a listing of
native American students a
native American tribes in
communities for that I'd like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
the bill today and thank you
very much thank you jasmine.
Our next speaker is care send.
C. O. sorry would be present
good morning madam chair members
the committee my name is process
I I am the first to ten a
governor for the problem back
what thank you first and
foremost for allow me the time
to comment HB eighty four the
public back in the supports the
bill we support the funding
proposals contained within the
bill the address so many
critical educational needs most
important more than was the need
to teach and preserve Act
language the funding would
create a dedicated funding
stream for language programs
this will put our indigenous
languages on equal par with
public school funding for other
languages taught in the schools
Spanish French English the
sector of the funding will be
other packed capacity needed to
have our native native languages
top within the community based
educational concept using
teachers materials.
Teaching materials created
developed by our tribal
education department and taught
by our own teachers will be
certified by the Pueblo it is
time we have control over the
teaching of our language taught
within a culturally relevant
environment this can be
accomplished with the use of
intergovernmental agreements
between tribes and local school
districts the ideas will also
assure accountability and
protect the sovereignty of both
the state and the tribes we ask
that this committee to stand
with us in support of HB eighty
four thank you I thank you madam
chair members of the committee
this concludes my comments thank
you so much our next speaker is
Clarissa.
Iran.
Good morning chair and committee
members thank you to those who
spoke before me my name is
Clarissa do Graham I am the
principal and founder of P. two
twenty thirty to use actually we
organize in New Mexico to bring
equity investors to our
communities we support house
bill sixty four and asked that
you wrote do pass on this
important bill thank you to
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward thank you chairman
committee members for your work.
Thank you our next speaker is
Bernard she mony.
Right.
Good morning chair.
I'm Bernard Germany of from the
pueblo of Zuni representing the
New Mexico association for
bilingual education a service of
vice president and we as a board
totally support house bill
eighty four because it in braces
the rich cultural and linguistic
diversity within our state's.
We have indigenous knowledge.
And we have yet to fulfill all
the obligations.
From our legislators funding
that will really perpetuate
faster and power are native
children as I advocate for all
our nineteen pueblos.
Including our other brothers and
sisters in northern and southern
Mescalero Apache and the didn't
act the Navajo.
We have strength in unity so
this house bill eighty four has
a lot of equity it is equitable
it will be strengths based
because historically we've been
seen as a Indian problem we are
not in the a problem and we will
counter that with indigenous
knowledge our system all day and
the strength based models that
we have in us because we teach
holistically heart mind body
soul and spirit so thank you
representative Lente E. and the
more we will continue to
advocate for bilingualism
throughout New Mexico thank you
very much eloquent.
Thank you so much our next
speaker is Valerie bell son.
Yes my our doctor.
You're on again Valerie.
All right.
My name is Valery bassin and I'm
a parent of two children who
attend school and soon the
middle school my teachers.
It my language where my
grandparents Lula was Layla and
John was laid off and right now
and this time manage we're
fortunate to have teachers in
the school to teach this
language R. as in the language
to our kids and I support house
bill eighty four because I'm
able to see both of my students
learning and speaking.
With zoom because of COVID
nineteen but I just want to say
it's time for excuses to stop
it's time to give our children
access because our outcomes and
future our children deserve to
be honored stop making excuses
this.
Spend money on children in
regards to the Yazzie verses we
are the Martinez lawsuit hello.
Thank you so much Valerie our
next speaker is my takes custody
on its.
Good morning chairwoman Garrett
and members of the committee to
take us on the honest
representing Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president.
We strongly supports HB eighty
four we want to thank
representative Lente Johnson and
Lewis for bringing this bill
forward.
House bill eighty four advances
a more equitable distribution of
state education resources.
It's important to make sure
live on our young not to learn
in the middle recognizes the
importance of native languages
and also our interest in
providing community and tribal
government based programs as
well as giving tribes the power.
To determine culturally
appropriate methods we ask for
your favorable consideration and
passage of house bill eighty
four thank you.
Thank you much take up our next
speaker is Norman clay
opticians.
Good morning chairwoman of
members of the committee I want
to thank our representative
Lente.
I'm Linda I lost him.
What was his name.
It was Norman where K..
All the giants Committee.
Okay he's not on the right and
more I think I.
I pressed the wrong button I
really apologize committee once
in a while this happens
if somebody can call him.
That was my hair so I deeply
apologize Norman for what
happened Linda.
if there's no great do you know
what to push.
I may have pushed remove I think
on.
You can't get back on yes it
means that we have to contact
Dever and.
Are
you will be receiving a back on
you will and he's back on the
list.
Norman can you raise your ICM.
Okay Norman you are back on I
deeply apologize.
No apologies needed chairwoman
as I was saying thank you to the
committee and members of the
Audience for your participation
I want to thank our
representative Lente Lewis and
Johnson for providing this bill
not to add any more to what
everybody has said but the
importance of this bill really
homes on to what indigenous
people really adhere to is
teaching begins at birth.
Teaching begins with the primary
language that the individual is
born into and that's to say that
native languages are very
important in the education of
our children not only in the
beginning but as they grow on
into their lives training to
become adults as well as elderly
to reciprocate when we get to
that age to teach the next
generation of what are called
cultural values and beliefs are
to ensure that we are sustained
generation to generation and
it's very important for zoning
the largest Pueblo in New Mexico
with who is also a.
Are unique in that the
linguistics of it is very
isolated there's no comparison
throughout the world so it's
very important that we save our
Zuni language and I'm speaking
as a former governor for the
pueblo of Zuni I'm also speaking
as currently my role as a tribal
race relations lands on at the
university of New Mexico center
for native American health but
also speaking as a great
grandparent as a grandparent as
a parent of a mentor and a
teacher as well as a student and
I thank you for your time and
I'm in support of this bill.
Thank you so much Norman our
next speaker is Steve's us side
as.
Good morning madam chair the
hearing.
Yes nice a good morning madam
chair members of the board my
name is Stacy Hines government
relations director with any New
Mexico the first like to
recognize and amplify the voices
in support with the state and
and I'm behalf of our members we
stand in support of this bill
are any a New Mexico legislative
goals.
Strive to provide a sufficient
and equitable education for all
students and we believe that the
way we achieve these goals is to
ensure students equity in
opportunity for all students and
this legislation we fill does
exactly that for this reason we
thank the sponsors for bringing
forth this bill and we ask that
you consider a favorable thank
you.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is Jeremy yeah
and K..
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee pleasure million
contributing learning speaking
on behalf of governor treasuries
Santa Clara pueblo I do that all
of the above our aforementioned
benefits of this program send a
clear public support this bill
thank you.
Thank you maybe our next.
Our next is Gail Chicago.
Yeah good morning of madam chair
and committee members thank you
representative Lente for
sponsoring this bill I am doctor
gelding that Ciccone I am a
family practice doctor and a
professor at the university of
New Mexico school of medicine
and executive director of the
native American budget and
policy institute as
Representative Eli T. stated
this is a matter of equity and
justice across the board there
are some words in our language
that we understand that involve
understanding our views of
health and wellness and how we
respect everyone and everything
in order to see and experience a
more balanced healthy and
equitable world our native
languages need to be taught
learned and used as a doctor and
grandmother I support house bill
eighty four thank you.
Thank you doctors call on our
next speaker is Vernon lu Han.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Vernon Luton.
Chairman of the.
What of education the task but
what I'd like to thank
Representative and T. and
Johnson.
We're sponsoring this bill is
very important as our languages.
The money that we have in New
Mexico are the essence and
locked out of our cultures and
the basis for everything that we
believe that for that are in our
communities and I would like to
ask for the support of the
community for this bill have a
good day.
Thank you so much our next
speaker is also Chavez.
Yeah K. J. after Chavis unisa
without needing extra is unable
should change not guiding the
EDD to J. he's on additional
what's the hope but any al the
woman said that good morning my
name is up to don Chavis I am
data born for Kewa Pueblo I'm
here today to ask for your
support for H. B. eighty four.
Our languages are crucial to our
communities.
And COVID nineteen.
Has taken so many of those in
our communities.
Who held our language is for us.
This bill.
Will allow native students to
have the resources they need to
be able to study these languages
that are so crucial to our
culture.
So much of our teaching.
So much of our history.
Is passed down through language.
Sh and it is a crucial point.
In our communities right now.
We need the funds to be able to
continue to teach our children.
These languages.
H. B. eighty four will amend the
public school finance act to
allow tribal education
departments to receive
educational funding.
And this will allow our students
the opportunity to learn their
language.
Opportunity to continue our
cultures and our heritage.
So I want to thank the sponsors
for proposing this bill and we
would like to ask that the
committee members pass this bill
because we know how devastated
our communities have been.
By the COVID nineteen and this
is one way.
We can start.
To repair what has happened to
our communities thank you very
much.
Thank you so much also our next
speaker is Adriaan Santa.
You need to do it yourself.
Hi yes agents on the one
representing the bilingual to co
chair Education Advisory Council
for the state of New Mexico as
well as the center for the
education and study of diverse
populations we stand firmly in
support of HB eighty four as it
will result in more equitable
education funding create a
dedicated funding stream for
native languages and will ensure
the school formula funding
reaches native students directly
thank you.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is but does
like them.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Patricia Jimenez late them I am
the project manager for
transformation cation New Mexico
the greatest gifts we can give
our children is the gift of
ensuring their cultural heritage
and language is both respected
and restored at a native
language program units to the
school formula will ensure these
gifts live on for generations
transformation cation you Mexico
and it's twenty four
Organization affiliates stand in
firm support for house bill
eighty four and would like to
thank representatives Lente and
Johnson for their leadership in
bringing this bill forward thank
you madam chair for the
opportunity.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is but you see
a Cory's.
Good morning my name is Patricia
curry's.
At work you what cares language
program H. B. eighty four will
help tribal language programs
step that and translate closed
from relevant programs president
of our language program.
Or subjected to western grading
analysis and.
Regarding language extension and
proficiency standards
because of the pandemic.
This has been very difficult
especially for those tribes that
do not offer all right that do
offer
Languages extension when where's
languages are not written or
recorded in training manner
thank you.
Thank you so much and our final
speaker in support of of house
bill eighty four before we go to
opposition is sherry Bellson
sherry.
Good morning.
Good morning chair members of
the committee I am twenty today
in support of this bill I am a
parent from the pueblo of Zuni
and I would like to say that
listening to everybody's
comments I would like to bring
forth of students with
disabilities in the language of
policies and laws on students
with disabilities are not seen
and heard and I would like to
include.
Our students and families with
disabilities in on this bill
because they are important as
well and
again being a parent of a
student with disability my
daughter was in SUNY language
class from elementary to high
school but was not able to
obtain additional based on her
ability to make sounds she is
hearing impaired and for her
hearing impacted the ability to
make and create some of the
sounds so again please look out
for students and families with
disabilities in this bill thank
you.
Thank you so much sherry add to
that is there anybody in
opposition to this bill
that would like to speak.
Anybody opposition.
Okay I see nobody in opposition
chairman are you back.
Madam chair I am okay and will
return to chairman Romero and.
Our committee panelists that
wish to speak.
Hello I assume nobody is on the
board yet okay there we go
Representative Lane please.
Thank you Mr chair I waited
resume and so would be the first
one out but we want.
Representative what they thank
you for the presentation of
which I hear your presentation
to be well organized and
thoughtful and today is no
exception to that.
Mr chair I do have a few
questions first one is I just
would like confirmation.
That these monies they you would
they would go to every federally
recognized tribe in New Mexico
there are no exclusions in terms
of tribes that correct.
Mr Chairman then and
Representative Lee good morning
I see on the screen all the time
and with that person good to
meet you if not.
But yes the money is within
house bill eighty four would go
to all of the in this in this
case in our state all the twenty
three pools nations and tribes
are fairly recognize.
Thank you Mr.
And
I I assume with that that that
each of our federally recognized
tribes have some form of a of
the tribal education departments
that a fair assumption.
Mr Chairman representative Lente
as was mentioned in my previous
bills whether it's a and eighty
five or or eighty six is that
the tribal education departments
are at a various level of
capacity at this point so when I
know maybe you think of an
education department like our
public education department of
the state of New Mexico is a
well funded would very much
divers
terms of staff capacity
Department and in some cases in
our education departments in the
tribal nations in the tribal
communities those may be a one
person one stop shop for
everything and everybody
education to that try and so
there are very levels as to
tribal capacity but I think to
your question and that there is
at least at a certain level even
if it's very basic and
education.
Department is not a education
coordinator.
Thank you Mr chair so I what I
take from that answer then Mr
chair.
I know that there wouldn't there
wouldn't be a single drive that
the X. would just because they
maybe don't have a
maybe you an official
Department with the name
education department for example
is that Mr chair Mr chairman and
Representative late nope and
that's the intent of providing
equity and inclusion.
Thank you for that.
Sure.
And it as I understand the
mechanics of the bill Mr chair
these funds go directly to the
tribal governments themselves
rather than the model of the
money going to the individual
school district for and in the
school district applying those
forms to meet our students at
twelve sure.
Mr Chairman Representative the
yes Sir.
And I'm I'm gonna ask a question
Mr chair that will expose my
ignorance but I I think it might
actually be helpful and may be
bill more
what can you can call
Representative David walking
through the rationale for having
the dollars go directly to the
tribe's as opposed to local
school districts to apply those
moneys towards their native
students Mr chair.
Absolutely and thank you Mr
chairman Representative links I
don't Mr chairman I don't know
if it's on Representative eight
and but is there seems to be
some some background noise but I
I I got your question
Representative away so the point
being that we want dollars to
flow from the SCG straight to
the tribal of education
department is for the simple
fact that there will be no
question that the fund will be
directly diverted to those
education apartments for that
purpose as opposed to a two
hoping and this is been the case
in the history is that when it
when it when it receives several
drop down steps whether it be
from SCG maybe then to the
school district then to the
tribe or whatever the the path
might be is that there is no
control of by that tribal
education department or the
tribe itself thank you we are.
To to to truly that that that
that god raised we are to truly
account for how those funds are
distributed and and how those
funds are appropriated because
at that point then there is cool
control between the state
government and the tribal
government for the benefit that
is a pursue for.
Thank you for that Sir Richard
thank you representative Lente.
I do notice on page eleven of
the bill.
The budget director tension
there Mr chair Representative
Lente.
Specifically lines eight through
fourteen.
I I take why why you added this
language
is to try to find some I guess
for lack of better word
count ability or some connection
with how these funds are being
allocated by the tribe's.
Is that a fair understanding Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative Sir.
Thank you Mr and and so I guess
this kind of rises might my next
question.
Tribes are sovereign nations
and the the state has no direct
authority over them so how does
the department ensure your
equivalent share the recent
resources are we students Mr
chair.
Mr chairman and and
Representative lane you're
exactly right that tries being
sovereign governments PED more
may not have the same type of
control over those programs and
the dollars and that would flow
to those but it's true that that
tribes have authority over
teaching.
The exclusive teaching of their
languages and cultures and this
is already defined in state law
well the money is the law and
state funded programs to abide
by that type of programming and
so the state tribal constitution
act PED must currently now
collaboration so which has
before any materials of
curriculum are implemented
within the classroom anyways and
so also PED must expect that the
tribe's sovereignty respected
the process which tribes of
green to teaching the teaching
other languages.
And the cultures and public
schools all of these things and
the mechanisms of those are
already in place and so this
bill really does nothing new
that there are already in place
like inter tribal governmental
agrees agreements with the state
and tribes there's well
established mechanisms for PED
and try to determine of those
type of shared responsibilities
in terms and conditions for
accountability measures that are
within house bill eighty four.
Mr chair and
at my last line of questioning I
just want understand make sure I
understand where the funds are
coming from
with this bill requiring
distributions from the land
grant permanent fund.
Mr Chairman representative and I
I think that you ask the
question of with this would
house bill eighty three receive
any funding from the land grant
permanent fund that would take a
vote on on Monday.
I'm sorry that.
No with this program with this
end up funneling funds from the
land grant permanent fund for
COVID.
Mr chair.
Mr chairman and Representative
lakes land and program funds for
what school that I I just I'm
sorry I'm having a hard time
hearing you in a representative
I think this is the issue that
that represents lane is getting
at incorrectly if I'm wrong
Representative land but that on
this would taken SCG
distribution which the SCG comes
from land grant permanent fund
in there some issues in the FIR
about constitutionality which is
what I think you're getting out
not to steal your thunder there
Representative Eli.
That's correct Mr chairman Mr
chair articulate.
Much more deeply than I did but
that's exactly service
specifically article three if we
can even we would have been a
violation of the New Mexico
should but would you mind my
direct question.
Thank you Representative
chairman Romero and
Representative lane so at this
point in time the that there
there could be a question of the
other consider unconstitutional
that ality of these types of
funding going for these purposes
but at this point in time that
there have been questions and
it's been well vetted that for
instance like capital outlay
dollars that currently go from
the state to tribes that was
that was challenged and and it
was resolved and and that
question was put to rest regards
to the unconstitutional idea of
that being taken care of so
there is well established once
again that this type of practice
would be constitutional in its
nature.
Thank you Mr are you saying that
the.
And maybe understand where the
the source of the capital outlay
money come but are you single
column Langer permit from Fund
Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative at
this point in time the way these
funding will slow but then not
being expansion of of.
The the land grant permanent
fund and then an
unconstitutional ality I'm
constitution Halliday question
but that these dollars are are
not they're not discriminated
there's no anti donation clause
that would be affected because
again that was put would put to
rest back in the in the mid
nineties with the questions of
of all other aspects of funding
from state to tribal aspects.
Thank you for that Sir Richard
the way I understand article
four section three incident
prohibits.
Monies allocated for common
school bonds and not be spent on
any of school that's not under
the jurisdiction reporting of
the state
and so I think that might be
needed to different provisions
that tie Division clause so but
I'm not sure what what you're
referring to in terms of produce
wrong so maybe they also cover
article four section three but I
think.
Are two different concepts Mr
chair.
Mr Chairman representative that
a question.
Thank you Mr that yeah I'm not
trained in the cross examiner I
actually if you have a response
that would help me understand
that I would walk in the
response.
Thank you for so so currently
again Mr Chairman representative
Lente there are funds that
currently are are put into place
even if it's a small amount of
dollars for for Indian Education
Act purposes that that directly
go to try and tribal functions
and there are capital outlay
dollars dollars that are that go
also to try and tribal function
for programs and capital and so
this again house bill eighty
four is nothing new regards to
utilizing the funds in regards
regardless of of where that
money comes from if it's land
grant permanent fund dollars or
or or SCG Ms ACG dollars but
dollars for for capital outlay
purposes all this does is it
funnels in in a different way
and and again this is that this
is a very bold bill in a very
much a paradigm shift in regards
to how things are done currently
as in regards to funding aspects
but this is again simply
providing that local control to
to to those types of funding for
a native languages and language
programs.
Thank you Mr chair enter thank
you for the answer they were
very helpful I know the
question.
Thank you representative next on
my list Representative care.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you chairman like K. for
bringing this bill
I I understand Representative
claims line of questioning but
there's multiple streams of
funding for public schools I
don't see that's the problem I I
just really want to stand and
support as
Just Chavez said one of the
attendees we've tried to destroy
native languages four hundred
years and I feel that we have to
really prepare that our elders
in the pueblos and tribes our
national and state treasures
many were killed by comment but
many more than that the ones who
are live are aging and we really
need to capture their knowledge
and experience while they're
alive so so in a sense I almost
thank this bill needs kind of a
spiritual emergency clause so I
just really want to stand in
support of it I just want to say
that thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this bill I'm just
start off by saying I'm
definitely up you know our
support strongly everyone
learning their hair G. toward
toward I come from was my
language I think you don't know
where you're going unless you
understand where you.
I'm concerned about this bill
because it does to my
understanding that it.
Transfers money that would
normally go into the SCG of our
other schools into the Indian
education departments and there
by PED then just control that
money so I'm gonna wrap this all
up in one big question you can
have a swing at also there are
they're not public schools in
the area that are attended by
native American children
the where there's an opportunity
to our native languages
I'm a I'm a little bit.
Clear about it and and I would
love to learn a little more
about it and how that really
works.
Representative Chatfield I
appreciate the question Sir Mr
Chairman representative
Chatfield.
You know I I I I appreciate your
question in regards to the
aspects of tribal languages and
the education of that within
public schools and and to be
honest with you that there are
some public schools with in New
Mexico that provide native
American language teaching there
are are Navajo classes and some
of our school districts there
are care is language classes
which is a dialect that is
spoken by some of the problems
within the middle Rio Grande
Valley that are taught in the
school district there are still
though that that are not
provided in school districts my
public for instance the public
setting that speaks a southern
dialect of the T. will language
is not taught in the school
districts and that is because
many of the native languages
that are taught are not written
languages there there there and
and to be honest with you is
that traditionally it's it's
it's the type of language
instruction that is unlike maybe
in English or the Spanish show
or or
other languages that that our
taught in school districts for
as many many times.
It is an oral tradition in oral
practice that is taught from
elders parents to then the
students and many times even
today because of the loss of
language.
It's from the elders to an adult
because of the lack of of of a
capacity that we have had and
the loss of our elders and along
with each time an elder passes
whether it be from just old age
or a or or currently from the
pandemic they take with them
unfortunately their language and
their fluency of that languages
so every time that we lose an
elder from anyone of the tribal
nations or pueblos with the New
Mexico it's like one of our
libraries burns down and so to
that point this is why these
types of initiatives are so very
important that is done with in
the tribal communities because.
Because that we have the
capacity would look within the
tribal communities where if you
have an elder the elder does not
have the ability to then go to
and all these my my general area
as an example the elder does not
have a capacity even today
especially with COVID to go to a
Bernalillo high school to teach
you a language classes or go to
let the Bernalillo Bill School
to teach you a language classes.
Furthermore because it's not
right and there's no
instructional materials that can
can really be developed it's got
to be one of those things where
it maybe a picture book as to
this is that what I do is this
is how you say do you do when
it's kind of those types of
things that have to be done with
in a very confined area with
those elders to those students
and so to that point that is why
well there is some public
schools that are being.
facilitating the classes to the
students for those
Languages that I mentioned
earlier
it does not include all native
students.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative as I said I fully
support the idea support the
concept I'm so some current
sermons about the weights for
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representative for the bill and
I are very clear and thorough
presentation I.
Mr chair wanted to point out
Some of the issues raised in one
of our analyses and I'm going to
assume Mr chair that the
representative has access to
those and will be addressing
them but.
Because this bill is so very
important I hope Mr chair
representative that you're
looking at the other pieces of
statute that are going to need
some tweaks in order for the
this bill to work as you intend
for example on page two of the
bill.
There's a reference to the
bilingual multicultural Act
We're talking about tribal
government and community based
language programs and right now.
That doesn't say in the
bilingual multicultural Act
there's a specification and in
the bilingual multi and act the
public schools and public
districts so there's an
amendment there that would need
to be made in order for this to
work as you wanted to.
The analysis points out some
some changes from page eleven
the requirements of an at risk
educational plans we need to be
specified for the tribal
governments based.
For the same reason and page six
there's some definitions that
don't align with the indicate
Indian Education Act so just
just some technical things that
will make this work as you want
it to and I'm hoping Mr chair
that that the sponsor will look
at those and see if they need to
be added to this bill are done
separately but things to
consider to make it work
Mr chair my mind being
questioned for myself is about
to page eleven.
Eleven of the bill we're it's
really very clearly articulated
in lines eight to fourteen.
What goals are this is school
based community based or tribal
government based programs.
But they must meet maintenance
student needs they must improve
their achievement.
Looting oral native language
acquisition and I'm really glad
that many folks have spoken
about oral languages as opposed
to those who are just oral and
written
And it here to culturally
appropriate message those are
beautifully articulated goals
that is where we want to go with
with this kind of legislation my
question is for PED in terms of
public schools.
Are we able to measure these
things what do we have to change
in our collection of information
in order to say we are meeting
these goals.
the second part of that question
is more for the tribal education
departments because as
Representative Lane pointed out
and representative Lente
confirms.
We those are sovereign nations
those are sovereign entities.
Is there a place in this bill or
is there a place anywhere else
where we could get a report of
how the programs are meeting
these goals through those
institutions as well so two part
question I guess thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative the Mr
Chairman representative grow up
to your first point regarding
the PED question.
Is there some from PED that we
want to address that that we can
go to the second part is that a
program is determined if not I
can answer Representative it is
but in terms of distractions I
think you have the pain coming
from your you have your your
phone link to your computer need
to find a way to meet that for
us.
But then I don't know to do
that.
Sorry I don't know how to do
this.
I can be myself and then and
then and then answer the
questions and so we we have
Representative I'm sorry months
that we were switching to hello
Mister Senate from PED was here
to help clarify if you what
would that be appropriate there
representing.
Meet or Representative Figueroa
is that okay.
Okay okay I'm not get Mr
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Figueroa I just
wanna clarify the question I was
listening to you and Senate at
the same time I I think I heard
you ask how we would measure
some of the goals that are
outlined in the in the proposal
is that right.
Mr chair and Mr send a test okay
so I can I can Mr chair
representative I can speak to
how we currently work with we
tribal communities to measure
some of the goals that they
outlined in regard to Indian
Education funds we already do
administer funds to various
tribal communities and tribal at
programs for various kinds of
programs and so we every year we
do we do collect the tribal
education status reports tester
and that does include some
metrics for whether or not these
programs are are meeting their
goals I'm I can't speak to to
the specifics each of them are
are different because of the the
various
Because each of the programs are
different each each our.
Program gets funded based on
their requests based on the
kinds of specific community
based needs that they have and
so I think there is essentially
a structure for how we might do
that if if this was to be put in
place again because each.
Each community probably has its
own needs and its own goals may
be have to be tailored to those
local needs.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr
Steiner and the tribal as status
reports
Do they include information from
the public schools as well as
tribal government based schools
or is it what category.
Mr chair representative I knew
you were going to ask for more
detail and I knew I was gonna
have to sell have to follow up
I'm not super familiar with the
report myself and so I can
follow up and get it back to
you.
Thank you Mr Jack.
Thank you representative CENIC's
unless Representative Roybal
coming you know.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for sponsoring
this legislation I've been a
very as you know very strong
proponent of not only this bill
but of every bill that promotes
language and culture
Mr chair I I.
And thank you Representative if
you're not because I wanted to
ask a question about evaluation
that's very important but I also
would like to make a note to Mr
Senator that the evaluation
evaluation tools that we
employment as part of PED I
think that on this particular
report for cultural and language
relevant education I think that
PED will be well served Mr chair
my leaning towards the tribal on
education and other cultural
population education that we've
mentioned to provide that
evaluation
In the manner best defined by
them.
And that is not something that
PED necessarily has to reinvent
although PED does have the
Indian education staffing
and and Division include it but
I think they need to rely on the
experts and the experts are on
in tribal education structure
and
and and the other cultural
components thank Mr chair I
wanted to also raise a couple of
important questions and issues
that this bill addresses that
very critical
from from higher ed perspective
and also higher ed working very
closely with public education
from from.
Elementary all the way through
high school and pathways to
college.
And in us being a strong
proponent of ethnic studies one
of the elements that's critical
in ethnic studies is critical
thinking Mr chair and
representative and critical
thinking has been proven to be
language found it I mean that's
critical thinking I you know
many of us can talk about when
we have multi languages that we
thank in those languages and we
express in those languages
first.
For being able to express in
other manners so languages a
ascension S. is very essential
to culture it's the way in which
we communicate our values
beliefs and customs and it's
really key to our ability to
socially function amongst
ourselves and with others and it
secures and fosters a lot of
identity.
Excuse me and it's really neat
it's the means in which culture
and cultural traditions are
shared and expressed in Mr chair
sale this because from personal
experience in a tribal member of
a southern tribe that
Where T. one is our language and
I think Representative brought
up that it's a southern based
language T. what is southern
based language and I grew up
with absolutely no knowledge.
T. one.
I Mr chair we're just touch and
I heard my great grandparents
and my grandparents speaking it
is one of those while languages
that.
Must be passed on it's not
hasn't been in on kind.
Translated or or is there a way
to translate other than through
expression and it's very
critically important as
Representative Garrett
mentioned that we.
Find the way in which to.
Document.
Tribal
manners and ways those languages
and preserve that oral language
it's so critically important to
press cultural preservation even
though Mr Chairman
representative we practice our
cultural traditions on a regular
basis as do any of the all the
other tribes missing component.
Other than from the elders is
our ability to
contribute in song and in
language expression those
cultural traditions because
they've been lost or they
weren't
taught in the educational
Systems and that to me Mr chair
is extremely important and then
the other point I wanted to
bring up is that.
We need to remove the way we
think about public education in
the state
Particularly in the state
because of the the richness of
the diversity of our state and
we need to make sure Mr chair
that we honor the fact that
tribes must be tribes and other
cultural populations must be the
caretakers.
Language and cultural
preservation
we're the ones that now.
We're the ones that
That express and we're the ones
that practice and we're the ones
that these cultural traditions
so as such we need to be looked
at as the ones.
With the quote unquote
expertise.
The knowledge the skills the
abilities whatever you measure
and in these different worlds Mr
chair.
You need to trust that we.
Mr chair and representative as
you I know you agree are the
The place where culture and
languages reserves and we have
that obligation in my final
point is that Mr chair even
though the questions that were
asked about.
Funding and responsibility and
oversight as it relates to to
our funding obligations as
representatives I think we need
to look at our greater
obligation and responsibilities
as representatives as
legislators in this state of New
Mexico with the diverse
populations that comprise the
majority populations across the
state of this of New Mexico and
our greater obligation is
constitutional.
And it's written into our
constitution a strong
Preservation of in recognition
of and in our salute to
preserving our cultural and
historical
Populations in the state so Mr
chair and and and Representative
I would hope that when we look
at these types of bills that we
place ourselves in that mindset
so that when we approached our
line of questions as well that
we're recognizing that we're
approaching from the string the
position of cultural and
language.
Diversity of strength in the
state so Mr Chairman
representative I stand in very
strong support of this
legislation and all legislation
that moves us forward in that
direction thank you.
Thank you representative Sir
anybody else that wishes to ask
questions or speak.
Okay so I do I do I do I have a
few questions I'm sorry to have
missed the the introduction to
this while I was away so some of
this is repetitive of course
forgive me for that so so
Representative Figueroa was
getting at some of the the
technical issues as far as the
billing citing the bilingual
multicultural act making sure
that the provisions in this bill
were in alignment
And and I was wondering about
The.
The.
Alignment with definitions in in
the Indian Education Act
because according to to our.
L. S. C. analysis is that the
Indian Education Act well as far
as as this house bill eighty
four Devine's tribal education
department as a tribal
government with the unit blow
box both of the reference
sections are in the Indian
Education Act already
but neither defines tribal
education or other terms is is
this an oversight or or
something that that should be
added already.
Mr Chairman great question you
know I I would I would be
amenable to be to striking that
reference to the to the Indian
Education Act to to start with
and then also going back to the
reference in regards to the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act I I think that
you know in terms of an
amendment from this committee it
seems to me that on page two
line five after act
simply to strike and the
bilingual multi multicultural
Education Act in and that should
I think at that point in time
addressed the technical issues
that were that were found in
the.
LFC FIR.
Well and I and I appreciate that
Representative meant that
And I.
Sorry was there and and and and
really if you want to make a
more detailed explanation to
those two technical points if
you want me to call on one of
the expert witnesses I have and
I know they're on their on the
then the bench and I can pull
them up if you want me to Mr
chairman if you want.
A more explanation if if they
had something to add okay and
ask any ruder if and if you
could please.
Find some for the insect at
thank you Mr chair
representative I just briefly
the definitional aspect so the
reason the references to the
Indian Education Act were put in
there is I'm not as a definition
as a citation XS as scientists
in the bill so we thought that
would be a difference in terms
of clarifying that tribal
education departments already
have a roll as cited in the
Indian Education Act so it is
true that is not a definition as
such
but we can definitely work with
the alley just see to see what
that what their recommendation
could add to this but I believe
that it's not incorrect the way
it is it is written right now
and and if I may also add to
there there could be other
technical amendments that are
being proposed and I think as
the representative said it's
it's definitely worse Act
considering those and talking to
the experts about that but
there's also an issue about the
and the use of intergovernmental
agreements so intergovernmental
agreements
at have the purpose to guide how
specific areas of law apply to
tribes so that precisely we
don't need to rewrite all
sections of statute when when
we're considering application to
tribes so I would just as a
general consideration of put
that to the to the experts that
they can be a role for a
defining the details of how as
statute applies differentially
to sovereign tribes to be faxed
to ensure governments agreements
where possible thank you.
Great no no and that's that's
tremendously helpful because I
think I think represents meant
that you're getting and I think
the committee recognizes kind of
the gravity of the issue that
we're dealing with as well as
the importance of it I would
just want to quadruple check
each provision in this bill to
make sure it aligns with what
we're trying to do here and what
the changes are in directing
they're appropriation to align
everything
so so I appreciate you all
billing being willing to to take
a look at that the the next
issue I had is with the at risk
programs in distributing at risk
money there there isn't a
particular formula how would how
would that how would the bill
distribute at risk program
units.
Mr chairman of great question
and I think I think that's
that's also some something I'd
like to lean on on yeah and
expertise to help me answer.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative I'm at I I I
definitely appreciate the LFC
and the LFC out raising this
issue about both how student
membership will be defined and
will be calculated for tribal
education departments and and to
some extent I would like to
refer back to what I said
earlier the preference would be
to leave as many of the details
as possible to inter
governmental agreements to
ensure full tribal input because
of the legislature doesn't as
you know there isn't isn't the
input of sovereign tribes but
then again reviewing the
aliasing specific proposal for
calculating program units for
tribal education departments I
think that is a very useful
proposal and definitely at
merits review and I think we we
would be happy with ever the
representatives
a permission to engage in that
discussion with the LFC thank
you.
And I I appreciate that
and and representative Lente
because there there there are
and a number of issues and and I
think given the weight of what
is.
Being done here and some of
these issues it seems like we
have a little bit of talking
through to go through on this
bill to to get it right and
before we send it off to finance
and appropriations I would ask
that you work with the LFC in
order to you know I mean you may
have points of disagreement and
that's totally fine but where
there can be definitions that
are
Needed to be added or
distributions from the at risk
to shore those up before sending
this to to finance and probation
so with that if you could get
with the legislative education
study committee to work this out
it's not
if if things can get worked out
because I understand that they
may
we can get those amendments and
it and bring it back on Saturday
to to hear further and and
shoring up some of those
definitions and and the at risk
factor I think would be for me
the the most important for
making this distribution of
money.
Mr Chairman your recommendation
is well taken you know the last
thing I want to do is try to
rush a process that is again a
paradigm shift in regards to how
funding is going to be proper
again not not not not to not to
Dismiss the aspects of and the
importance of of where I'm
coming from of that.
Oldest government in the state
of New Mexico cannot continue to
do without language and so as we
move forward a lot of these
issues that have been brought to
light in regards to the LFC in
the L. A. S. C. in their and
their analysis really at the end
of the day they're making our
points for us in regards to
their lack of funding in regards
to their indirect throwing money
at a problem and hope that goes
away when really at the end of
the day what we're looking for
is that targeted funding to
really help and rescue a
language and languages that are
being lost on a daily basis so
that being stated Mr Chairman
your your points are well taken
a look forward to the
conversation with alias C.
Stephan LFC staff and and if
Representative get wants to find
that amendment for a spiritually
emerged a spiritual emergency
clause we will take that as well
but at that point in time I look
for to bring it back on Saturday
for a further discussion
absolutely.
Place in please get the
amendment to to land it should
there be any by
what's today got these are
bleeding together
well if we're going to hear it
it would have to be the and up
to Morrow.
Right so we can get it in Friday
early in the morning
and then here on Saturday or
before eleven o'clock on Friday
yeah yeah because we'll have a
later meeting.
One Saturday absolutely no
problem.
With that will roll it over will
hear this first thing Saturday
pending the amendments should
there be any Mr Chairman
remembers the conversation right
thank you representative.
All right so we'll go to.
They are Representative Dow.
Morning
Let me get my steps in order
here.
On house bill one thirty five.
Do I need to thank you yes thank
you Mr chairman thank you and
members of the committee and I
do have a couple people to
promote it is Mike get.
Charlotte your hero and
roughing.
All right would you all raise
your hands please.
I need your a constituent of
house district ten would be able
to follow instructions very
quickly.
So so can you read the other two
names people in the attendees
please listen in can raise your
hand once Representative Dow
mentions your name please
Charlotte Trujillo.
Nope Charlotte's here.
Mike yes.
So there you are.
Right thank you Mike and.
Was there somebody else
Representative.
I believe you got rough eight.
Right.
Right sorry.
Did we I don't see him.
Right.
Right I see you at the hunt you
down.
There you.
Hopefully we're not catching him
off guard or on a break.
I'm here okay all right there
you go great so house bill one
thirty five please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee that says another
look at the school for funding
formula and basically we had a
bill with the formula if you
remember last session we
introduced a bill and we asked
for a study and that was not
passed our committee passed it
but it did not get an
appropriation and so we went
ahead with a mathematician from
Los Alamos to create the formula
to prison the formula tier and
the problem was I guarantee you
he took all for required math
credits and probably a couple
extras and he is like so smart
that it didn't matter how many
times they try to explain the
formula to me or even our folks
at LUFC we could not get a grasp
on it we knew the intent of the
formula but couldn't understand
the formula at to put it into
application so with with
discussions with LFC LFC staff
what we ended up doing is
presenting as side we're gonna
do a sub today and so I do need
someone to move the subs for
discussion.
The committee substitute for
discussion.
A second that.
Okay in the miss my whole
comments.
Go ahead Representative.
Sorry I need to so is that is
the sub moved sorry it has been
Representative Figueroa made it
and Representative Lente
seconded thank thank you thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
for those of the motion the
second so now what we have is a
substitute that a bill that has
a hundred thousand dollars
appropriation from the general
fund to the public acts at
education department to work on
a new at at risk index in the
public school **** for funding
formula that has this the
statistical differences in the
index using demographic and
performance data.
For the subgroups of the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and so
basically we we see all these
bills that have pilot programs
or are grant at below the line
initiatives that folks will
apply for and that will try
these different initiatives and
all these different things we
can DO we're passing into this
committee because we want to
make these efforts and they
probably will died
appropriations what this is
intended to do and what I hope
we come out of the interim study
is that we have a funding
formula that finally adequately
funds and response to the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit adequately
funding schools based on the
population that they serve and
that we let the experts in the
folks at the local level design
evidence based programs that
they will implement to produce
student outcomes in response to
the lawsuit and I think it pairs
really nicely with the bill that
we passed unanimously through
the house and the Senate the
last sixty day Senate bill
ninety six which was funded at
six million dollars
appropriation to create the
mechanism it will replace BMS
and track the dollars not at the
district level but to the school
site level and assure that
there's some accountability and
transparency on how school
districts are spending the
dollars they received at the
school site level and and with
that I'll just go ahead and and
turn it and turn it over to the
expert witness I think I Mr
Martinez gonna go first.
thank you Representative out of
the Mr chair members of the
committee I don't know if I
could add anything to that
Representative I think you
nailed it I I'm we spent a lot
of time over the past year a
team of us going around talking
about the the concept of this
idea that we were able to use
that mathematical routine known
as canonical correlation to
basically be able to track all
the kids as you noted in the in
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit to
the school level and then be
able to to appropriate funds
accordingly to where those kids
go to school and the I. D.
intent is I think it's two
things one so that the so that
schools know do by this students
they serve that they are
entitled to appropriate adequate
and equitable funding
and then to the and I think this
is something to clarify in the
ice I read reading some of the
analysis of the bill there is a
way to not out K. the the
funding that already exist in at
risk at as it is today so so
basically whatever that that
dollar then I think it's
somewhere around three hundred
million dollars there's a way to
make sure that that the the sum
total of the at risk fund does
not exceed that budget cap so so
that is basically taking the
distribution and making sure to
appropriately goes to schools in
which those kids are being
served.
If that helps.
Thank you.
The of the other experts wish to
weigh in.
All at in
Mr chair and members of the
committee I just wanted to
reiterate that the intent of the
bill is to address the equity in
funding at the school level
verses what is currently in
place which is at the district
level and so
the operation of the opportunity
and equity index targets funding
to the schools that are serving
the students that have been
identified at risk by the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit as well as
other demographic subgroups that
are furthest from opportunity
and so we really feel strongly
that this provides an equitable
redistribution of of at risk
funds for those schools and
students that needed the most
and it provides it could provide
a permanent and sustainable
shift in funding based on that
equity rather than you know I
think we are philosophically in
complete agreement with the
other bills that are coming out
we don't want this to be a
temporary thing wanted to be
permanent.
Thank you Mr Mr chair I just
might add a COVID of and just my
colleagues and and
Representative Dow have stated
it very very well our our main
goal was was to.
You know have discussion and
address the issues surrounding
the the the Martinez Yazzie
ruling and and trying to come up
with some of reliable solutions
to to move funding in and in a
manner where where things could
be addressed at the school level
and I think of what we've done
over the past two years it is
address those types of issues
and at least proper discussion
forward along with the many of
the other bills that we all
hardly support you know to bring
equity across New Mexico and and
to bring you know dollars much
needed dollars exactly to the
school where the kids are so
thank you for hearing this and
and thank you for our.
For we look forward to the
discussion moving forward thank
you.
Thank thank you all.
Representative Dow are you ready
for questions.
Sure thank you Mr chairman.
Right thank you so before we go
to questions will go to the
attendees list those in support
of house bill one thirty five
please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right so you'll have up to
two minutes.
Robert you're with us good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm I'm Robert
Beatty the director Robert F.
Kennedy charter school I stand
in support of the committee
substitute I'm the concepts
behind house bill one thirty
five address several important
factors related to the at risk
calculation of the school
funding formula that generates
the state equalization
guarantee.
Our house bill one thirty five
and the substitute would
addressed equity not simply
equal distribution it seeks to
align the at risk index with the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit.
It identifies schools that are
serving at risk students and
supports funding being directed
to those schools I particularly
appreciate the title of
opportunity and equity index and
not using the term at risk
students at Saturday's house
Education Committee meeting I
heard information regarding this
bill and I am not shocked that
we need to invest more money if
we're going to move the needle
on education in New Mexico.
These calculations in this
proposal may need more work
giving that PED import data has
only recently been made
available.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the concepts in this
bill are important and should
not be ignored and I appreciate
the sponsor for bringing the
bill forward thank you.
Right thank you.
All right go to Matthew good
morning Matthew you're with us.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Matt Paul with public charter
schools of New Mexico for over
twenty years charter schools
have been enrolling students in
our state and every one of those
years the at risk index has been
inappropriately allocated to
them via the funding formula the
result is that the students who
are at risk and the schools that
serve high proportions of them
the very population that the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit focuses
on our under funded in many
cases house bill one thirty five
is the first step in providing
true equity at the school level
and we look forward to working
with the sponsor in passing this
bill and participating in any
workgroups provided by its
passage thank you.
Great.
Thank you.
All right so we'll go to then
that.
Good morning Amanda you have two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is in and
out of our executive director of
New Mexico can can.
I would like to thank the
legislature for working hard
over the last three years to
increase that risk index school
funding formula.
Before we leave the state
equalization guarantee and one
of the strongest component New
Mexico education.
Not applaud at risk index has
great intentions those
intentions fall short due to the
fact that it is generated by the
district and not by the school
itself resulting in people with
back with different demographics
receiving the same amount that
with funding I think we all
agree that we played a high
school and Rio Grande High
School in Albuquerque public
schools should not be generating
the same amount of at risk one
we wanted this appropriations
bill that we can work to amplify
the string of are at risk while
working to address it current
limitation we think this work
paired with the new school
funding reporting tool created
by Senate bill ninety six last
year will make great strides in
improving New Mexico December
for funding and we think about
this for bringing this work
forward.
Great thank you so we have when
we go.
When we need to know if you
could please identify yourself
and you have a two minutes.
You may be muted.
When will it though we can't
hear you.
All right we'll see if we can
get back to you so we'll go to
Robert.
Good morning Robert you have up
to two minutes.
The chair members of the
committee this meant Robert up
with us to a I'm a consultant
for the south valley prep
charter and also Representative
Google tribal communities and we
also send support this
legislation and and
appropriation just so that we
think it's important to have
everybody come to the table to
ensure that
no we would get the the formula.
Done correctly so that we can
have a more equitable
distribution of the funding so
of course I do sense or thank
you Mr chair.
Right thank you Robert.
Though has left us okay so we'll
come back to committee so first
on my list is Representative
Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative tentative for
bringing this and I apologize if
my question is naive I'm new to
the committee but I have been
following some trends and I'm
just wondering is this kind of
the first step in in trying to
have our funding follow the
student instead of the school or
district I know this is going to
the school instead of the
district but I is is your intent
to be moving in that direction
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Sweetser that is one but it also
gives us this opportunity to
fully fund schools through the
formula it you know the the F.
I. R. states that this is new
this is a new costs but really
what we have to do with if think
intentionally and adequately
fund schools in the first place
and I think it's specific
example that relates to our
districts where we serve down in
southern New Mexico is when we
made the change in the formula
from rural to small school you
know that kids are small schools
pretty hard or whenever you must
you know if you were you've got
low income at risk kids you're
in a title district you've got
my Grace you've got minority but
you could not comply with the K.
five plus or extended learning
therefore you had your you
negotiations so you passed so
the children who are targeted in
the Yazzie Martinez could not
get the below the line services
so we're not adequately funding
everyone agrees that we're not
adequately funding and the
simplest long term solution to
doing that is to adequately fund
at the school site level
according to the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and and not have these
above the line below the line of
pilot over here reverted funds
over here this kind of stuff
adequately funded and
restructure the formula to
comply with the lawsuit.
So thank you help helpful answer
Representative Mr chair this
committee set up basically gives
us funding to to work with
outside experts to kind of
reformulate the indexes that is
that a fair analysis.
Mr Chairman representative
sweeter that is correct and I
actually asked you know we try
to simplify this and make it is
as simple as possible I work
with LAFC they do understand the
intent and this was their
suggested language of how to
move forward giving us the
information we need during the
interim to make an informed
meaningful targeted intentional
decision in the future so in the
future session.
Mr chair thank you for that and
Representative one of the
proponents made a comment that
really stuck with me and that is
that we need to drop the
language of the at risk index
and call it an equity index and
I made a little note I think
dance right on I have never
never thought the at risk
funding this is a title was a
very helpful title and so I just
wanted to close with that
comment thank you Representative
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you next on the list
Representative Roybal us sorry
was Rupel coming you know I is
looking at the wrong hands that
went up Representative Stapleton
sorry about that.
Mr Chairman thank you I'm
Representative Dow.
I'm I listened to some of your
witnesses that made a
presentation.
I'm.
Are you.
Is this.
Thank you know when a lot of
what was approved in house but
I.
Under the at risk funding.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Stapleton
this bill doesn't do anything
I'm at this point the substitute
it it it was a restructure the
funding formula not taking away
it wouldn't of it probably would
have increased it will increase
the funding to the the students
targeted by the lawsuit but what
it this current bill that's what
the substitute bill does is
simply appropriate a hundred
thousand dollars for a study in
the interim to look at a formula
that would be structured in a
way to directly respond to the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit.
So.
You have to study.
Did you.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
Chairman Representative Dow
you'll be able is asking for
study with request of a hundred
thousand dollars.
To do a study in regards to the
Yazzie Martinez lost so.
Correct Mr Chairman
Representative Stapleton yes it
is a study to create a formula
during the interim to work with
us and and an outside entity
because it's a complicated
mathematical formula to
restructure the school funding
formula to align with the
mandates of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit.
And to follow and and so
hopefully if if if it
accomplishes its intended
purpose in the future we would
pass a formula that would
respond to the lawsuit and
follow the student to the school
site rather than I mean this is
this is where we want it to go
this is just a study but that
when the dollars to the district
we don't know where they go that
these dollars would follow the
student to their public school
site.
How Mr Chairman Representative
Dow how is it you don't this the
schools don't know where the
money goes when day that money
is I'm in terms of the Yazzie
Martinez as well as of the
funding.
To the NBA are you I heard
somebody mention.
Money going straight to the
school are you saying the money
would flow you are you seeking a
study that would show the money
going from the state to the
school itself rather than to the
district to fall to the school.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative is able to know
the dollars would slow the for
the same way in in in the two
thousand nineteen session we
passed unanimously Senate bill
ninety six that is a six million
dollars appropriation that is
restructuring BMS and so right
now when the dollars to the
school district they become
under restricted so they may be
generated by a low income at
risk minority with the English
second language who has an IP in
a disability that student
generates the dollars but once
they hit the district there and
restricted and they and and what
happens in many districts is
based on the exact same amount
of money per student per school
site regardless of how the
dollars regenerated so Senate
bill ninety six which should be
implemented by the end of this
year will allow us to see where
the districts are spending their
money at the school site level
instead of what we know now
which is the district level this
bill proposes to do a study to
see to generate to to to
create a formula that Paul that
is responsive to the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit which
identified students and
populations that need additional
services or that we're
underserved and this would take
a look if we do this formula yes
we would pair it with Senate
bill ninety six and the students
I to generated the funds are the
students who should receive the
funds and get the services.
We Mr Chairman and
Representative Dow based on the
title one requisites and some of
what you just mentioned that is
in the Yazzie Martinez in terms
of ELL students and mobility and
disability and poverty levels
which.
The funding comes in and the
funding goes out to the schools.
You Askin to move that funding
I'm.
To just the specific student
rather than that school that
income passes all of the
students within that school.
And I think in the long run when
hard many small districts that
you're trying to help.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Stapleton I
think that it's definitely
something that we should take
into consideration and that the
study would help us identify if
there any flaws in the formula.
But this is simply a study.
Okay I'll keep listening thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
Representative Dow.
Thank you Representative
Stapleton Representative
Trujillo.
Good morning Mr chairman
Representative Dow and
presenters I I to have
I'm puzzled by the bill first of
all.
How long will the study take
because that's a hundred
thousand dollars.
And
And so to me I think it's a lot
of money number one depends on
how deeply you're going to
Study.
Of what it is that you're
seeking but more than anything
you know as I've been listening.
This bill would would change the
the SCG or the flow of money
rather to each school site
rather than the school district
that my correct.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Trujillo it
doesn't change any of the flow
of money at all it still goes to
the district.
What happens when it gets and
and and actually doesn't change
any just a study it's a study to
figure out how to get the
dollars to flow to the students
who are identified as
underserved.
That's what the according to the
unit Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
that's what the this bill
that's.
Thank you for that response that
helps clear that up.
But and I understand why the
study needs to be conducted not
simply because this is pretty
convoluted with all due respect
in terms of.
Of getting.
Specific money to specific kids
I guess in my head I can't
figure out how all of that is
going to work and I've and I've
worked with several of your of
your experts in the past on
issues but I can't wrap my head
around this and and I'm not
sure.
That we need this right now but
I'd rather see the
implementation of the Hispanic
Education Act this budget the
native American that Education
Act all of the acts that are in
place that address the issues of
Yazzie Martinez and let them.
To kind of see that help settle
the dust in their implementation
before we go to this next step I
think I would supported in the
future but I'm not sure I can
supported at this time thank you
Mr chair thank you Rebecca I
mean Representative Dow.
Thank thank you Representative
you know I like that name up
Rebecca over some other names
that we've we've that you've
called me.
So we won't go there
representatives Representative
Garrett please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dow it.
When we do a study this is a
study that I'd like because I
feel like we have all these
different SCG
and I love the equity versus at
risk we have all these different
bills and surely you know some
of them are gonna pass
but it seems it's kind of like a
tangled olds tree with all these
routes so I feel that it's
needed but what am I correct in
understanding of we do is study
it's not tying us to any new
form or just actually study net
is that correct.
Mr Martinez please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and I'm sorry I
don't I'm not.
Completely familiar with this
process so so if I could just.
Address a couple of things have
been brought up from from the
different Representative so so
one just a reminder that this is
not an adjustment of anything
with SCG just the at risk
portion the at risk funding
portion of the public school
funding not not that the SCG
formula right and what it is is
it's a it's a more precise tool
that leverages the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit and all that on
all the Democrats demographic
populations that were listed in
that lawsuit and making sure
that then money is directed to
those schools with those kids
exist it would still be.
All monies would flow through
the
Through the district and then
and then it's becomes a tool for
the district to be used as to as
to what schools are generating
those dollars based on
ject of mathematical copy for
formulas right numbers so so
that's one thing it's not it's
not a redo of the SCG it's only
up that portion of at risk
funding the other thing is is
yeah it's it's the idea is that
this is something that is a
systemic change so that it
actually aligns with the
Martinez.
Yazzie lawsuit in the long term
so then
in the future if if if there is
funding increases education
putting it or or running it
through this idea of the
following kids who are who are
in most need of
And the resources that you could
go through something of this
sort right but but the years
hundred thousand dollars is to
create something that you can
take a good look at as far as
the mathematical routine being
used and it flying passing all
the sniff test around it being a
viable computation and then also
making sure that the the data
that that PED would be able to
use in this in this process is
clean so it's getting us the
cleanest numbers possible.
Thank you chairman thank you Mr
Martinez so I just realized why
I know you.
So so now my question about a
study is we do studies and it
seems to me like we do need a
study.
But I don't but not to do a
study to to prove something we
already think it's to show us is
that correct or is there
something else and not I see Mr
same as on the call I'm this
relates Mr chairman to PED's
suggesting also under I forget
what it was the family income
index how does that relate to
this proposal is that going to
come forth in a bill Mr Santa or
anyone else from PED that I can
answer that.
Mr chair yeah.
Please go ahead.
Mr chair representative Garrett
yes so the the department's
proposal for the family income
index is similar in that in that
we are also trying to make sure
that additional funding gets to
the to the schools and students
that need it the most.
ours is ours is different and
and and and you know we'll be in
bill bill form so you should be
saying it's in.
Sources a little bit different
in that it doesn't it doesn't
rely specifically on any sort of
demographic or student
achievement data based on the
previous proposal ours is.
Specifically focused on the
amount of money that families
make and where those kids go to
school how do we director
divisional funds to those
schools realizing that the
impacts of concentrated poverty
in those communities so they're
they're similar in that they try
to directors additional funds or
funds to states to school that
the student level.
A different and that this our
proposal income index will not
affect SCG or the at risk index
separate propose on a separate.
Direct funds to schools.
Mr chairman and Representative
Gary if I can just add to that I
don't think this is a
competition that bill at all
that bill is a pilot using the
reverted school reform funds I
think well that was I mean I.
So it's not in competition with
that bill I think that it brings
to light that we are looking for
a way to get dollars to schools
and students and that they they
probably actually prepare really
well together we have this pilot
using reverted a school reform
funds and then we get deeper
dive as the education and LESC
interim committee to see what a
permanent solution is moving
forward.
Thank you everybody that's my
questions thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa please.
Thank you Mr chair I I like to
wait Mr chair because oftentimes
my questions get answered by
other people's questions I still
a couple remaining on this bill.
And I think it's you too the.
Switched to commute Committee
sub from the original bill I
want to make sure I understand
the committee set up and what we
are trying to do so.
Mr chair.
I think.
Getting the funds to the schools
that are serving the students
that have the need makes so much
sense.
So I I so appreciate that
intense and the ideas that we
have to figure out the best way
to do that taking the time to
figure it out if we're trying to
just implement something called
is incredibly sensible so my
questions Mr chair
The language and the committee
sub.
Is.
But is specifies that must
include the use of inferential
statistics and I'm wondering why
we are limiting the study to a
specific kind of statistics
I believe this the FIR in the
alley S. C. mentions.
Regression statistics
Another modeling techniques that
might serve the purpose so I'm
wondering why we are saying we
must use this one behind in the
study instead of saying look at
what's going to get the job done
best.
Mr chair and representative I
wondered if you had a reason why
this one kind of statistical
modeling must be included.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative if you're grow
you always ask like questions
that I have as well and I was
looking to see of sunny or
Rachel were on and they're not
and they're the ones who helped
draft the language for the sub
so I you know I would have opted
out of algebra three and that I
do have a degree in that
business but I really struggled
with that all the statistical
formulas and stuff said this is
one of the reasons why one of
the suburbs because this was
great to me so maybe maybe
someone else can answer.
We do so we do have director
Gadgil as well.
Thank you Mr chairman and I saw
that Mr Martinez off.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative I was trying to
work with Representative Dow and
her
supporters of the concept to
come up with some general
language they have canonical
correlation in the first bill
and so canonical correlation
falls underneath the statistical
modeling term that's used in the
bill I apologize I don't have it
pulled up in front of me but
that that term is a little bit
broader so it was trying to
mirror what Mr Martinez and
folks have been working on and
and what their desire for the
bill was.
Mr Mr chair representative Mr go
to thank you for that and I'll
just the only thing I'll add is
mathematics the mathematician
that we've been working with
this represents about twenty
years of his life working on
within this mathematical routine
and and basically the the it
just it and I and and I'm not a
math guy either just so.
The first opening of the gates
but it's the idea of taking
multiple inputs and related to
to an output that basically
shows a correlation not a
causation but the correlation
between how those factors play
in regard to the end in output
and in this put the end up with
his academic achievement.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
racial and thank you Mr Martinez
I appreciate that answer and I
think that
only by my question.
The former statistical analysis
you're talking about it takes
multiple input variables to
measure against multiple output
or to correlate with more than
one output and it seems like we
might have one output we are
shooting for here so there might
be other statistical models that
would serve the purpose better
so again my only question would
be why limited's if we're
looking at the best way to us
follow the students with the
funds to get them services but I
will I will let you guys.
Continue to debate that and see
if it needs to be changed before
your next committee my other
question refers to things that
were specified in the original
bill but are not really
specified in the committee set
up the some says demographic and
performance data from.
Public education systems for
some groups.
Whereas the original bill
specified economically
disadvantaged and English
learners and mobility for
students with disabilities and
specific ethnic subgroups so the
original bill was really
specific about what we were
trying to follow in this one is
is very broad but I'm just gonna
ask Miss during share and
Representative is the entrance
the same as those groups that
we're really trying to follow.
Mr Mr chair and representative
grow yes we are trying to in the
side to make it broad enough
that we could get a really good
robust interim committee study
and to to follow disincentive
what the complicated formula
didn't allow folks understand.
Including me.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative.
Last question is is really just
a COVID a little bit of a
disappointment one thing I
really liked about the original
bill was changing the name to
the equity index and that is not
in the committee set up so I
hope that comes out of the study
is one of the recommendations
moving forward and I appreciate
this bill and we'll be
supporting it thank you.
Right thank you Representative
Any other questions comments
concerns.
All right so
Representative Lente please.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
simply going to make a motion
for do best.
so you need to make the
appropriate motion which is we
have a committee substitute so
it do not pass on house bill one
thirty yes Sir sorry about that
make a motion for do not hasn't
house bill one thirty one but I
do pass on the committees on the
house Education Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty five.
So it's house bill one thirty
five thank you Representative
you're good I appreciate it
right so we have a second by
Representative Sweetser thank
you
so and madam secretary would you
call the roll on a do not pass
on the original bill but it to
pass on the committee
substitute.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative itself.
Representative itself
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Thank you for laying.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative then and then
yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative robocup I at all.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Spitzer yes.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes.
Matt I'm Mr Chairman madam
secretary I was on mute and I
said yes and we like to do hear
me okay I will take your test.
Vice chair Garrett yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Thirteen two zero.
All right we have I thank you
all you have a do not pass on
house bill one thirty five but I
do passed in the committees
how's Education Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty five thank you all for
being here we appreciate it
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you all.
All right so committee that
includes that concludes I should
say our business for today
remember we're gonna be having
floor sessions
The next couple of days so we
will reconvene at eleven o'clock
on Saturday morning almost
afternoon
so we'll have an action packed
Committee Saturday meeting with
everybody's committee's meeting.
So other than that.
No questions comments concerns.
All right.
Have a nice rest of your day
we'll see you all and then just.
Yes.
You want to meet with us.
Do I want to or do I have to
all.
Okay I'll see you in a bit okay
do I need to create one yes Sir
okay I'll do it I'll send you an
invite okay.
