Representative Torresales
Valesque.
Representative Vincent.
Recent device.
Gary
Here.
Sherman. We do have a car. All
right. So Senate Bill 387. So
welcome back, Senator Figueroa,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee. It's always a
pleasure to be in a room full of
educators and people passionate
about education.
Um, this bill send Bill 387 does
two things. Number one and
probably the most important
thing. It adds two words to the
disbursement language, it adds
up to 150,000 is the
disbursement rate setting
statute, and that's a hard
figure, so it doesn't give the
department any discretion when
our pot of money is low in the
community schools fund to make
smaller amount disbursements.
across more schools, so they
have to choose winners and
losers and stick to that
$150,000 amount. Now, this
change is at the behest of PED
with the full support of the
coalition of Community Schools
because they would like to see
this money available to be
dispersed in other amounts. The
other thing it does, um, is
rename our community schools
fund to be called the Doctor
Jeannie Oakes Memorial Community
Schools Fund.
And this is in honor of Doctor
Jeannie Oakes, who was a senior
fellow at the residents and
learning policy and did enormous
work, not only across New Mexico
but across our entire country to
develop the community schools
initiative. So this is in honor
of her work on our behalf as a
legislature, she testified and
worked with our EESC
Muchatolando and Loiento.
With our LESC for many, many
years, and devoted much of her
life to education. So with those
two changes will stand for
questions.
All right, thank you, Senator.
So we'll go to folks on Zoom,
folks on Zoom, if you're here
and support, I'll send a Bill
387, wish to speak, please
indicate by raising your hand.
On that populate folks in the
audience, if you're here in
support of Senate bill of 387.
All right, so if you want to
stand in line, please. You have
up to 2 minutes. Briefer is
better or the end of the
session.
Hm
Please.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Lily
Mayortis representing the New
Mexico School Board Association
and the Mexico School Board
Association has supported
community schools statewide for
many years. Uh, we believe the
program is very beneficial to
our students. It addresses
barriers holistically and it
creates an excellent learning
environment for our students. We
ask you to move forward and we
thank you for your work during
the session. Thank you. All
right. Thank you. Please. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman Dan Weeks
representing Burleyo County.
Burleyo County has this under
legislative.
resolution, and we're very
supportive of community schools,
community schools are very
effective, and we urge your
support.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, John Dich with
the American Federation of
Teachers in New Mexico, we like
the bill for for two reasons.
One, it meets the needs of
districts where they are with
that flexibility that the bill
seeks to implement, and the
second reason is it's certainly
a fitting tribute to Doctor
Oaks, many of us sat through um
their presentations and interim
meetings that have seen them
present in other different
conferences and it's a nice
tribute on behalf of her work
for our state. Thank you.
Thank you.
Please, Mr. Chairman and
committee members, uh, Edward
Webster with NEA New Mexico. Um,
NEA, uh, we think, first of all,
we thank Senator Figueroa for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
NEA New Mexico supports this
bill and believes community
schools are an opportunity to
reimagine public education in
our state by centering the
voices of students, families,
and educators and creating space
for shared leadership.
In schools all across our great
state. Please vote yes on this
bill. Thank you.
Great, thank you. So we'll go to
our folks on Zoom, so Brian,
good morning, Brian. You have up
to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
committee and members of the
audience. Uh, my name is Brian
Garcia. I'm the community school
development specialist for
Albuquerque Public Schools.
With community schools
identified as one of our 6
promising practices reflected in
our district goals, guardrails,
strategic plan, and budgetary
priorities we stand in support
of Senate Bill 387.
Here in APS we are seeing
tangible results in our
community schools that range
from improvements in attendance
and chronic absenteeism, growth
in students' skills, mindsets,
and habits, as well as increased
family and community engagement
and partnerships. This
demonstrates that when schools
address barriers holistically
outcomes improve. Thank you to
Senator Figueroa for sponsoring
this bill to the ed for their
collaboration, and all of you on
this committee for your
consideration. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Oh, Dianna, good morning.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Deanna Creighton. I am
the director for ABC Community
School Partnership and the
deputy director of the Community
School Innovation and strategic
Partnerships department in
Bernaleo County. I'd like to
echo the comments of those
who've spoken before me to
express strong support of both
the ABC Community School
Partnership and the Bernalillo
County Commission for the
committee substitute of Senate
Bill 387. We believe that these
changes proposed are very
thought.
and we'll strengthen our
implementation of the musical
framework. They will help ensure
that resources are distributed
fairly and effectively by
allowing for this flexibility
and how funds are allocated, the
bill will be better, uh, will
better meet the diverse needs of
schools and the communities they
serve ultimately helping
students and families thrive.
And I would like to add that we
are especially moved by the
decision to rename the fund in
honor of Doctor Jeannie Oaks.
Her groundbreaking work in
educational equity and her deep
commitment to community schools,
um, as mentioned both across New
Mexico and
across our country has had a
profound and lasting impact on
New Mexico by honoring her
legacy in this way, we not only
recognize her contributions, but
also reaffirm our commitment to
her vision of thriving
student-centered schools. I
respectfully urge your support
for this bill. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Michael, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes.
Good morning. My name is Michael
Nolan. I'm the community schools
coordinator at the Penasco
Independent School District.
Community schools has been
crucial to our successes. Our
high school is a spotlight
school where reading scores have
nearly doubled in the past
couple of years.
And last year, every single
graduate enrolled in college,
joined the military or was hired
to a good job.
This success is due in large
part to the community school
strategy of pulling together all
available resources, creating an
atmosphere of innovation among
our staff and give our students'
voice and agency.
I urge you to vote for this bill
in order to give PED more
flexibility in supporting
districts in communities like
Penasco and regions like
northern New Mexico, where there
simply isn't enough local
funding to sustain a coordinator
and keep pipeline services.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Matthew, good morning. You have
2 minutes.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee Matt Paul with
Public Charter Schools of New
Mexico. I think you've heard a
number of reasons why this bill
is a good one, and we support it
for all of those. Thank you.
Yeah, uh, Kristen, good morning.
You have up to 2 minutes,
please.
Good morning, chair and members
of community. My name is Kristen
Salliards. I'm the district lead
for the Roswell Independent
School District. We just thank
you for previous legislative
support as we continue to see
our schools transforming under
the community school strategy,
and we ask for your support to
move forward, Senate Bill 387.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you. So we'll go
to opposition folks on Zoom, if
you're here opposed to Senate
Bill 387. Could you please
indicate by raising your hand if
you wish to speak?
folks in the room, is there any
opposition to Senate Bill 387.
All right.
Not seeing any
many folks.
And I'll jump up that one, Mr.
Chair Representative, to pass,
right? So we have a do pass
motion on Senate Bill 387,
seconded by Representative
Roland.
Um
Dare I ask, is there any
opposition to the DuP Past
motion?
No
know
You have a do pass, senator.
Thank you so much.
All right.
Senator now
Representative Silva, good
morning.
All right.
Send a bill for 80, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members. Thank you for having
us. We are very pleased to be
with you today. Uh, Senate Bill
480 is a bipartisan.
Uh, a piece of legislation
co-sponsored by Senator Brant,
myself, uh, representative Silva
and Representative Hollen, and
we are, uh, we are essentially
addressing uh several things
that have not been, I think,
prioritized and it all reflects
on New Mexico, New Mexico's
graduation rate, and as many of
you know, the graduation rate in
New Mexico has hovered between
75% and 80% since 2016. A
typical cohort is typically
about.
30,000 students, which means
approximately 6000 students do
not graduate from high school
every year. Every year we
appropriate millions of dollars
to our institutions of higher ed
and work for solutions to
implement programming that
provide pathways for schools and
for public school for, for
public schools also to offer
re-engagement programming for
students who may not have
graduated. These programs, high
school diploma re-engagement,
high school equivalency are
important in providing pathways
for future success for.
who have struggled.
that all of these programs have
no centralized list of students
from which they can recruit,
meaning that they can directly
contact students who are
non-graduates to encourage them
to enroll in a program that they
are offering. That seems really
inefficient, so that's why I
introduced Senate, the Senate
bill uh for 80, which would
require that every summer PED
would create a list of all
students who were in high school
and one of the last 4 years, who
did not graduate within those 4
years. That list would be
available for the.
higher education department,
public post-secondary education
institutions, school districts,
and charter schools, and New
Mexico-based adult basic
education providers or workforce
development programs that
provide programming for out of
school cohorts attaining a high
school diploma, a high school
equivalency credential or
workforce credentials.
The whole of the hope overall is
that with a specific list of
students to recruit from these
programs can actually be even
more successful than they've
been in the past and we can
streamline enrollments. And now
I will turn it over to my
co-sponsor, Sarah Representative
Sarah Silva.
Thank you chair and committee.
uh, just briefly wanted to touch
on two points, uh, New Mexico is
one of the highest youth
disconnection rates in the
country in 2022, uh, with 15.3%
of youth between 16 and 24 in
the state, neither working nor
in school, and this bill focuses
on this population of New
Mexicans. Um, I know for myself
in House District 53, I have 3
Donana Community College
branches in uh my district alone
and they have a, a robust adult.
Education program along with
incredible workforce training
programs. And I think these
programs allow our residents to
gain workforce credentials and
things like welding, coding, EMT
training and uh this bill would
help give more access and
opportunity to to those new
Mexicans. Thank you. And I
wanted to also introduce our
expert witness, um,
Carry
Bruer, sorry.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee carry Robin Bruder. I
do represent public charter
schools of New Mexico, but this
is not a charter school bill.
This actually came out of a
brainstorming session that we
had this summer where we said,
what is it that could actually
help people re-engage in some of
the programs that we already
have for youth who have
disengaged from school. And one
of the things came up was, well,
right now we kind of have to do
blanket advertising because we
don't have a specific list of
students that we can go to to
say,
A warm reach out, right? Uh,
we've got tons of programs all
around the state that are trying
to work with these students, but
when they don't have a
centralized list becomes very
difficult for people to actually
make that one on one connection
so that they can recruit
students into the program. So
even though this is not a
charter school bill, uh, we are
supportive of it because we
think it's one of those, it just
makes sense kind of things, um,
and so I'm here to answer any
technical questions that you
have, but uh thank you very much
to the sponsors for bringing it.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. If I may add just one
last thing, I think pertaining
to New Mexico, when we think of
graduation rates for specific
populations, uh, I think it's
important to note that
economically disadvantaged
students graduated at 69.7%
English language learners
graduate out of 74.9% and foster
students graduated at a 45%.
Those are some of the high risk
populations that have uh some of
the lowest graduation rates that
we've been able to see and um
and this I think plays.
right into it, um, and I think
also from our specific lived
experience, um, as a community
college graduate and as a UNM
grad, I know, and as a first
generation college grad, I know
what it takes and I know that
our families aren't always ready
at this at the time that they
have to be ready for graduation,
um, so I think this is just an
added resource for our
communities, um, whenever it is
needed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We'll yield.
All right, so, um, folks in the
audience on Zoom, if you're here
in support of Senate bill for
80, please indicate by raising
your hand if you wish to speak.
Let that populate folks in the
room if you're here in support
of Senate Bill 480. Could you
please raise your hand.
Right, so we'll go to Matthew
again. Good morning, Matthew.
You have up to 2 minutes,
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee met Paul with
public charter schools in New
Mexico, um, as Carrie mentioned,
this is not a charter school
bill, but charter schools are
supportive of it. Um, we have 15
schools um that are charters
that serve as dropout
re-engagement schools in the
state, and they graduate
hundreds of students every year
that had previously disengaged
with their education. We think
this bill will do two things.
One is help target recruitment
of students, um, uh, so they
know what kind of opportunities
exist.
For them, students can enroll in
a New Mexico public school until
the age of 21 to get their
diploma and while Representative
Silva mentioned some really
great programming in adult base
again, um, we know that the
outcomes are better when they
get a diploma, and so being able
to reach these students to um
accomplish that goal is a
relevant one. Secondly, we think
this will lower the barriers,
um, for school districts to
create programming, um, our, uh,
charter schools that
serve as dropout re-engagement,
um, uh, programming for
communities are largely in Las
Cruces, Albuquerque, um, and,
uh, Santa Fe's house area. The
service array of different
programs that are reaching out
to students who had disengaged
with their education is very
limited, and the hope is with a
ready-made list for uh local
school districts, they may be
inclined to provide new
opportunities as well. So, um,
Senator Napa mentioned some of
the graduation rates.
It's just unacceptable, and this
can take us one little step
forward to serving those
students. Thank you.
Right, thank you. So go to
opposition folks on Zoom if you
are opposed to Senate bill 480,
would you please indicate by
raising your hand?
Folks in the audience, if you're
here opposed to Senate Bill 480,
please raise your hand.
All right. So we'll come to
committee, uh, representing the
way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much. Um, I just got a couple
of quick questions. Um, and
more, more technical because I,
I do like the fact that if we
can identify them, that would
be, that would be a great um
idea. Have you, um,
My my minute is up
Time is up. Well done. You talk
too much. I've been told that
several times, but um, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, have you consulted
with the, with the reporting
date is July 15th, being that uh
many high schools have um um.
Summer school and that's not
done until the end of June. Have
you spoke with Ped? Is that a
realistic uh uh date that they
can get these numbers, being
that just a couple of weeks
before and sometimes a little
bit further, there's still
summer school going on.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I won't speak for
PED. They are here. Uh, they
have not brought this up as an
issue in any of the other
committees that we have been in,
so we assume that because July
15th was one of the days that we
chose because we wanted to make
sure that we captured all of
those students who did.
End of June.
would not be caught up in this
list because we know about
summer school, so, um, really
it's a coding issue. They just
have to go into the system and
make sure that anybody who's not
now coded as a graduate, they
land on this list, um, so I
don't think it will be a
problem, um, but of course, PED
can answer that question if, if
they're flagging it.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, Greg Frost at
Assistant Secretary of Education
for the Public Education
department. Um, there are some
concerns that we have, uh, the
first is that, um, yes,
reporting end of year reporting
happens at different dates and
can happen even in July. We're
still collecting no data, um, in
July. So there um that's an
issue. The other is that we will
need to make sure that we have
MOUs in place for anyone that we
want to share the data with, it
is protected data.
And making sure that we have
those in place before we share
the data may take some time as
well. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair because that was gonna be
my other with uh with all the
entities that we're sharing this
list from, um, that, that was, I
was like, is there, is there
like privacy type of issues that
are going on with all of these
different entities because some
of them aren't regular just
public schools, so and so, so
but uh MOUs will, will be
something that we, that we have
to deal with. Um, and then, um,
I, I'll just, I'm gonna tell you
I have a wonderful
superintendent that sends me
questions. Um, so, um, uh, but
he, but 11 concern that he, that
he had is uh the attainment of
these adult education
credentials, are they gonna be
counted towards the graduation
rate or because, of course,
we're that's, that's one thing
that's gonna be helping, um,
hopefully our state get out of
50th, uh, so because right now a
GED does not count towards
graduation rates.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Mir Mirabal Moya, I would say
first of all the data sharing
agreements are very important.
The bill directs that the list
be available by July 15th, but
doesn't mandate that all of that
data sharing agreement work be
done by then, so the list is
available by the 15th. Let's say
someone requested it at the end
of July. They're a data sharing
agreement would be entered into,
which is total standard
operating procedure and then the
information could be released to
the requesting entity.
in order to make sure
confidentiality takes place, um,
for your second question, if a
student receives their diploma.
So let's say that they became
part of a local school district
re-engagement program like Las
Cruces Public schools just
launched a re-engagement program
in the spring. If they attain a
diploma, then that does increase
the overall graduation rate for
any district that shares
accountability with that student
due to our shared accountability
system. If the student were to
receive their equivalency or if
they said I don't necessarily
want a diploma, but I do want
workforce credentials so that I
can enter the labor market and,
and have a career using this
workforce credential, then they
would not count as a high school
graduate because they didn't
actually attain their diploma,
um, so it depends on what was
right for that student and what
path that student chose, which
is honestly part of the
intention of the bill is to
provide all of those
opportunities for what's gonna
work for the students.
At that time.
Yeah, uh definitely. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, cause I, I think the,
the most important thing, and of
course, we definitely, um, um,
and, and I think uh the
re-engagement programs are, are,
are an excellent idea across the
state. So, uh, but identifying
the students, but um the most
important thing is to get them
to be productive members of
society and make sure that they
have whatever they need to, uh,
to achieve that success, so I
think, thank you very much.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
senator, so I did have a quick
question. Um,
I know I signed on to this, but
I wanted to just kind of verify.
We have a very good uh
alternative school in Rio
Rancho. Um, and so would they
also so that typically they're
not grudgings within the 4-year
program, so are they going to be
receiving notifications as well
since they are already in.
already involved with our
alternative. Mr. Chairman,
Representative Cohen, yes, that
is correct. And I think one of
the most important things to
note from the original bill and
the sub is that we wanted to
ensure that the information was
going to be shared with folks
within the state, at the state
level because at at first it was
sort of a broader sort of
sharing opportunity with
entities and institutions from
across the country, that sort of
really hyper focuses to New
Mexico. So yes, they would
automatically.
Uh, qualify.
To be able to receive. That's
what you're asking, right? No,
so they're already enrolled in,
say, Independence High School.
So there are a lot of them did
not graduate within the 4 years,
so are they going to be notified
from other organizations and
colleges, um, that they qualify
for different things if they're
already in.
You know, in enrolled in a
program.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Cole, the bill specifies that if
you disengaged for one out of
the previous 4 years and have
not yet graduated, you would be
on the list. So if there's a
student who, let's say was not
doing well at Cleveland and then
they get referred to
independence, um, for your
alternative program. They're
enrolled, um, and so they've not
disengaged and so they would
stay within the school district
system. It's only if, let's say
a student was
Attending Valley High School and
then they left after their
junior year and then they didn't
graduate, right? They have not
been enrolled in school for 2
years. They are now an out of
cohort student. That student
from Valley High School in
Albuquerque would end up on the
out of cohorts too cohort list
because they are not enrolled.
They didn't graduate in 4 years
and now it's like we want to
have a warm outreach from any
one of these programs for that
student. OK, that's why I just
need clarification because all
out of cold heart because then I
was reading the title, so I
wanted to clarify that. And then
um I know that we've had issues
with um.
Because of our graduation rate
at an alternative school is
lower, obviously, because that
is an alternative school. I know
that we had some issues with
because of the federal reporting
with that, I know earlier this
year with some guidelines, um,
So I'm hoping that that it looks
like it died, went through an
old uh email from our school
district.
Because it was all like an
improvement plan because our
graduation rate is lower, but
that is the whole point of these
types of programs is that their
graduation rates are going to be
lower because they're typically
5 to 6 years of graduation. So,
um, I'm hoping that has been
resolved, but that's something
that we'll have to talk with Ped
about. Thank you.
Zumba.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator, um, and
Representative.
For bringing this forward, um,
my debate's gonna be with the
expert witness for 2 hours,
please set the timer.
Mr. Chairman, um,
I, I do have some questions
about this, and so,
Very, you know, just very
briefly, what kind of data is
our, is already collected.
On graduation.
How was it gathered by PED and
orders that report go. Mr.
Chairman and Representative Baca
right now the cohort data that
is actually published is just
statistical information. So what
people have access to is I'm a
high school, this is my overall
graduation rate for my 4-year
cohort. This is then it
disaggregated by different
student groups, right? English
language learners, students with
disabilities, etc.
There's no information that um
is contained in a report, at
least to our knowledge right now
that actually captures the
student name information for
those who have not graduated,
who are now out of cohorts, so
while that reporting does happen
under the federal regulations,
this bill is really trying to
say we don't just want the
statistics we want to be able to
identify students for that warm
outreach for recruitment, um,
after, of course, the, the data.
ing agreement has been entered
into.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. I'm, I'm kind of surprised
that they don't already gather
that through their student.
Information systems or stuff
that's reported to PD, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, senator and representative.
We're talking about data.
Where is the LESC or will this
be represented to the LESC or
LFC in this through this
process.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Baca, I think that it would,
it's absolutely appropriate for
the legislative education Study
Committee to do.
A report, let's say in a year or
two to say how many students who
are out of cohort did actually
then get enrolled in some of
these programs. All of the
programs, um, especially like
workforce training programs,
those workforce credentials are
registered through the Workforce
Solutions so we know who those
programs are, they receive some
state dollars in order to
operate. We know who the
independent community colleges
are. There's reporting
requirements that they have to
make to the higher ed department
and of course our schools are
always doing reporting. So I do
think that it would be very
interesting, um, and I would
really encourage in 2 years for
LESD to look at this and say did
this start moving the needle in
terms of recruitment. There's no
requirement in the bill right
now, but that would, I think,
just fall under the purview of
the LESD on the public education
side. I know that there's a bill
moving through the session to
give Ellie a Seymour purview
over the P20 system, um, but I
think that that would fall into.
To what would be available and
what you all could study.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for that.
I kind of, you know, the
implication that it should
happen doesn't happen.
You know, one of the things Mr.
Chairman and um presenters.
Is we go through this and
through the intern process we
take time away from our
families, and we take time away
and we travel the state.
And then we get
Tasks or make requests to adopt
programs or to fund programs
that we've never actually been
engaged with before.
So Mr. Chairman and I, I think
the fact that, you know, that
this report.
should be, you know, it talked
about being published.
But if we're looking at
Data through the interim, and
we're looking at committee
endorsed legislation.
I don't think that it should be
implied that the LESC be a part
of it.
I think that it absolutely
should be.
As we talk about the engagement
in the budget process for LSC.
I'm gonna really advocate that
the LESC has a greater role in
the planning of the budget.
But in order to do so, we have
to have information so that we
can make recommendations with
our colleagues on LFC.
And make sure that we have money
in the budget.
That way when we come to this
committees or especially to the
House Appropriations. Is there
no approach we're stripping the,
we're stripping this and
basically we haven't done
anything here and Representative
Silva, she's shaking her head
cause we don't, right.
I
Mr. Chairman, um,
And committing the other.
Um
thing I'm gonna say. I like the
fact about reporting.
But once they've not graduated
with the cohort, it's too late.
What I would prefer and actually
think Mr. Chairman and
presenters.
Is that the report should be on.
You know, by the end of their
sophomore year, we've said many
times in my 32 years, if we get
a kid through their freshman
sophomore year with credits
credits intact, will graduate
them, not at 70%, not at 80%,
but in the high 80s or 90%.
So I think, you know, it's kind
of like
The difference between going to
a doctor's visit or a physical.
Rather an an autopsy when it's
already too late and we're
trying to do the root cause
analysis.
So I, I think that, you know,
all this is good. I mean, I
think, I, I like that.
And one of my frustrations, um,
Mr. Chairman, through this.
is the request of data.
That it should not just be,
well,
I, I can't tell you how many
times in the 4 years I've sat up
here, and I said, well, we don't
have that, we haven't gathered
that and that's very frustrating
because
If we're to make informed
decisions on policy and or
funding, we need to have data.
So,
Uh, that would be also, Mr. Cha,
a recommendation is that
Really? Well, we still have
these kids in school.
It would be nice that after
their sophomore year.
That we don't have some kind of
measure.
That is also reported so that we
can
Help fund as far as some of
these alternative programs or
help to create and provide
supports and additional funding
in our high schools to get these
guys graduated. Mr. Chairman and
committee, I think that when
we're talking about, and I
realized we have up to the age
of 21, but many of these folks
ops are 18 when they leave that,
then they're starting, they have
more factors, not to mean that
we don't fund that, but I mean,
I really would prefer to
identify these guys early.
While we still have them in
school, well, for they're still
like, you know, and we provide
support and funding to our
schools, to our charter schools
or our adult education programs
and so for that, you know, I, I
really do think that your bill
is good.
But I think to make an impact.
I would also see as, you know,
are we be doing something at
the, for your cohort and at the
end of their sophomore year so
that we know, we know that we
have 5000 kids that are at risk
not graduating with their
cowork, and that way we're not,
we're being
Proactive rather than reactive.
So I support your bill, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and
But I do believe that
We probably need the one, the
LEC engagement and reporting and
also LFC so that we can properly
fund public schools.
And also the report, um,
Uh, it would be great for me to
see a second or early report by
the end of their sophomore year
so that we can really target
those guys while we still have
You know, more oversight of the
students. So, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you, um.
I have a question in regards to
um
Reporting the graduation rate.
And uh what are we doing about
um
About students that are
Going from one school to
another, and the reason I say
this is, um, uh, in my area
there are um
The federally funded schools,
and then we have the public
schools, and then of course uh
there are um
Religious organization that have
their schools too, so they move
in between those schools because
they're close by and
And for whatever reason, if they
didn't like one, they go to
another one and it's really up
to the parents.
So when this happens, uh, are
you requiring the federally
funded schools also to do the
graduation rate of.
According to the state also, so
that you can keep track of where
all these students are.
Uh, I've seen it done frequently
both in steep land in Lake
County.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Garcia.
This bill doesn't do anything to
change the way our graduation
rate is reported, but what we do
in this state is we have what's
called a shared accountability
model. So imagine if you will
that every single high school
student is divided into 16
parts, so 4 parts for each 4
years that they should be in
high school. So if a student
moves, let's say in between
schools. The school becomes
responsible for the amount of
time in which they were enrolled
in that school. So if they were
enrolled in Gallup High School
for 2 years and then they were
enrolled in, let's say a BIE
school for the other two years
when they graduate, Gallup High
School gets credit for the 2
years that they were enrolled at
Gallup High School. Um, this
bill doesn't do anything to
change that, and that's really
how we reflect that movement
between schools to make sure
that
schools are responsible for the
amount of time in which the
school was that the student was
actually enrolled in that
school. Um, graduation rates are
reported, um, from all of those
different entities, uh, but
again, like I said, this bill
isn't changing that process.
It's just saying if you did not
graduate from high school, um,
and you are now not enrolled
somewhere else. Let's make sure
that there's an ability for
programs that were already
funding throughout the state to
recruit you.
OK, thank you, um, Mr. Charades,
my question.
Thank you for being.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator and Representative
for, for bringing this forward.
So I do have a few questions,
Mr. Chair, and, and uh and
presenters so which, which
programs will be eligible to
receive these students to give
them their diploma.
Not a GED, not work for, not a
certificate, but a high school
diploma.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Lauda, you would
have to be an accredited public
school or a private school, I
guess, of a private school had
to re-engagement program that
was accredited. So, uh, in, in
your, uh, part of the state, Las
Cruces Public schools just
launched in the spring a
re-engagement program. So those
students could be recruited from
this list by Las Cruces Public
Schools to enroll in Las Cruces
public schools to receive their
diploma from Los.
public schools, but you have to
be either a a district school, a
district high school, or a
charter school that is actually
accredited to give a diploma in
order to get your diploma under
this program, which is how it is
right now. We're not changing
that. Thank thank you for that,
Mr. Chair, and, and, uh,
And uh that expert, so in my
area, in my nick of the words,
we have desert Pride Academy.
And a private Academy is already
doing that, so we have that
built into our system.
So how old do students have to
be in order to be be eligible to
receive their diploma by these
other means, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Lauda.
A school-aged student. So in
order to receive funding through
the SCG, you have to have
enrolled in school before your
22nd birthday and have
continuous enrollment.
So if you are a student who is
20 you never got your diploma
and you re-enrolled in school
and you stay in school even past
your 22nd birthday, that school
would continue to receive
funding for you because of that
age limit that we put in place,
um, back in 2018, I think it was
2018 when we did the moonshot
bill, um, that really kind of is
putting the guardrails around
the programs that are offering a
real diploma, they're doing.
it for school age students.
After students um are past their
22nd birthday, most often
they're going into an
equivalency program, um, or a
workforce credentialing program.
you for that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. So at least you mentioned
the CG funding.
So if
students haven't graduated yet.
And the list is made available
to other entities who offer
diplomas.
Um, would you say there'd be a
mad scramble for it to get these
students to, so we in order for
the, for the institution to be
able to get their the SCG
funding.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lauda, I think, uh, I'll be
guarded in my answer because
working with these students is,
is a challenge. These are our
most at-risk students, right? So
there are programs in this state
that have been built, um, some
of them are in our charter
schools, some of them are
alternative schools like
Independence High School and Rio
Rancho, where they, I think have
more capacity to serve more
students, but those students are
constitutional.
ally guaranteed their right to
public school funding until they
reach their 22nd birthday. So I
will not say that we maybe won't
have 200 more students to enroll
in a diploma program through a
local district or a charter
school once we can recruit from
that this list. I think that's a
great thing, um, and those
students are already considered
to have the right to to state
equalization guarantee dollars
right now. So will it be in
that dash
Maybe, um, when we look at the
reality of how these programs
are built and the kind of work
that we have to get these
students to come back in. Do I
think it's gonna be thousands of
students right off the bat.
Probably not. I think that this
bill is more about making sure
students know the different
opportunities that they have,
uh, before they reached the age
of 22 and even after the age of
22, if not through the state
equalization guarantee.
Thank you for that and Mr.
Chairman, and, and, uh,
presenter, senator and
representatives, you know, I, I
understand that I'm not opposed
to the idea, I'm not opposed to
the bill. I just, you know, I'm
concerned.
That there will be, I don't want
to say unscrupulous, but, you
know, more uh ambitious programs
that are gonna go head hunting.
I hate to use that term, but
that that's, that's why I feel,
and they're gonna be, you know,
Promising all these things, you
know, come to our place, we can
do this for you. We'll roll out
the red carpet. We'll give you a
stipend, we'll give you a golden
chalice. We'll do all these
things in order to, in order to
be receiving that SDG funding.
And Mr. Chairman and presenters,
I, I don't want, I don't want
that to happen because I feel
that they take advantage of some
of of my community members and
my students who otherwise, you
know, wouldn't want, you know,
wouldn't, uh,
choose to stay at Desert Pride
Academy per se, but go to the,
to the Cadillac version where
they offer all these things, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lara, if I may, um,
I, we definitely hear that
point, but I think one of the
most concerning things for us on
the bill pertaining to your
question was keeping at New
Mexico base to ensure that we
are reinvesting in sort of a
return on investment situation
with the students and because
there's only, whereas I
absolutely agree with
Representative Baca as well in
terms of being preventative and
ensuring that we have
preventative measures. There's
only so much that we can
control.
There's only so much that we
know about our communities in
terms of support systems.
There's only so much that we can
do, um, you know, to prevent,
but these things happen, so in
the, in the reality of the
situation where we have folks
who are not graduating, we want
to see this as a support system
for them, and I totally hear you
in terms of folks who may be,
you know, wanting to benefit
from it, but I think at the end
of the day, it's a direct return
on investment for New Mexico and
that's why we were prioritizing
it. Thank you. Thank you for
that, and Mr. Chair, one more
question.
So, uh, how about, uh, entities
who are who are certified, but
do online only.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lauda only New Mexico, uh,
program.
have access to this list. So if
there is a New Mexico school
that is online only. I'm
thinking about uh
Um, academy at Albuquerque
Public schools, right? They're
an online only program, a lot of
credit recovery in Albuquerque
public schools happens at the
Academy. If Albuquerque Public
Schools said we want academy to
do more work with re-engagement,
Albuquerque Public Schools could
request this information and
they could enroll students in
academy as a total online
environment, um, but again, that
school has to be accredited in
order to receive to grant a
diploma, so all of those
guardrail.
that we have put around online
education in our public high
schools would apply to any
school that was requesting this
information because it is only
New Mexico public schools and
New Mexico workforce training
programs that could receive
access to this list in addition
to our institutions New Mexico
institutions of higher ed.
Thank you for that and I thank
you for the reassurances and I,
I completely believe what you're
telling me and, and I think I, I
believe that this has been
thought out, very well thought
out, and, but there, there will
always be someone looking for an
edge.
And uh that, that would be my
concern. But other than that,
you know, I think this is a good
piece of legislation. I'm going
to support it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
for abacavier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you all for um
For your presentation. I, and I
think represented Baca and
representative Lada because
They hit on some of the major um
questions that I have,
particularly uh just now
represent a lot of.
Um, I was trying to figure out
Um, how
I guess the question is trying
to, and I, and thank you to PED
for your comments, uh.
I'm concerned only from the
standpoint of I understand that
we need to, um, collect data.
Um
But my, my concern is not just
around the privacy issue, um, as
we share data amongst ourselves
and amongst departments and
amongst programs, but
In this time of um
Uncertainty for lack of another
word.
Um, lists become a problem.
And
Names
And affiliations, family, so on,
all become.
Questionable, uh, because the,
once you generate a list.
Once the data is collected.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
That becomes public information
to a large extent. And so,
Um, one of the questions I had
had to do with um the family
educational rights and Privacy
Act.
And how we will protect our
children and families.
Um, under that.
That privacy Act, uh, that's one
question.
Associated with that is, do we
currently have a way to connect
this particular demographic.
With our adult basic education,
I think earlier.
It was touched upon slightly.
But those two things are
interrelated and so uh if you
could address that, I appreciate
it. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Roybak Caballero. I'm gonna
answer your second question
first, cause I think it gives
good context to your first
question. So right now, uh, in
conversations that we had with
the independent community
colleges with workforce
solutions, um.
There is no direct way for those
programs that already exist in
our state and are doing good
work to directly recruit
students, they have to do
blanket advertising. They have
to, you know, depend on
I have a family friend who went
through a program at CNM and it
was a really great experience
and they know that their
friend's kid is maybe struggling
in high school, so they're gonna
say, oh, go to this program in
CNN. It really worked out for
me, right? There's no way where
our programs um across the state
have a way to call a student and
say, hey, like,
Come and see if this works for
you, right? Um, so I think that
that benefit of us having a
direct way to recruit will help
make things more efficient
because that does not exist
right now. Um, in terms of your
first question, I think that
first of all, we need to
remember, yes, the environment
is very different right now, but
under federal law, under FERPA
directory information is already
something that is permissible to
share, um, so,
Think about when your student
was maybe a senior in high
school and they started to get
all of the mailers from
universities trying to recruit
them to go to their school. They
get that information because
they can submit an IPRA to a
school district and say, can I
have the directory information
of all of the students that are
in your senior class and under
FERPA, that is releasable
information. Um, what we're
doing here is we're saying the
information is restricted to
that directory information
student name.
phone number and address, but
the PED is going to put extra
guard rails around that
information by requiring a data
sharing agreement with any
entity that requests it. That
data sharing agreement then has
all of the confidentiality
requirements in it for the
entity that is requesting that
information so they can't turn
around and use that data for
something other than what their
specifically asking for within
their program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you for your response.
It still is um
Data
It still appears and um
We can put all the guardrails
and the protections, however,
it's still there, and that's the
um what I believe would be.
The fear, particularly in the
southern part of our state.
Uh, southwestern part of our
state, southeastern part of our
state.
Um, where
Where that may be potentially.
an issue and then the question
then is, is this the best way?
Um, and it goes to now, um
Representative Bacca.
Earlier comments.
And um
You know, my, my position has
always been that the earlier we
can intervene.
In a child's progress in a young
person's progress.
We stand a better chance to
retain them within the school
system, and within our
educational system. And so for
me, all of the programs that we
have been supporting throughout
the years and all of the funding
that we've been providing
throughout the years that have
been geared towards retaining
our students and
And it's been a difficult
discussion for many years, but
my position still remains that I
think we need to take more of an
intervention, um, approach.
Earlier
So that we're already in, in my
view, at the, the teachers, the
school systems, independent
school district, everybody
already is eager to ensure that
our graduation rates, um,
Increase that our students
receive their diploma and that
they would go out into the uh
community uh either in
university, whatever they
choose, there, it's their
choice. Whatever careers,
whatever, um, however way they
wish to contribute to their
communities, that's their
choice.
And that to me is, is a much
better approach. I'm concerned,
Mr. Chair, it goes back now to
representative Lata who asked
all my questions about the
money. Um, you know, this.
And, and thank you for asking
those questions about the SCG
because my question was going to
be uh about the funding
directly, and that was answered
and
It's
We all know that being in school
is money.
It, it, you know, that if you're
in the longer you're in school,
the more money, uh, whoever is
delivering that school, whether
it's a public in whatever
charter school, whatever.
Um, receives funding.
However, if we're not
Mr. Chair.
Cautious
Then whatever we begin to do.
With good intentions, because
this is well intentioned.
Leaves
The door opened.
For what represented a lot of
this cautioning about
unscrupulous or other ways in
which to come in and take
advantage of
What we have to offer because
right now, our state is being
recognized, um, Mr. Chair, as
being very aggressive.
In our funding mechanisms, um,
to our schools so that we can
address the 50, uh, the place
that we exist and, and it's not
a secret that we have money,
that we have the revenue, that
we have the SCG so that would be
my only um
Those are all of my concerns as
it related to this. I was in my
thought process of trying to
wrap around why we needed this.
That, that's where I came from
it. I always come from the
premise of
Why?
And what is this gonna, uh,
accomplish where what gaps or
what
Um
areas are we trying to address
and I, I think it was well
articulated, however, the guard
rail or the question, uh, Mr.
Chair, that representative Lada
asked at the very end, it's not
addressed in the bill itself, so
it would have to be up to
whoever it is, it's going to be,
in this case, it's the school,
whomever is going to be setting
up his uh reporting mechanism.
Um, to ensure.
Um, that we close as many gaps
as possible, uh, in the process
of doing this, but my most
important
Caution is in the way we uh
protect the list.
And the families and the
children in the list, because
that's the last thing that we
want. We're already a vulnerable
state.
In terms of immigration, in
terms of refugees, in terms in
terms of our whole all all of
our, our vulnerable communities,
and we don't want them to
continue to be at risk. Thank
you, Mr.
care.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for
bringing this bill up.
Um, I do support it. Um, I think
that the departments involved
are well aware of the FERPA
requirements, according to PED
the data for the required report
is quite readily available.
And I think what I like about
the bill is we collect data, but
what do we do with it? And I
think your bill is saying let's
do something with it. There's
multiple ways to do it. We have
a robust adult education
program, which hopefully you
will get free tests if the bill
passes, which it should pass,
and um workforce solutions is
very much involved
apprenticeships.
So I think
Realizing let's collect the
data, but let's do something
with it. Also just looking at
the data, what it shows, I note
on the report here, it said that
youth disconnection, the highest
concentrations are relative to
the total population actually in
San Juan McKinley, Sabola, Mora
Luna, and Union. So just knowing
where this is, are their
programs. So thank you for
bringing it forward, and I will
support it.
Represent Doris Velas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I, I want to start by thinking.
The sponsors.
Um, this is a very creative,
clever bill and a way to address
a concern.
That, um,
I hear a lot when I'm working
with youth in the community, and
I've been hearing it ever since
I started with work in the
community and I'm sure y'all
have heard it too, um, a couple
of the concerns that I've heard.
From the students that I work
with who, um, some of them were
involved in
Um, well,
And making change for our state.
Um, in education, one is that
they, they felt in the public
schools very often that they
were seen for uh as deficits.
They heard derogatory comments.
Um, the treatment that they got
from some teachers was punitive
and at other times, um, ignored
that they wanted to go to
college or wanted to do
something, so when they were
absent sometimes. I'm sure Mr.
Romero will chair you never so
please, I know we've got some
incredible teachers you would
never think about doing these
things, but
Students might be absent and
come back and
Ask, can I have the makeup work
and, and the teacher might say
something, um, around the lines
of why you're not going to go to
college or anything, you know,
just really, really.
Making them feel bad about their
dreams.
Um, and, and they
Often felt that the
witnessed other students being
pushed out.
And the students I'm talking
about sometimes were student
class presidents star athletes.
Theater
You know, stars.
And, and I, and I'm sure no one
on this committee would ever
dare think about.
Those types of comments, but
It was a message that some
students saw other students get
or got themselves and
One of the concerns that, you
know, they started doing some um
They started writing some
autobiographical stories started
to think about their own stories
related to education, and one of
the concerns that also came up
was that around middle school, a
lot of them started wondering
where some kids went.
Because they're kind of just
disappeared.
They weren't at this school.
They weren't at that school. The
family still lived in the home,
but where were the kids?
And I, I agree with um
Representative Baca from
Valencier County, I agree we
need to start earlier.
Um, because it does dropping out
does start in middle school and
we do see that in the data.
Um
I'm glad that this will focus
on, um,
Again, on graduation rates.
And, and I actually um I'm kind
of glad that you're gonna be
looking to see who it is.
And you won't be doing the
actual work with the PED will be
looking to see who it is that's
missing.
And, and I, I, I do have um a
couple.
Around that, um, one is that a
couple of times.
The data sharing agreement was
mentioned.
But I, I, I'm not sure. Can you
show me if that's in the bill
where I can find it.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Torres Velasquez. The data
sharing agreement is not in the
bill, but that's how PED
operationalizes it and if you
look even at their um FIR their
in their analysis. They say that
as part of operationalizing this
bill, they require data sharing
agreements. It's something that
they do all the time. So it's
not in the statue um or in the
bill, but that's how PED
operationalizes it, which
they've testified to. It might
be helpful to refer to it, even
though it's not explained in the
bill, um.
Somewhere, it just might um
might help.
Um
And, and then the other question
I have, um, Senator Nova, I know
is a DACA student at UNM, you
know, we tried hard to protect
our students, and um are very
careful with the data that we
share, and I'm wondering with
the PED, do we have those same
protections for high school
students in terms of, you know,
we, we don't report immigration
status. We don't report certain
things that would target
particular students in
Past ice raids.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Torres Velasquez.
I know from my time being
in-house at Albuquerque Public
schools, we worked a lot on this
policy, immigration status is
never asked by our public
schools as part of enrollment.
It is not captured in any kind
of record at all. So even with
the student information in the
state student information system
from which they would pull
directory information there is
absolutely nothing in there
about immigration status and so
that is not information.
that anybody could receive
because that record is never
created and would have that also
count for the English language
you please make sure I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair. Thank you. Sorry,
sorry, Mr. Chair, would that
also count for the
English language status. Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Torres Velasquez, if you are a
student that is an English
language learner, um, within
your school district, meaning
you have not yet reached
academic English proficiency,
um, you are flagged as an
English language learner, but
that is not part of your
directory information. Your
directory information is your
name, your address, and your
phone number. Um, and so whether
or not a student was an English
learner would not be put into
this.
That is something that I would
hope that as programs are
working to reach out to students
if they know a student is an
English learner, that's part of
the support that a program could
have, but that wouldn't be
revealed in this information
either, um, which I think again
is one of those protections, um,
that's in place.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, and,
and, uh, presenters, um, and Mr.
Chair, there is, there is one
more thing that I would ask you
to consider, um, I, I think
you're going to find um that you
might have a need for an
appropriation in further years
for developing programs like
this so that the public schools
might have um additional funds
to work with kids that are
brought back that could not
seem.
fit in the public schools and so
I'm not asking you to include an
appropriation just to consider
that as you look at the progress
of the work that y'all are doing
around this bill that in future
years it might be good to
include some type of
appropriation um for um not so
much incentives, um, the type
that um send a representative
Lara was talking about, but more
the types of academic needs. um,
I worry about
who um have disabilities or are
gifted, Mr. Chair, we have a lot
of kids who are twice
exceptional who drop out early,
um, because they're highly
gifted, um, but also have some
disability they are learning
disability or um behavior or
communication disorder and, and,
and it's, it's not a good fit to
be in the public schools, but
maybe if there were some
additional funding for ways to
better meet their needs in the
schools they might uh
in the schools I share.
Mr. Cherry share the um
The concern that uh
Representative Lada talks about
in terms of exploitation and I
think that might just be a
chance we have to take in order
to reach out and find the
students that we're talking
about because it is a big
concern. We do want to find them
and I'm so glad that you're
doing this project. Um, so, um,
robust education programs for
all of our students who might
drop out Mr. Chair would be um
something that I would love to
see.
And I certainly support your
bill. Thank you. Thank you.
What's the will of the
committee?
right, so we have to pass
motion.
by representative Garrett, um.
There any opposition to the
DuPass motion.
Right, see then you have a path.
Thank you all so much. Thank
you.
So that's it for today. We'll
see you all possibly on
Wednesday.
