Others I bet I bet it's a big
one.
Because it is a little sore from
us.
I don't know.
You know it's going to be so
you.
I.
Okay.
It is.
Two minutes.
But they.
But you had.
One fifty.
All right.
Has it been so far.
We decided to enter there in the
middle of yes I think they're
still on.
They haven't done opposition in.
A lot of interesting
to me is to.
Okay folks.
Supporters.
Is there on both that yeah they
didn't ask when they can
interview with writer groups.
So I get the same amount in
opposition for.
There are people here but he
hasn't heard those.
So you'll get to hear that.
Its down just here everywhere as
you know I.
Is that time.
Thanks.
Thank you all right so the Cerro
would you mind testing for us if
I allow you to speak please
Serra.
All right Mister chair can you
hear me now we can let me just
all right everybody in the
committee room we're back.
So we're gonna allow Serra you
have up to two minutes welcome.
All right thank you so much for
taking the time to figure that
out that means a lot to us Mr
chair members of the committee
I'm Sarah fitzgerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we are in support of HB three
twenty five because leadership
matters and it starts at the top
our local school board set the
tone for district administrators
and our principles eight schools
of hundreds sometimes even
thousands of kids this bill will
help them attain the skills they
need like an awareness of
finance and legal topics and the
value of data for helping
students set and reach academic
performance goals will also help
hold them accountable for their
actions as board members and as
elected officials setting up
important guardrails against
abuse of the influence they have
our students and families have a
right to expect their district
leaders to give them their best
and this bill creates new
supports an important
consequences to help our members
deliver we are the committee
support thank you thank you all
right Meredith good morning of
up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee can you hear me
we can.
A good a good I want to echo the
previous
remarks and the ones that were
made before the break down in
the zoo at I. E. I am speaking
on behalf of J. U. W. that's
American Association of
university women and the league
of women voters of New Mexico
previous commenters made the
comments that I would like to
make I urge the committee to
support this bill and I like all
of the elements that have been
discussed the accountability the
transparency the making sure
that we're working on outcomes
I wish that we could have had
more hours required in the bill
as we did in the previous
version but it's August the
elements are there I don't know
how you could do them all and I
hours I I really encourage all
school boards to have more
training than five hours I think
and that's up there anymore and
I want to thank the sponsors and
all the people who worked on
this bill I urge you to pass
this bill and speed it through
this process thank you very
much.
Okay good morning hope you have
a two minutes.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is help
moralis and I currently serve as
president of the rules of school
board I'm speaking on behalf of
myself based on my own
understanding experiences and
hope for becoming better we have
several affected board members
across the state this
legislation is not about any one
individual or board this is
about the system and
expectations we have in place
for our local leaders are board
members have specific duties and
responsibilities however there's
no specific requirements to the
training topics that we must
participate in meeting some
board members actually never
take training related sites
finance.
Unlike elected state leaders
local boards don't have access
to regular policy staff or
analysis based on research we
must rely on our own knowledge
experiences and wearing support
the local level this bill would
ensure all board members are
participating in training topics
that are outlined as best
practices by the national school
board association and align with
our duties required and improve
training will help ensure better
dialogue across our state that
is focused on the goals of our
duties communities across our
state will know that their local
leaders year after year will
have been trained on these
important topics please support
this bill which would help
improve the overall system of
support transparency and
accountability of our local
boards if we create a more
effective system our students
will benefit thank you to the
Sanchez and thank you Mr chair
thank you Chrissy good morning
Chrissy of about two minutes.
And morning can you hear me we
can.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman and the members of the
committee my name is Christy
Centers I am currently at two
thousand twenty two thousand
twenty three senior Kate plus
hello and a fifth grade English
language arts teacher with
twenty if you're twenty four
years of experience at UW stout
entry school in Silver City New
Mexico.
Educational decisions are made
at many different levels that
affect the students I teach
among these are local school
boards and they are one of the
most important decision making
bodies that affects my students
on a daily basis.
By ensuring that all board
members present participate in
training that is thoughtful
critical and connected to their
duties local school boards will
be more effective they will have
training and support to make
informed votes which will help
our schools and students to
thrive.
Team of educators I work went
from four other districts also
support this legislation as an
opportunity to support
development and transparency of
all school boards I appreciate
your time and consideration and
provide the best educational
opportunities for the students
of New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Shannon good morning
Jenny of about two minutes.
Good morning thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the
committee I apologize in advance
for my boys and over coming from
laryngitis here I'm so thank you
very much for letting us
testified the Izu my name is
Shannon Kunkle I am outreach and
development director for common
cause New Mexico we stand in
full support of HB three twenty
five and would like to thank the
sponsors for bringing forward
this legislation currently the
vast majority of school board
candidates in New Mexico do not
have to disclose contributions
to their campaigns this
represents a real and growing
threat to transparency in
elections and thereby will also
wrote public trust we know when
we're seeing across the country
more and more national political
groups are pouring money into
local school board elections and
that includes your New Mexico
voters need to know which out of
state special interests might be
attempting to influence our
education system so to that end
we believe HB three twenty five
will help to ensure that parents
teachers taxpayers and the
community at large know who is
putting money into these races
and for what purposes
additionally we also echo the
other comments about supporting
the webcasting and clarifying
ethical guidelines and
enforcement actions so we urge
the committee to pass H. B.
three twenty five thank you so
much I appreciate it thank you
Gabrielle good morning of up to
two minutes.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Gabrielle Biggie and I'm a newly
appointed school board member
incorporate consolidated schools
as a new board member I need
access to training that
specifically aligns with my
duties as a board member and
will prepare me to make informed
votes for my district although
these things are although these
are things I can currently seek
out this bill will ensure all
board members across our state
participate in these sessions
giving communities insurance
that we have been trained on
these issues it will also ensure
that these topics become a top
priority for organizations to
continuously offer and hopefully
improve the quality of training
sessions available I also
support campaign fund reporting
the nepotism clause and the
webcasting of school board
meetings I want to be as
transparent as possible this
bill outline simple things that
will guide me and help me in my
role as a school board member my
experience has been rewarding
and I look forward to improving
as a school board member thank
you for your time.
Thank you omega good morning you
have up to two minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is omega Soto and I am a line
through twelfth grade chemistry
doll credit and CTE teacher and
I teach plus policy fellow this
year our group works to learn
more about the decisions that
were made at the local level and
the training and support that
local leaders receive in order
to make those decisions I am in
support of HB three twenty five
related to school board.
School board members make
important investments in their
districts through providing
governments to support district
and school needs during our
teach plus research which
included interviewing ten board
members from our days different
districts we found that many of
them felt they would have been
more prepared in understanding
their duties and to make
decisions for school needs if
they would have had more
training prior to officially
taking office in those first
months they also shared a desire
for increased and improved
training on topics like finance
budgets and legislative updates
we also recommend expanding the
allowable individuals and groups
to train school board members on
a more frequent basis by L. E.
S. C. and LFC staff.
Through these efforts we hope to
increase the effectiveness of
our school board members and
support our students here in New
Mexico I hope that this bill is
received with great
consideration and enthusiasm as
we put the needs of our students
and schools first in New Mexico
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Great.
Thank you all right before we go
on with further public comment
Representative Lundstrom if you
wish to make some brief public
our comments rather please thank
thank you Mr chairman I just
want to say good morning to
everyone and all COVID after we
hear all the all this input this
morning thank I think I think
this will be your opportunity to
do that before we go on all
before you go on okay well I
would like to thank the
committee this morning for
hearing house bill three twenty
five I I enthusiastically signed
on to this bill primarily
because of my work as the former
LESC chair this last of interim
we had done a review of to
western school districts we do
audits year round on different
school districts and a lot of
the issues that were found to be
challenges go back to general
governance and the lack of
General governments when it
comes to school school boards I
feel this is an incredibly
important bill I think that
coming just from what you've
heard Mr chairman and committee
from those that supported I
think it's badly needed in New
Mexico we we're all we're all
rowing in the same direction Mr
chairman to try to make
education better whether through
funding but I think of one of
the presenters who spoke earlier
we talked about leadership
matters I absolutely agree with
that I think it's critical that
comes from the top.
And we see lots of
inconsistencies we see lots of
things that are slipping through
the cracks and I appreciate you
all you'll taking this into
consideration this morning great
thank you for being here all
right so we will go back to a
public comment those in
opposition online please
indicate by raising your hand.
Hold right there those in the
room on my left hand side those
in opposition to house bill
three twenty five please
indicate by raising your hand
left hand side okay hi C. one
help to all right we'll start on
my far left hand side.
Which is the woman that was
looking around that's you all
the ones here left to right
rather sorry out school board
member board member Peterson
please give up to two minutes
welcome.
I I'm R. Peterson speaking as an
individual who is an elected
school board member.
Reporter directors The New
Mexico school board association
I am increase.
With many many many of the
sentence as I think.
The reason why I'm standing
positions because of the work is
done by the end of us for four
years with the only elected
officials hired already to.
To participate in the training
and The New Mexico school board
association takes very
seriously.
Are you should educate to
perhaps with over finance.
Of the other statutory language
and senator I am standing in
solidarity with the New Mexico
school boards association in
opposition.
Thank thank you others please
family of up to two minutes
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee chair Prof
former school board member for
thirteen years but I can school
district right next to us the
thirteenth year was because of
the election change I want to
make a couple points first of
all anyone who is familiar with
campaign finance.
Will understand how services at
how challenging that is right
it's not one report they're
approximately seven or eight
reports every year where you
have to identify every
contribution every expense with
the names addresses phone
numbers etcetera if you miss a
report there are serious.
It was and I think still is very
state fifty dollars per day so
for any candidate thank you
happy.
First who would have to take
that on that could be a huge
deterrent for the second point
that I'd like to make right in
opposition to this bill really
has to do with nepotism and I
want to point out nepotism is
not a problem there has been an
override a law in place for a
long time and every school
district every school board
members well where in my school
district one here there was a
school board member whose son
wanted to be a teacher he
stepped down very dedicated
committed percent find centers
hired by the superintendent and
all right he was re elected I
should point out in the bill
that to punish is board member
right fundamentally incorrect
the superintendent is the one
liners all right and that has
been in statute for very very
long time my last point all
right basically is there is
language in this bill is as
important as based budgeting
which fundamentally is a
financial term we're familiar
with that term.
Thank you in those two minutes
thank you others on the left
hand side please and not just in
up to two minutes.
Chair members of the committee
just call us W. secretary of the
Public Education Department I do
first want to start by saying
that we are please support of
transparency transparency at all
levels of education and I want
to thank the sponsors of the
bill for bringing this forward I
do however think that there may
be some areas where we might
need to maybe talk a little more
and understand the on the fact
that this situation first I just
want to start by acknowledging
all of you with elected
officials and and also
developing that school board
elections by nature are
nonpartisan we have a loss my
district
in the state close to.
Percent of all school districts
have been front on propose and
some fees have no candidate.
That's even more about the very
democratic process that we are
teaching in K. twelve education
for students civic engagement
given the enormous fines that
could occur if you forget to
disclose that you didn't take
any campaign funds and the
purchase that I would put on
people that might
the thinking about running to
serve their communities and
half of our students that would
be burdensome I also want to
talk that the current
requirements for governing body
funds are established already in
New Mexico order a dot I and new
members are required for the
total of ten hours of training
in their first year of service
those include powers that are
determined by public as I.
We do three hours with a party.
I'm in the field and we do that
with the New Mexico school board
association thank provide those
training in concert with us and
we focus on increasing
leadership stability equity in
this room all of the fact.
Thank you W. secretary thank you
all right anybody else in
opposition of my left hand side.
Opposition on my right hand
side.
All right so start Miller okay.
Please up to two minutes welcome
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee it's good to see
you this morning of the person
my name is Jody and executive
director of the New Mexico
school boards association and a
three term school board member
former school member so I know
these issues first hand I'm
speaking today on behalf of our
eighty nine school boards four
hundred and.
A fifty members that have
adopted our our legislative
position we thank the sponsors
for working with us from the
original bill we were able to
agree on several items including
the the the the planning portion
we are the premier of planning
body for school board members
and the the the of.
Topics that are listed are only
a portion of what we we find we
find over a hundred offering so
here including a lot of the
areas that people have requested
finance budget LESC L. E. S. C.
O. R. R. I. at all of our
meetings.
Fighting assistance but I want
to talk to you about the two
issues that we haven't been able
to agree upon and that is the
first is the campaign finance
reporting and we've offered some
amendments to that but they have
not been accepted we feel that
again school board members are
nonpartisan we have very few
that are actually stepping
forward in many communities to
take advantage of to lead in
this effort and we feel strongly
that these cumbersome reporting
requirements with fines and
penalties will will distract of
potential members from for from
running for office we also also
want to mention that right now
okay close to fifty percent of
our of seats are unopposed and
they're usually five to ten
seats annually that aren't
aren't even sought out by anyone
so those boards have to a point
down the line so we oppose this
part of it we feel that the most
most of the campaign activities
taking place in the large
districts and those are covered
already.
just want to thank you Sir that
was two minutes.
Thank you very.
To.
Goes by fast when you're having
fun please Sir chairman that's
on you former president Mexico
school boards former school
board member will community I
started my career two thousand
one I served there three terms I
became more president my rural
community and then I finished my
career Rio Rancho on the only
one to ever do it twice in two
different service president
twice and and from two different
districts I serve in Rio Rancho
one of the largest districts in
the state I'll tell you one
thing the finance reporting was
very difficult I ran for house
of representatives last cycle
came close but didn't win and SO
west those has still yet to
respond to my request because
some things are as clear as mud
as we needed money for that
money came from I still have yet
to get an answer as a school
board member in Las Vegas I
don't have the opportunity have
accounts helping me in Las Vegas
I raise four hundred dollars Rio
Rancho five hundred dollars and
let's be clear I don't have
lobbyists knocking on my door
wanting to donate me money I
don't have it enters Madam chair
representative asking me to
donate money to me that's not
happening when it comes to
nepotism house bill two twelve I
served one point hired everybody
fired everybody I was happy to
see house bill two twelve
committee put that
responsibility on the
superintendent boards don't do
that we don't do that on top of
that I had fifty sixty hours of
training as a school board
leader in my community I chaired
meetings DC Chicago San Diego I
can go on and on and I have
colleagues doing the same thing
I think this bill there's some
things that we can enhance but I
think we should go back and have
a mutual agreement sit down with
everybody involved and work on
how we improve our systems
because transparency is
important transparency's
important and when I come here I
get to miss a session in twenty
years when I come in to talk to
representative and they refused
to see me but yet all this gets
ahead of me gets that
opportunity I have issues with
that as well so we're going to
fix school boards we gotta fix
Santa Fe as well we just can't
call it one.
Elected body second while I
attend school board meetings
across the state attended
meetings the last
two minutes on this on the call
else was on the call besides me
and employees thank thank you
sorry are passionate about I
don't want to do this.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee willing they are
to for the New Mexico scored
Association and I come to also
the twelve over twelve year
school board member working
mother at the time was to to
public schools and so I also
passionate and live the life I
just have a couple of things
that I hope I can get to them
quickly campaign reporting the
transparency discussion is not
the reform initiative this is
not a new reform bill these
things have been going on over
the years we have been working
on the movie years is being
taught as a reform bill but we
don't see that as at that in two
thousand and thirteen the
legislature created by
requirements for the local
school districts with twelve
thousand students or more to the
to report their campaigns this
bill targets small school
districts that targets
traditional small school
districts but it does not
address any financial
transparency requirements for.
Public schools it's
inconsistent.
Our fifth and the phone
likelihood reported phone likely
of any campaign reporting will
significantly help voters
determine who's financing the
candidates because information
is not shared until after the
individuals for New Mexico so
that is.
Currently does not work in terms
of nepotism it's been said
already one more member loan has
the authority for members not
violate the law consequently
there already exists I
committees food violate law
person that creates infraction
similarly there are no
requirements for any public
charter schools that and if you
are not held to the same
standards have another
inconsistency in terms of the
nepotism in terms of the hiring
of the third thing I want to
mention I was in terms of the
training and I think it's but
are you mentioned the multitude
of trans van offered I counted
sectors high four hundred
training sessions in the last
few years four hundred provided
by.
Thank you ma'am thank you for
asking of the bill all right Sir
please give two minutes thanks
I'm David Casteel I'm a lawyer
for school districts all of the
state large small rural urban
we are always on here to talk
specifically about the nepotism
portion of the bill and really
do shall be removed period
the throughout the course of the
day today legal advice to be
given districts and then all
these to do with hundreds of
board members showing up all the
time we're always drill and and
and into their head that it is
badly not the job of school
board members to to hire
employees of the school
districts right there's a
separation of powers built into
the law that's not their job
it's the job of the
superintendent everybody
understands that school board
members can be recalled if they
violate this the separation of
powers principle Supreme Court
said that in two thousand five
the superintendents do all the
hiring force can't be involved
it's also not the case the
school board members can be
punished or removed from office
already for violating the
nepotism law they can be subject
to recall they can be removed by
former auto
for anything that involves
malfeasance and misfeasance in
office for violation of the oath
of office so this bill just says
shall be removed period
That those existing remedies
like I set off some amount of
due process right it's so.
This bill would allow people to
be removed with no due process
with no requirement that the
actual malfeasance or
misfeasance in office or even
necessarily that that the board
member nope that the
superintendent has hired someone
relations.
So I don't think it's actually a
real problem notice in the New
Mexico it's been a long thanks
for for ever.
There's no there is no issue
serious business to recall
elected officials and others
already provisions in place to
have due process to make sure
that happened so that that
portion of the bill I not become
law thank you
the boys are looked at thank you
all right in the next row those
out ma'am please you have up to
two minutes money no worries
chairman members of the
committee my name is funny like
that president New Mexico School
superted Association also
incoming president of the New
Mexico college of education
leaders I don't appreciate
privative we stand in opposition
to this of this bill for a
couple reasons what is it has
potential over reach and local
board decision making and it
could potentially be excessively
directive and further whether
several of the provisions of
this bill seem to be unfunded
mandates encourage opposition
thank you thank you I appreciate
the privative Sen ma'am please
give up to two minutes Mr
chairman members of the
committee harmless shows
registered lobbyists in the New
Mexico coalition education
leaders we stand behind our
school boards and and there are
concerns with this bill we
believe that community
involvement is critical right
now this goes Pacific Lee after
the smaller school districts
what we want to do is encourage
candidates to run often times
are school board seats are left
vacant that further increases
the problems with instability we
stand behind our school
superintendents who we believe
have the ability currently to
deal with nepotism the statues
as they currently are and we
stand behind their ability to do
that thank you thank you others
in opposition next row thanks
for all right Sir you in
opposition.
Yes or all right please have a
two minutes thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is JD
Bullington on the register
lobbyist for the gala McKinley
County school district we really
only have one issue with this
legislation was it was well
stated by the attorney it's on
page four lines have that
language with the school board.
We remove there is currently a
recall process and.
Of school board members any of
the attorneys to great job of
outlining that so we we just
hope that maybe that section
right there can have a little
bit more due process bait bait
down right there on that point
and and that's a really are a
major concern thank you right
thank you others not position
place many of appurtenant my
name is John Brown on the
superintendent for Moscow school
districts we are explicitly one
of the small school districts
but was really struggling with
this bill we have a hard time
getting school board members to
to come in and participate and
so anything that we can do to to
alleviate that process is is
better for us we believe in
strong educational processes for
school board members for the
reason of our well articulated
by everybody else we would stand
in opposition to this bill right
thank you any other opposition
are inside all right we'll go to
our folks online that have been
waiting ever so patiently Travis
good morning you have two
minutes.
Good morning can you hear me we
can please thank you chairman
Romero members of the committee
my name is Travis gland board
president of Tatum municipal
school district I stand before
you in opposition of house bill
three twenty five for the
following reasons personal page
two line twenty two adding rural
districts to this definition
places an unreasonable burden on
small district board members at
first glance the secretary of
state's website is confusing and
complying with this drops
potential board member
candidates away secondly with
respect to nepotism on page four
lines four through six the
requirement states for the local
school super coming the local
superintendent may provide proof
of quality of qualification and
request the department to grant
a waiver uncle the PED doesn't
have to grant the waiver is a
legislature or this committee
running the PED authority to
grant or do not based on some
arbitrary guidelines to be
developed in the future.
Thirdly for board member
training on page five last three
two three three twenty I am
opposed to the PED's dictating
the training required by board
members The New Mexico school
boards association is a more
qualified entity to determine
the most appropriate training
needed lastly on page five line
twenty one section four edgy
requirement to provide live
audio and video webcasting of
local school at school board
meetings it doesn't provide any
funding for that I fully support
more public access to decision
making of local board but there
is an expense associated with it
for these reasons I asked you to
reject this bill and work to
improve it and most importantly
work to provide more local
control of our schools thank you
thank you demarini good morning
you have up to two minutes
welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Emory maker and I'm a member of
the loving to the board of
education and currently serves
as president of the New Mexico
school board association my
concern begins with campaign
finance sixty percent of our
state eighty nine school
districts are in small
communities and have a student
population of less than a
thousand forty four percent have
a student population of less
than five hundred in small
communities it's very easy to
learn all you could possibly
want to know about school board
elections go to the parts store
the post office or the cafe and
what you'll find out is that
candidates spend little to no
money on running for any elected
position and if it's needed they
usually fund their own campaigns
this bill would create an
unnecessary level of paperwork
and have a punitive effect on
any person who failed to file
finance finally manner nepotism
is a non issue due to board
members willingly stepping down
to allow our relative to be
higher and they do this because
they know how important it is to
have adequate staffing in our
schools so they are willing to
step away from serving
trainings I urge you to visit
the NMAA be a website where you
can find training sessions
posted from over twenty
conferences in the past five
years which cover every topic
listed in this bill and then
some.
Every decision about education
should begin with how does this
affect our students
opportunities for success this
bill does not focus on that this
bill focuses on adults not
playing nicely together and
right now in education in our
state that is the wrong focus
thank you for your time thank
you thank you Christine good
morning of two minutes.
Good morning my name is
Christine moody and I am a west
Las Vegas board member of and
I've been on the board for my
turn and
I'm also the president elect
with the school board
association and I oppose house
bill three twenty five for the
two items that have been
already in numerous of people
have already had concerns with I
concur with those opposed to the
two items already specified by
those that have spoken that is
on the finance reporting and on
the net nepotism yes we all
agree on transparency there are
school boards that are already
because of the pandemic at the
end of recording their their
school board meetings and have
been posted and and they're
there for the public to see
there is no hidden agendas in
any of those meetings and we
encourage our community to look
at them and and review of
there's also on the finance
reporting the secretary of
state's office is not developed
and outreach awareness or
training programs specific to
school board reporting of school
board candidates which hinders
compliance with understanding
nor have there been efforts to
streamline the reporting process
for those that have no
contribution to report I also
come from a small community and
in my I terms I have spent less
less than five hundred dollars
of my own campaign money to
campaign in the small district.
Our bars the nepotism nouvelle
all of our members and and two
percent are are aware that this
is not an issue so with that I I
in a post of this bill thank you
thank you Marvin good morning
you have up to two minutes
please.
You Mr we can you have two
minutes welcome.
Thank you.
I just wanted to just myself one
is more than how to me on the
immediate past president for New
Mrs Cooper Association and a
board member for misuse of
consulting school districts in
regards to section one under the
finance the campaign finance
reporting on New Mexico school
Association opposes this section
of the proposed bill as it's a
nifty further reduces the number
and the quality of school board
candidates across New Mexico
will subject members to
cumbersome requirements and
penalties moral moreover.
Our larger districts which
includes Albuquerque Los crucis
rental sent the accent our with
the very with the most campaign
finance activity VRA subject to
this requirement.
in addition secretary of state's
office has not developed and all
reach awareness or a training a
training program specific to the
school board candidates which
hinders compliance and
understanding nor have I been in
the efforts to streamline the
reporting process for goals that
have not no contributions to
report in regards to section two
of the Neptis in statute our New
Mexico School personalization of
polls this section of the
proposed legislation as a
mechanism law already exists
it's worked for us for over
thirty years it's effective in
all parties are fully aware of
the
prevention further the penalties
propose our punitive
incorrectly directed and told in
the state.
Let me know what also charter
school governing councils are
not subject to nepotism all
requirements in regards to
training just a group of my
fellow constituents have said
you can look up the New Mexico
school board online and you can
see all the training that has
been given are brought to school
board members thank you for
listening to me all right at the
buzzer thank you Martin all
right so.
Will come to committee
representative Lente.
Thank you Mr chair.
So I will confessed from the
outset I I generally don't know
we're around the landfill.
I don't see that too many times
a hard headed Republican so I
I'm intrigued I what the debate
is the questions but I do like
certain parts of this bill I do
have heartburn about certain
parts this bill.
So Mister chair page two.
So under existing law if the
district is smaller than twelve
thousand students and you don't
have to.
File campaign finance reports is
that correct.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct and that applies and
passed it applied to four of our
eighty nine school districts
Albuquerque Los crucis Rio
Rancho
It uses Santa Fe it used to
apply to Santa Fe but they're
less enrollment counts just drop
them out of that category they
would be in there anymore so now
the fort would apply to
Albuquerque Las Cruces Rio
Rancho Gatson.
And Mr chairman the way I read
F. B. as in Bravo this is
existing law that's not being
changed so when you combine be
with do so basically now every
school board candidate they
received five hundred dollars
more either the contribution or
like kind than they would be
required to report is that
accurate.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for making that connection
that is correct it is also
repeated in our NMSA statutes
one dash twenty two eight dash
three.
No okay handed who receives or
expands under five hundred
dollars has to do a campaign
finance report anyway that
applies to not just school board
members that's all so in R.
fifty six percent of school
board races where someone's
unopposed.
They're not going to have to
file a finance report unless
they spend more than five
hundred dollars and if you think
about our smaller districts you
can copy flyers for fifty you
can spend a hundred dollars on
cake for the town hall meeting
you can buy a banner to put up
on the school field and not hit
that five hundred dollar mark Mr
chair about ice cream.
highly recommend asking for a
friend.
And Mr chair so.
You know I did serve once one
term on the asset school more
prior to join legislature.
and I think.
Part of my concerns over this
is.
Their nonpartisan elections and
so there's not a lot of support.
You know when you run for a
statewide officer provided C.
oftentimes very run as part of
the party and and built into
that system is is a level of
sophistication and help.
Now I can understand sort of the
you know the APS school board
races I imagine those are
probably pretty steep to to plan
those races I don't know but I'm
assuming.
Maybe Santa Fe similar but you
know some of our.
Smaller districts I just worry
about the sophistication level
that's required without there
being a lot of help and
resources.
And whether this could sort of
have the opposite effect of
discouraging people to dip their
toe in the water so Mr chair can
can would you mind just trying
to address those concerns for
me.
Mr Chairman representative
absolutely is one of the reasons
we reached out to the secretary
of state to state how this work
what do you do how can you help
school board members and they
consider it part of their
mission to reach out and do this
training and provide this
support
and again.
That five hundred dollar limit
is really in eliminate a lot of
our school board races but the
underlying piece here is
fairness if you live in one any
town outside those for.
You deserve to be able to see
major contributions over five
hundred dollars that are given
to school board races whether
they are partisan or not if
there are if it's a contested
race and money is being spent.
Everybody deserves to see that.
Madam chairman of and actually
on the contributions that I I
hundred percent agree with you
I think people need to know.
How their elected officials are
receiving donations and even if
it's a small rural school
districts like that makes sense
to me.
and I could see there's maybe
some concerns on in certain
district races about who's
funding what and and maybe who's
driving a gender not
have you considered though.
With regard to change in.
Rep D..
It just.
Taking the approach of donations
because I know a lot of people
will dig in their own pocket for
school boards and make
expenditures and in that sense
it doesn't seem like there's a
same concern about influence.
so I just cures Mr chair if you
given any thought to maybe limit
it to just donations for the
school board elections Mr
Chairman representative you
can't really because even if
folks are digging into their own
pockets their community deserves
to know that so if the
expenditures are over five
hundred.
Somehow someone has to explain
where the money came from.
Third of thank you Mr thank no
Sarmento.
So that's it I will say though
it we're on the floor at ten
thirty and we have a couple
other bills to one is another
popular bill on session to make
sure that comments are concise
questions or concise and we get
to the meat of the issue because
I have a long list for this bill
message received Mr chair.
The page four paragraph B. as in
Bravo there's some comments and
I thought about this too when I
served on the board.
The superzoom technically do the
hiring we would get a person
report typically on a monthly
basis so I don't think the board
members are entirely removed
from culpability because I think
I they probably know
but can you just share with you
why we don't also includes
superintendents within this this
list here.
Mr chair and representative the.
What we heard today is that the
superintendent not
superintendent school board
members voluntarily step down
when this situation occurs
because they know that the
requirement
If.
It's the school board member
whose voluntarily stepping down
when a family member is hired.
That's what I do is written the
way it is it is the school board
member who would step out the
intent because it is school
board members Mr Mr chair school
boards to hire the
superintendents the intent is to
prohibit leaning on the
superintendent to make the
higher.
That is the concern that's
trying to be addressed here in
section a and section.
Mr Chairman yeah I understand
that it just seems like there.
I think what I hear you saying
really is that there's
tremendous political pressure
and superintendent sometimes
from a board and.
If they're told to hire of you
know and nephew or something
like that a sibling
then there in an awkward
position where they have to
either tell board members no one
could potentially face support
corrupt or.
if you could include this in the
in here than they might their
license might be subject to
suspension but.
I'm just curious because they
are ultimately the ones I think
that make the hiring and and Mr
just last thing on the
webcasting.
I like the transparency fees
that do have some concerns about
how local rural districts are
going to fund.
Both the IT equipment not just
in the cameras but if you
require five years of
retention and storage of those
materials I just concerned about
how some of our small.
My producers are in a for that
so thank you Mr chair so my
questions right thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair.
Hi I think all of you know that
I spent sixteen years on this on
the school board and I I believe
strongly in local control and
what I've seen over the years is
a move away from controlled by
the local school board and
towards more centralized control
strolled here at the state level
House Bill to twelve took away
the power of the school board to
approve the teachers that were
hired by by the superintendent
so basically the school board is
left with these powers they can
hire the superintendent they
approve the budget and they set
policy we recently saw that they
can only set policy if they
agree with the policy set forth
by the state in the case of
Floyd where the the board member
was removed because of the
disagreements with us with the
that policy the set forth so
I'd say the least the ability to
set policy is fairly limited
nepotism is already not okay we
know we know nepotism is illegal
it's already bans.
Campaign contributions sixteen
years on the on the school board
not one penny did I ever ever
get it is a thankless unpaid
job.
Another great opportunity to get
all your friends very angry with
you because of.
Some decision that you did
through the your best.
Intentions of your heart to help
the local children
grow and learn and do good there
is there
It's not much opportunity for
graft on the school board I
assure you there's mostly
opportunity to get people angry
with you
So it's something that you do
because you care and because you
get up and
early in the morning go to the
training center legislative
something that you do because
you stay up till two o'clock in
the morning
trying to debate policy for your
school that makes that school a
better school
transparency were subject to the
open meetings act are subject to
April requests
So.
You know I will adjust.
In my tirade said that to I
think that it is a.
Kind of a thankless job it's a
job that we have trouble getting
candidates for when I ran for
this office I heard CPA to to do
my reports because it's just so
easy to forget to do a report
just constantly afraid that I'll
not get one in on time or
something and for the job of
Alamos little school board I
can't even imagine trying to
file report all those reports of
secretary of state I think it's
unnecessary and I would give you
all an opportunity to respond to
that because I don't like to
just say a big long thing in in
not not give me the opportunity
to respond Mr please thank you
Mr chair and thank you
Representative I would point out
in your sixteen years you
would've had to file a campaign
finance report because you
weren't spending money on for
those fifty six percent of our
school boards where that's not
happening nope this bill would
not require a finance report but
in those forty four percent
where money is being spent and
received.
Folks deserve to be able to see
where it's coming from and if
it's coming out of their pocket
of that school board candidate
they deserve to see that too
because that's commitment to
their community.
Please thank you Mr chairman I
just want to make a comment as
of twenty three year veteran of
the New Mexico legislature as a
non paid citizen legislator to
hear folks say that campaign
finance reporting is is too
difficult I think for me it
falls on deaf ears
I've been filling out for
campaign finance reports for
twenty three years and as all of
you have been.
And when we start out in these
non paid positions.
We don't have help.
I don't think it's a matter
sophistication we have to go to
the secretary of state.
And we get help from them.
I I just think that that is a
red herring to hear that that
especially when it's at a five
hundred dollar level for
goodness sakes I just I find
that to be disingenuous I think
that school districts are big
business you serve on the
Appropriations Committee school
districts receive over four
billion dollars in total of
public education money.
And in some cases those are very
large budgets in some districts.
And they spend a lot of money
and they spend a lot of money on
a lot of things I think it's
incredibly important that the
public has an opportunity to see
who funds those candidates and
why.
So I I guess for myself Mr
chairman having had to fill
these out for twenty three
years.
And never being denied by the
secretary of state for help I
think anybody who wants to lead
a district and lead a community
education initiative should be
able to at least fill out a
campaign finance report I would
question that if they can thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative go to
a.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
Hi tech everybody's where they
have these one before with that
idea out reporting transparency
training of the separate than
the everything sounds also on
the more that I hear the more
that I read that would confuse
might want left masamoto had I
am.
So I have some questions on and
forgive me if this is clear for
most people but I'm getting I'm
new from us confirming the
patients so I work with a small
districts with everybody's
related to everybody.
So where the nipple to some
polls on these I know I mean it
would be completely unfair to
how the superintendent married
to one of the more members
that's great to hear but I what
wonderful teachers what about
people who we worked with the
administration would that be
part of these.
Madam.
Mr chair and representative at
the bottom of the page three
that is current nepotism law and
that is what is spelled out this
bill doesn't change the rules of
who qualifies as nepotism and
it's spelled out pretty clearly
there and teachers do fall under
it and in.
And you've all heard of school
board members to step down
because their daughter
granddaughter was being hired as
a teacher and they recognize
that this nepotism law applies
in that case so it it does fall
under the nepotism law and that
law has been in place for a long
time we're not changing it
except to add the waiver on page
four so in our super small towns
is super small districts.
Keep that person potentially on
the school board and make that
high.
By petitioning putting in a
waiver getting a waiver from PED
in our small communities that
has not been available and that
is an important piece of this
bill.
Section B. is the penalty this
bill has existed having this
nepotism law has existed for a
long time with no penalty with
no teeth New Mexico is one of
thirteen states that says
nepotism is not allowed.
But has no concept.
So we're putting the
consequences in New in other
states twelve a make it a
criminal misdemeanor which is
way farther than I wanted to go
five states making the civil
penalty.
I didn't even want to go that
far we went with the lowest
possible as the school board
member to step down.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
that's what I want to understood
my concern with like in APS it
would be this is perfect I mean
thank you that is not happening
but it's good to have a clear I
don't understand in the
community who has as many of our
members asked school students
both how this is going to be
part is not going to be part of
the rate for for somebody.
Lay that my other question is on
page four on them part of a
thank you at twenty three I came
I was really excited about
having training for a school
board members as a teacher and I
think with the show we we get
them sometimes these frameworks
that are doing amazing things
for school and then leadership
changes and they have different
views and everything goes to the
trash basically so the trainees
I understand more members on
administrative that that that
that the strict but I wanted to
see something more like students
achieve may how can we included
and and at and these they're
mentioned the north to
Strongsville a lot of
ministration on yeah we're
coming change right field the
same hours and and they but I
have a question about including
performance based budgeting
could you give us an example
what is that.
Mr chair and representative
performance based budgeting is
used across educational statute.
for example.
I'm looking for it because I
looked this up this this
question I thought might come up
and there's a kind of a standard
understanding across PED and the
school board association
themselves had no questions
about what this means and that
it is a good thing for schools
to know
it's Houston NMSA twenty two
dash thirteen three one is used
in twenty two dash two C. dash
eleven there's a common
understanding of performance
based budgeting and using funds
to get the student outcomes that
is also mentioned Mr chair and
representative on page five in
line tenants.
But the school boards part of
their training is on their role
in evaluating and improving
student academic achievement
because that is the.
Both with the budget and with
all the other decisions they're
making that goal is for students
to achieve.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
representative I'm gonna the
separate problem my questions
are going to be answered also to
the conversation so thank you so
much thank you Representative
Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for reasons for
you have to post me early on to
be co sponsor of this and it's
no secret that I
have an interest in school
boards I have had the pleasure
in my thirty years to see how an
effective school board can help
with student achievement in the
overall governance of this I
also seen how school board can
you can be at a hamper I do
think that there's a correlation
between this average tender
superintendent being two years.
There's something going on there
so I think that we need to look
at this Mr Chairman also can
tell you that the training
Is important I have been to the
school board association strings
I do understand that so my
question to you of Mr Chairman
is what happens if they do not.
Under your bill take advantage
of those trainings what what
would would be that
accountability.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative that's an
excellent question
And right now they get per diem
for training there's no
consequence for not attending
training Mr chair representative
but what came out in multiple
negotiations with the school
board association and the
superintendents association and
with PED and with the charter
schools we've met multiple times
around this bill and.
The discussion around the
training there is.
It's public it's published on
school websites is published on
dashboards.
Folks who have completed
training are not completed
training so then it's up to
their community to look at that
and decide do they want to
reelect.
At the end Mr Chairman I'm gonna
just
I think that needs to be clear
this far as with this because
there is good training out there
I I I've been a part of it I
myself benefit from it might my
concern more is when it's not
being done that the individual
accountability to that board
member so Mister chairman and
representative of to grow I.
I will through this process I
think it is in collaboration
with the school board
association and superintendent.
Do regards what happens here
today is something that I think
that we need to study and it's
something that I would like to
help work help you work with
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you presenters for the for the
bill this is a maybe a more
stable question for the body of
the committee the other day we
we had a bill.
Mimi Stewart Senators to its
bill and which we were talking
about going to a commission or a
aboard state board.
So that being said we went to
the state board they went for it
on this on the superintendent
side what was talked about how
would this interface now I mean
with that with the state board
be subject to the same with the
supply to the state board I
don't know for making myself
clear there was a presentation
about getting rid of PED for
native pini these version and
then put in a what I'm what's
called a commission the state
board.
So of super well like
superintendent so now we have of
the state board.
And then we're going to have
of school boards I'm saying it
to the body because I think you
know we're pretty we're moving
stuff long we need to understand
the other stuff is coming to you
to coincide with the to make it
stronger.
But right now I have my concerns
that it's kind of the show room
because we've got two different
ends working effect if you will.
Comments if you like to make Mr
Chairman representative
Sure that bill go through there
will be many things that have to
be changed but with respect to
the training if that's what this
is about on page four where it
says the department child
development toward training that
section the department of
education will still exists I
believe should even that other
go through and the department
will develop that but on page
five.
The new training items that are
listed here which has been
pointed out they're not really
new Mr Chairman representative
they have been offered by our
school board association they've
been doing tremendous work
training school boards across
the state but listing them here
and how to find them is these
are essential pieces that need
to be included notice at the top
that is has other mandatory
training this is not listed in
the paragraph that PED is
creating this training this is
recognition that our school
board association is doing
almost all of this training
across the state already and
changes that in in New Public
Education Commission or
whatever's being proposed would
not affect that because I fully
expect Mr chair our school board
assists Association would
continue doing this great work
Representative thank you Mr
chairman having been here at the
time when the public education
secretary was created by the
state legislature I can tell you
that the
Local school districts are
instrumentality of the state
through the constitution.
The state board is a legislative
creation so they're very
different I think this bill
deals with local school
districts period if the senators
bill was to get through that's a
whole different discussion.
but I can I can tell you that
there's been Mr Chairman a lot
of debate on did we do the right
thing in creating a secretary of
education.
and I actually voted for that
bill when that happened over
twenty years ago thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the explanation
because I had to get that out of
thought out there so everybody
reminds each other of what else
is of the components of this if
we go to this new directions and
I appreciate the bill thank you
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
both of you for bringing this
bill forward obviously have co
signed on to this bill I think
it's a critical pieces of
legislation for this chamber and
I'd like to really direct my
questions about school finance
because I want people understand
I represent over six school well
I represent six school districts
in the north these are small
rural school districts for the
most part probably have about
ten to fifteen charter schools
in the north so in on education
is is what I do in the north and
I want to talk a little bit
about school finance and
Representative I know you you
would agree that school boards
really three things they have
the authority to hire and fire
superintendent to do policy and
to oversee the school budget
that's it thank you and
Representative can you tell me.
These smaller schools even
though they're smaller school
sometimes they're the biggest
employers in a rural district
what kind of monies to they
controlled a small school
district which is state.
Okay Mister chair Mister
chairman thank you
Representative you're absolutely
correct in many of the small
communities the economic driver
is the school district that's
for most of the people are
employed that's where the
economy is moving so to speak
when you're looking at
purchasing vendor purchases and
that kind of thing each one of
the school districts has a
different budget it's based on a
unit value based on the number
of kids that are actually in
each one of the districts and it
varies it varies
He's greatly on what each one of
the districts receive however Mr
chairman it's comparable to the
number of children that they're
educating.
But I I believe that education
and education finance is his
business at the end of the day
it's big business in the state
it moves on a lot of initiatives
and.
What we've seen our districts
and certainly we can find that
that to you Mr Chairman
representative it is a large.
Portion of a small communities
economic ecosystem.
Mr chair and representative I
would totally agree and
therefore when we when we put
these rules forward when we're
asking for people to donate to
to list their financial
contributions would you explain
and ordered or donations you
know at the small restaurant
except that you know picks up
the party of four local school
district and then gets a a
contract following that would
you say that's that's part of
the of the part of the problem
that we're trying to solve here
Representative Mr Chairman
representative I think part of
it is for me anyway it's more
along the lines of the faster
things like telecommunications
when you think about what it
cost to build out a
telecommunications system in a
rural school that's millions and
millions of dollars.
And so there's lots of
competitive bidding that goes on
with that but we're also curious
to see how much of the then goes
into just like with us just like
with legislators to fund your
campaigns.
And I think that's important for
the public to know.
You know in and the same way
with the local businesses but I
I'm more concerned Mr chairman
and and Representative with the
bigger contractors could be
school bus contractors it could
be telecommunications
contractors could be health
services there's big contracts
out there the supply support for
school districts it's big
business.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
Chairman representative would
you say would you say school
budgets on the on the whole are
easy for that the normal citizen
to read would you
I I remember being up here and
at one point and so I'd like to
see the numbers and they gave me
a basket that I'm not kidding
you it was that that that was
the budget I got and could you
talk about that a little bit
Representative Mr Chairman
representative I spent twenty
two years my life with that that
budget it is very complicated it
of the way the school district
budgets are laid out
and it seems that we we add to
it as a legislative body were
always changing something or
tweaking something and then it's
it then it's a domino effect for
the district to try to figure
out how they're going to how
they're going to implement that
budget but I would I would say
without question the average
parent if they went to us to a
school board meeting and asked
for
of you know some clarification
on the budget if it wasn't the
finance director themselves
explaining it I'm not sure
anybody else could.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that and now I'd like to
I'd like to turn to this other
Thing that you're addressing
here that we're addressing this
bill which is you know that only
the superintendent have the
right to hire and fire and that
you know I.
I just have to say all things
are not wonderful and school
board land I'm just gonna say
that people act like you know I
mean we hear how wonderful.
Schools are and I think that's
the most important component of
this bill what we're trying to
do is rectify the fact that
sixty out of eighty nine school
districts will have new
superintendents this year
something is wrong something is
wrong if there is a turnover of
every two years with
superintendents and you know we
have a wonderful school board
members sitting on this panel
and I get it but I'm just
telling you school board
elections are highly contested
in my district and it's because
of the power of the purse that
they hold I'm just going to say
that and I've seen it over and
over and over again and I used
to meet with the superintendents
on a regular basis and offline
you hear a lot of stories so I
would just like to talk about
whether or not really
superintendents hire and fire
employees and and really how
this system works if if either
of you could respond to that.
Mr chairman if there were
problems with nepotism there
would be a lot of prevent.
in my opinion Mr chairman I
think that it happens all the
time.
And it happens in ways that it's
it's it's undue influence is
undue influence by elected
officials.
some people have come forward to
say that my area.
Not going to mention any names
in in northwest New Mexico's
what I'm familiar with now I
don't think we're naive enough
to believe that that doesn't
happen.
And.
Maybe it's you know maybe this
local a local control thing Mr
chairman but we're trying to do
at least my participation in
this I certainly respect money
co sponsor because she
understands education I'm I'm
not an education professional
but I do understand how the
budgets work and I do understand
that we are.
At a ranking that's fifty
fiftieth in the country.
And we need to look at
everything leadership to me is
key.
At the end of the day it's about
leadership you guys are doing
the best you can with what
you've got but at the end of the
day it goes back to the local
level for implementation.
And and I'm not at least in my
twenty three years here I
haven't seen a lot of change
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative right thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative
I as many others have
articulated starting with my
seatmate over here
Representative Lane
are torn.
And I appreciate the
conversation though because it
has that at at a lot of clarity
to some of the questions and a
lot of the questions have been
asked already.
I am torn because there is that
divide between Mr chair the the
way that the the social
conditions within the urban
school district area and then
the vast majority of our smaller
school districts and so today I
tried to put on the lands of the
smaller school districts who I
think are far greater than just
those few
urban areas and try to direct my
questions the good things about
the bill of course of the
transparency of the webcasting
the archival records those are
all very important everyone
needs to be brought up into the
current state of transparency
and and offering
those types of of for technology
which were all in the mix that
and growing and our students are
learning and so as our students
are learning in that arena we
should be demonstrating and we
should be the examples of school
boards should be those examples
so those are the good things I
have one question though for
clarity because I'm not sure if
it was just left out
accidentally or what the
thinking was on page two line
twenty one of through twenty
five or twenty yes that's right
through the end of that section.
under covered office.
And I know a large part of this
was current law but then it was
there was a section removed but
there's still no mention of
charter schools in that
covered office and it is in the
in the title is there a reason
for that with that just a
mistake.
Mr chair and representative.
This charter schools have
governing authorities who are
not elected and this section
pertains to campaign
contribution reporting so they
don't do campaign contribution
reporting that's why they're not
mentioned in this section they
if there is a section in the
bill that has to do with
training so that the training is
parallel Mr chair between school
boards and charter governing
authorities so Mister chair and
Representative this is a
definition and the definition I
I I was from when it when I'm
going through a Legislative
Council and they're advising I
thought it had to include when
you're defining something and
has to match the title and then
under chapter twenty one out of
thirteen article sixteen that
covers includes charter schools
that's why I'm wondering because
that that section is quoted here
and it includes
charter school so I think it
should I think my thinking is
that if ever mention.
Mr chair and representative on
page one line twenty three this
is definitions as used in school
district campaign reporting act
so it wouldn't be appropriate in
that spot.
Okay.
Mr chairman and Representative
I'll accept that I'm not quite
sure that I'm in full agreement
are all affected then
Mr chair and Representative just
on the question so all of the
all of the points have been
brought forward I'm concerned
about.
Section
Let's see it's on page four and
it's the section beginning on
seventeen that I'm always
concerned about the terminology
and language mandatory I
understand what we're trying to
do
that local school districts as
has been mentioned by many
others
it's very.
I think I think our approach has
to be.
Not punitive I don't think in
any kind of our legislative work
Mr chair representative should
we take punitive approaches I
think what we should be doing is
placing it and not also
placing impediments.
I think what we should be doing
is promoting improvements
however way we can support in
this case our local school
districts.
I think that's that's really
what we should be doing in order
to encourage involvement it's
been said Mr chair over and over
again today that there's been a
lot of difficulty in recruiting
or getting candidates to run for
school boards and there's not a
lot of reasons it it and it's
different in larger school
districts were competitive
smaller rural districts were not
part of it has to do with the
way we extend those school
districts school boards into the
community and how the
communities and at with those
school districts not and I think
they do so better the local
smaller little lower rural
school districts than they do in
the larger school district for
obvious reasons and so
that and on the issue of
nepotism I just want to mention
too that again it takes a
punitive approach I don't think
that nepotism in this case
applies because
you know we're talking about the
superintendent hires and fires
and the school board actually
is only charged with the hiring
and firing of the superintendent
from my understanding and then
there's mechanisms in place as
has been stated of school board
members
resigning their positions when
those circumstances of her so
there's still a lot of questions
that I had it was cloudy when I
was approached yesterday to
support the bill or if I had any
questions I had not had a chance
to really look at it thoroughly
really appreciate today's
conversation but thank you know
my my leaning is that I think
that that if we could take the
lens and look at taking all the
issues and problems that you
articulated were the reasons
that led to this bill and try to
find the ways that we can
support our local schools and
improve these processes rather
than statutorily put in place a
punitive of penalty approach and
mandatory approach and let the
school boards understand what
our concerns are and then try to
help the school boards in
addressing those concerns I
think is always a much better
approach so Mister chair that's
all thank you Representative
Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
to do have some special guests
to destructive I did as if we
take a break for a moment as in
a way to this discussion and in
but I have my wife fine arts
teacher in our community you
stand up the at Terry and my two
sons Danny seo and gas.
Thank you recognize that
Representative L. thank you.
Mr speaker that gave a solid
chance to smile all right.
Are you saying your call line of
questioning.
The Darling young bowlers are
the envoys Representative
Figueroa and Representative
Lundstrom thank you for this
bill some of the questions I had
in mind they've already been
answered that's a good thing for
you all.
Of when we get heard testimony
from people that support that
there was a school board member
that did respond from the
Russell Independent School
District.
And I do want her to listen to
my comments before she rinses
says Hey you know for whatever.
But of.
As far as our campaign finance
reporting in this particular
bill I've had to file campaign
finance reports for nineteen
years at first they were pretty
easy because I could write about
submitted by county clerk in the
past few years.
It's been a pain in my you know
what.
Because I do live out in the
rural areas madam chair and
sometimes are.
System works and sometimes it
that it depends on what the
class condition is or if we're
still having the wind storm said
eighty four miles an hour so
there is a problem there.
Whether you're talking about on
page five whenever you're
talking about the different open
meetings act I'm assuming that
most of the schools
representatives of whenever the.
The COVID hit everybody had to
virtual learning that was going
on so I'm assuming that most of
the smaller schools included
been able to get that done is
that correct Mr chairman and
representatives Mr Chairman
representative yes and in
conversations with the school
board association there is
agreement that this could be
done but just in case on page
six line five it says as
practicable in recognition of
those places that still have
internet issues.
anywhere things drop off yes
ma'am and and that is a big
problem I I did get that.
Of.
Representative will.
I like it whenever.
Especially in our rural areas Mr
chairman because sometimes these
folks that do live in our rulers
for new think ruler issued
thinking of maybe.
People living for five miles
away but whenever we have people
that live twenty five one of my
kids are grown up we live twenty
six miles from time so it was
kind of a hardship to be able to
get into any these school board
meetings but I like it where
there's interface between the
people that are.
Going to submit comments and be
heard unlike the New Mexico
racing Commission that they
don't care.
Yeah that was a dig at a.
Of.
That settlement Mr chairman and
representatives.
I'm not gonna go back overall
positive body else's made no
know that we are in a time
crunch right here the whenever I
take this vote what I'm voting
on is what is good for the
entire state not just for one
area of the state it has to
encompass the whole state and
that's a big area that we're
looking at here folks
It's got impact some areas.
Perfectly and others are going
to be going what the heck
whenever I look back at what
happened to Floyd I get really
angry about that of.
Whenever there's not enough
people even in that community to
serve on the board there's a
problem.
And therefore I'm going to have
to wait everything I've heard
today right here today whenever
I do consider my vote Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
representatives
I've been I've also been waiting
this both sides and there's some
good and there's some things
that are questionable but
what I do appreciate as a
conversation starter.
So based on that Mr chair
representative so I would like
to ask what was the impetus
behind us what community members
came to what what staff members
in the school districts seem to
have this what was the genesis
of this.
Mr chair and representative this
was in its original form
combined with house bill one
forty three it was an LESC
interim bill worked on over into
rural they came out of a couple
of program evaluations the north
central school district
evaluation of two thousand
nineteen and the central
consolidated evaluation.
Of two thousand twenty three.
I think it's under the original
conversation there and then
organizations and advocates
outside also weighed in and
there was some consensus that
school boards have a critical
role to play.
And they need our attention and
as has been pointed out Mr chair
they need our support.
So that was the genesis of this
bill Mr chairman I just like to
say Representative the.
It's been through LFC primarily
that year after year performance
reports hi back to leadership.
it's not always about what's
happening in the classroom it's
about how the does the policy
decisions are made and.
They're all different in many
ways and then.
when we were looking Mr chairman
at evaluating some of these
districts and it's not just
northwest New Mexico it's across
its across the spectrum.
You could see that
performance measures and and and
these are performance
Measures that are not done just
with the LFC they're done with
el ESC.
And they're done with the
districts and many of them were
not being met and it also points
to we've got to start to look at
it comprehensively and that
includes boards.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
again reminds me think New
Mexico has weighed in on this
teach plus New Mexico has
identified this is key areas in
which we can support our
educational system so there's
been a lot of impotence from
many places.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative because I this is
that's what I was trying to to
establish in my mind and I hope
hopefully with the committee
members this year there was a
genesis there's an origin to
this point began with a
conversation began and what we
saw numbers and we compare
things to each other things
weren't matching up the way we
would like them to back in
February I had my screen members
who came to visit me.
And I it's our tickets done for
them I recognize them I
recognize them for their service
or recognize them for their
dedication to our kids are the
same time Mr chair
representative I also understand
the that they are community
members who have good intentions
who want to better the
educational system.
And sometimes the.
Lack of the support sometimes a
lack of it training.
What I mean by that is based on
my conversations with my screen
were members it's you know when
when we Mr chair representative
of when we do professional valve
for teachers we ask your
teachers what what do you.
And the teachers were
responsible we need this
training on this with the
professional development of this
and this we need help here we
need help there I don't know Mr
chair representatives of that
that actually if that
necessarily happens with the
school board members I I believe
of what I've seen and I this is
just from the outside looking in
it's very prescriptive in here
this that gender Bob above about
and you know we don't
necessarily passed the school
board members what it is what is
it what is it that you need.
And
And I believe that Mr chair
representative.
This starts a conversation.
This starts a conversation this
starts the ball rolling on these
things and is there are good and
bad yes service is there are
things that need to be fixed or
the other or their concerns
coming from the community that
we're seeing this happening yes
service but I think and I
believe Mr chair that there's
that there's going on on this
site's already work that's being
done it's just a matter of
mission all this together and
and getting to the point where
we need to be a so Mr chair
representative hi I'm I I I'm
going to support this bill
merely based on the fact that it
is a conversation started
knowing as well Mister chair
representative that we're eight
days away from the end of the
session.
And so if this this this bill it
starts a conversation we've had
many other bills us our
conversations I have I had some
the sort of conversations and Mr
chair representative I really
hope that we give some time to
the subject during the intra
agency first with the LFC and
LESC because we need to come
together start talking about
this and come up with a
comprehensive plan where
everybody has.
By and where everybody has of
something to say about it
because it is something that's
really important it is something
that needs to be addressed and
like I said Mr chair
representative based on the mere
fact that the starts a
conversation I I will be
supporting the bill thank you Mr
chair.
Right thank you Representative
Trujillo.
Yes thank you very much
prisoners Mr chair for this bill
it's I'm a lot of information
and the some might like some I
don't like.
But one of the issues of concern
and it's always been a concern
for me is the issue of LFC
interjecting itself into policy
making decisions especially
about education I know they have
to do certain reports but when
they're committee.
Ends up.
Becoming the very here for
funding public education because
only one component of the entire
of the legislature has input on
that without sharing it I think
in a much more comprehensive way
We only see one cook one part of
it I really think school boards
need to be held accountable and
from Albuquerque so I'm really
struggling because I want them
to be held accountable and they
are political I don't know about
other small towns but I
definitely know that there are a
lot of issues that a supported
near probably eighty percent of
them.
But I have strong concerns.
Above just the one component
regarding the LFC being a part
of this and unfortunately at
this point in time I think put
Representative
Let us it is important there are
very few a few short days and I
believe that this needs to go
through the summer interim
program so they can really get.
Valid floral discussion.
And I'm that's why I'm going to
vote against it but I but I
think and I think highly of you
and I respect you.
Thank you other questions from
committee.
What's the will of the committee
Mr chair I move to table right
seven have table and second by
Representative Roybal cover yet
those who are on a table in
motion madam secretary called
role on a table in motion please
Representative Baca yes to
table.
Representative Chatfield is.
Representative exam.
Representative Kerala.
Yes.
Representative had a no.
Representative Lane no to table.
Representative Lara the table.
Representative Madrid no to
table.
Representative might involve oil
yes to table.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes to table.
Representative Christine
Trujillo yes to table.
Chairman.
Yes.
Four so House Bill three twenty
five has been table thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee for your time all
right Senator Padilla.
All right everybody we're gonna
have to make a case with this
bill in the next bill.
As we're on the floor but we're
all excused.
It's very if you what we have
further business.
All right Senate bill for a
we're under.
Very strict time limit and stuff
we could be very mindful Senator
for the F. please thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee we appreciate you
allowing us to be prepared to
present today I'm coming before
you with that Senate bill four
which is actually the Senate
Education Committee substitute
that we adopted on the Senate
side essentially what the
legislation does is it's it's a
follow on to a bill that I had
in two thousand seventeen Mr
chairman members of the
committee called the hunger free
student bill of rights that bill
took took us aim at the poverty
and hunger here in New Mexico
with that and are at with our
public schools it is now working
with thirty seven different
legislature's outside of New
Mexico on that legislation one
of the things I said at the time
was just because we find and and
want to make sure we provide
lunch that way that we need to
make sure that it's a healthy
lunch as well and so fast
forward to to two thousand
twenty three the governor has a
food initiative in her up in the
governor's office Kendall Chavis
who is with me today is the
director of that office and what
we decided to do was come
forward with a free universal
breakfast and lunch it's not
just lunches breakfast and lunch
for all New Mexico public school
children including charter
schools and special schools and
all the very schools that are
within the the the public school
system Esther chairman if they
are already operating the
national lunch program and by
doing that
they would be providing these
lunches budget budgets within
school districts would then be
right sized over the next couple
of years to make sure that
students who can still afford to
bring their own lunch in or
whatever may be going on in that
district they're able to right
size that budget over time to
make sure that we reduce waste
we reduce the number of other
things that way we are proposing
an additional funding mechanism
we asked for thirty million
dollars originally Mr chairman
and now we are at twenty two
point five is what is built into
the budget I serve on the Senate
finance committee I have the
details of that if you would
like but I just want to sure you
that that we are already up
funded at that level the other
thing that we decided to do as
we move.
the long in the Senate Mr chair
is to add a two year
implementation timeline rather
than a one year so that
districts can retool whatever it
is that they're going to need to
find these breakfasts and lunch
and then they can come back with
the full revised budget in two
years to make sure that we're
down the road the right way the
additional monies will be for
some critical items like
creating relationships with
local farmers and ranchers to
purchase local vegetables fruits
vegetables meats products
poultry etcetera to put the get
those on the tables the earlier
we start the healthier
consumption of food Mr chairman
it becomes a lifelong habit so
after a generation or two I
think we're gonna see some
really huge gains that way and
just health outcomes and things
of that nature with the
additional funding we're going
to be adding a forty point four
percent increased funding per
meal for the breakfast and
thirty eight point four six
percent additional funding for
the lunch and and Mr chairman
this is just something I've been
working on for the eleven years
I've been here in the
legislature and it's something
that I think we should we should
really be focused on and with
that one last thing I want to
say is
You know it is super critical I
know some of your teachers you
you yourself Mr chairman in in
the air that I represent and and
your family as well I know
several members of the committee
it is it is fully important that
we take the focus off of our
children stomach some places on
their studies if we truly want
to improve reading scores at
third grade math and science at
a great improve graduation rates
and really close are teaming gap
here in New Mexico thank you Mr
chairman I'm just Mr I was to
respond we have actual questions
okay great sounds good all right
so we'll go to our audience does
online in the room is there any
opposition.
To send a bill for.
I figured there would not be but
as I mentioned we're under a
time crunch and it had to roll
this bill over but is there.
Support for Senate bill four if
you which to speak.
Okay so we do we appreciate that
what I'm gonna do for public
comment is I'm going to give ten
minutes for everybody so not
individually but for the
collective group so if you would
please be brief so that we can
get through the agenda for today
so I'm I'm gonna mix between
people in the room people online
and see how far we get so I'll
start off on my left hand side
doesn't support if you would
raise your hand all right so
we'll start off in front ma'am
please some of the start ten
minutes.
I just want to have the medical
office network.
Over fifty five dollars farmers
in the south New Mexico we have
over seven hundred letters of
support from children.
About New Mexico you are here.
As we are concerned about.
The good work that are Senator
video and the governor's
interagency task force are do.
From that.
Hunger and
Education issue.
Our kids need to have healthy
food breakfast lunch snacks
dinner one in three students as
hungry.
Start reverse that I stand in
strong support of this bill
great thank you others please
Sir all enrollment thirty
Wagner.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Anthony Wagner
with like new forms we've been
farming in this whole valley for
over a hundred years we farming
Sapporo and Corelli's and we've
been part of the The New Mexico
grown program since our twenty
ten providing the fruits and
vegetables to school districts
throughout the whole state good
providing food to senior centers
and the growers markets we stand
in full support of this bill we
feel this universal school meals
is important and I feel this
will reduce up childhood hunger
and the address of food
insecurity here in New Mexico
thank you thanks thank you I'm
gonna go to our folks online so
Emily.
There's eight minutes left in
public comment please.
A good morning Mr chair members
of the committee I am simply
well Dallas New Mexico voices
for children and we support just
before thanks Senator Padilla
and senator Hermio for carrying
this bill of families are
continuing to face economic
challenges as a result of the
pandemic particularly with the
and earlier this month the
pandemic aerostat benefits of
and there's a real concern that
more kids will end up going to
school hungry so just before we
come at a critical time
providing families with some
relief in their household
budgets and allowing them to
afford enough food at home
giving them a better ability to
cover other basic needs like
housing and clothing for their
kids and we strongly encourage
the committee to support just
before so every school age child
to go to class ready to learn
and without worrying about being
hungry thank you right thank you
those are my right hand side the
wish to speak in support please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee let me Ortiz
representing the New Mexico
scored Association in fact the
senator for be a champion for
children year after year after
year please House Bill thank
thank you Sir you're standing
you are prepared
chairman for for profit Navajo
Nation New Mexico I'm on the New
Mexico food policy council more
importantly to me I am a gravel
under former.
In working with the Policy
Council I learned the more than
ninety percent of the foods we
consume in New Mexico it is
important.
The New Mexico role provisions
of the SP four will directly
dress that I legislative
resources to buy from our local
growers I also learned that one
out of every six kids in New
Mexico will be hungry with our
Indian kids it is one out of
every four ladies and gentlemen
that is unconscionable we are
following the killing our
children are our future let us
prove it to them let us ensure
they have sufficient food in
their bellies so they can learn
from our leaders with all
thank you ladies and gents thank
you on my left hand side of the
page speaking support please
ma'am next.
Peter Senator is that on the APS
board of education I want to
thank Senator Padilla for
presenting this not only to make
sure that our students are fed
also hi towards words coming
from but it's it's policy so
thank you very much for
introducing this hearing this
and urge the committee to accept
great thank you thank you ma'am.
Please the glasses oh no no no
top of our head is what I mean.
Is also enthusiastic this is the
day of the boarding of things in
two thousand.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm director The New
Mexico sic Association of thank
Senator Padilla for his
leadership on this issue I'm a I
come from a family that's been
raging was in place for a
generation well we support this
bill because it supports healthy
kids and also support the
livelihoods of farmers and
ranchers across the state.
Take advantage of local markets
are schools thank you thank
thank you we'll go online Marie
E. hi Marie there's five minutes
left on the timer.
good morning can you hear me we
can.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I am Marie Johnson
I'm the president of New Mexico
school nutrition association
representing statewide
approximately fourteen thousand
school lunch heroes that stand
in full support of SB four as we
work on the front lines serving
New Mexico students proudly and
experience the heartbreak when
some of our students for
whatever the reason I'm able to
participate in mail programs we
are happy to know that that will
change in school year twenty
three twenty four as just be for
is and will be signed into law
we already know it's going to
happen this bill is a game
changer in ensuring every
student receives the healthy
nourishment needed to learn and
excel I'm proud to be an New
Mexican as we will become the
seventh state and thank you to
put our children first thanks
for hearing us and thank you
thank you thank you.
Thank.
Thank you my right hand side
continued service please that Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is my seat
though the.
Want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this
as you know Mr chairman I think
we spent over four billion
dollars.
Ation from everything from
schools technology folks you
know Hey raises you know and but
we don't see anyone on on hunger
meals breakfast and lunch is so
I think that this is a very
small investment and the return
on investment is going to be
really really huge so we
strongly support this version is
passed this thank you for
another three minutes left ma'am
in the green.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you so much I'm
here representing the New Mexico
food and agriculture policy
council the rocky mountain
farmers union and from the table
again we want to thank the
sponsor one bank office of the
government thank all of you for
the support you've given to
projects these kinds permits to
build this program out we have
the right people in the right
place at the right time across
the state in in the public
education department in the
fields are firms and in our
communities and our school food
service directors like misery we
really look for to support thank
you thank you my left hand side
ma'am in the glasses this time
please.
Thank you.
Our.
You to support it.
The one that really irritates me
poverty is no excuse for lower
grades that's not true try going
to school on an empty belly try
going home explain your eight
year old from.
That is going to be.
They will.
The quality.
Thank thank you for any online
supporter a good morning.
There's two minutes left in
public comment.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is C.
four NF fashion I am the
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways in experience whole
farm and the Navajo Nation.
And we stand in strong support
of SB four it's good for our
children it's good for their
educational outcomes and it's
good for local growers and
farmers thank you very much for
your time right thank you.
Travis Travis there's a minute
and a half left in public
comment welcome.
Hey can you hear me we can.
Hey sorry then minute have that
just go quick but I just wanted
to say it's an honor to be here
and thank you all for your hard
work I'm a teacher at pope
middle school in the south
valley about Booker T. and we
just wanted to support SB four
we were blessed to be able to
take up over a hundred sixty
students this year our whole
seventh grade and eighth grade
class to advocate for just
before the students have been
learning about their elected
officials and the importance of
this bill and we just wanted to
advocate for it in this
committee meeting I hope we can
get it across the finish line
because our students matter and
I feel like this piece of
legislation is gonna laid the
strong foundation for us moving
forward and transforming our
food systems and transforming
the food that we're able to
provide our children every
single day and shout out to
Representative Romero we
appreciate all your support and
leadership for our community
thank you thank thank you go
patriots all right in the room
Sir we have thirty seconds left
chairman members of the
committee Charles good workers
being for an NBC action fund.
I'd like to say this bill is a
no brainer but in fact it's
going to feed the brain of our
children please pass.
Thirty fifteen seconds.
Daniel already Mexico apple seed
New Mexico has led the way in
hunger and in the hunger and
educational context just before
we put us over the top thanks
thank thank you so much so
that's public comment and again
of support in the room your body
all right thank you all for
being aware of the things that
are very tiny little thing it
will Mr chair I just wanted to
think of genalyn gray can demand
W. secretary and all the other
individuals LFC staff that it
provided some excellent analysis
thank you okay thank you so much
all right so come to committee
representative as a.
Chairman thank you very much
Senator thank you for your still
work on this hi to one all of
our kids to go to school and not
be hungry so that can.
Learn it up here.
Mr chairman and senator.
Whenever we're talking about
food waste and I don't believe
in wasting food I really done
sometimes my has been kinda
scares me because the heights
left over simple smell the
refrigerator two weeks later so
if he dies it's not my fault not
me given him food poisoning
okay.
He scares me whatever he does
that.
Because he works with the whole
department of the internet so I
know what will happen there that
Mr Chairman addressing the food
waste part of it you're saying
there your including chair
tables for fall qualified food
items stating anything left of
the to share tables may be
donated to the families our food
banks read the nonprofit
charitable organizations give me
an idea of what some of those
are please thank you Mr chairman
and madam Senator and I do know
your husband and I I think the
world into a bottom line is you
have Roadrunner food bank in
Albuquerque you'll have regional
food banks all over the state
that can benefit for things of
this nature are missing industry
arousal that would work
absolutely yeah.
Okay but what are what is the
Environment Department and so
I'm not development department
the I'm sorry.
It would be that it would be the
environment department what is
their state in this Mr chairman
and madam representative they
the schools will over time
that's what we have a two year
implementation plan here to
promulgate if there's any
additional rules and we don't
think there are any that are
additionally needed they simply
have to adhere to those
standards environment is not
wait in actually because they're
in support of what we're trying
to do Senator sure Mr chair
representative I'll keep this
very shortened season share
tables are already and am up
common thing that you see in
schools across the country they
were taken away during the COVID
we're hoping to bring this back
to this bill allowable products
are things that are wrapped in
plastic wrap or have and natural
rock or something like an orange
they can be sanitized a carton
of milk etcetera the environment
department and the national
school lunch program have rules
that are already adopted for
this so we would simply be act
requiring districts to bring
back chair tables reuse the
foods that can be reusing and
get that practice going against
Mr chairman I appreciate the
explanation but I'm kind of
concerned about what's happening
here in our world because right
now we are not going to have
that fee this year Mr chairman
and is to the varmint Department
stating you cannot bring in
outside food it all has to be
catered obviously this group
can't afford to cater all these
meals is so whenever I'm talking
about the environment department
list they're on board I don't
see this happened I really don't
I do want food not to be waste
that's a huge concern money that
Mr Chairman.
Do you have any is to maybe
because right now on the mount
of non consume food that is
actually thrown out Senator
Padilla so Mr chairman and madam
Representative this actually is
happening today already in some
districts and some and some
schools already understand how
do it here to those provisions
in those rules in terms of your
your specific question on ways
we actually took a tour out to
in elementary school when I
introduce the bill at here in in
Santa Fe on the south side where
where this would be great
greatly appreciated and utilized
and we saw very little waste
happening there with our own
eyes now districts ice like I
was mentioning when I introduce
the bill we will they will right
size their budgets over time to
reduce the amount of food that
they actually need based on you
know for four percent of them
our kids are bringing in their
own lunches this that whatever I
mean I I have seen yep and I
disclose this before Mr chairman
and I was one of these kids
that's why introduce that bill
in two thousand seventeen I mean
we would shovel the food our
pockets that we could get out of
there and so we see you see a
little bit of that it's really
something that now that we bring
the focus to it will see a lot
more you know help with the
districts are helping the
districts to to avoid that food
waste okay Mr chairman thank you
Senator Padilla of.
On page four of your bill I
participating school food
authority the schools can choose
to participate in the New Mexico
grown grant program and I
appreciate that I mean whenever
our farmers have turned in what
is it over three billion dollars
and act production this past
year that's huge the profit and
I'm assuming you know what the
problem is because a harp on
this all the time.
There is one processing plant in
my particular area and I see
some people back there nodding
their heads that this meat pork
goat lamb the list goes on and
on that is being processed but
that facility cannot is not
being utilized by our local
schools and I I'd like an
explanation for that.
Mr chairman what Kendall respond
but but this is exactly what
we're trying to learn over the
next two years and re work we
have a whole legislative session
that will occur in the middle of
the implementation period so we
can bring measures forward on
that to to repair the quicken Mr
chair representative and again
I'll get my comment short and
sweet I would love to follow up
with you after this to talk more
about this exact topic and the
environment department committee
made so actually secure schools
in your district are already
buying local needs through the
New Mexico and purpose of that
is not all of.
Russell for sure is buying local
meeting this off I I don't have
the most recent list in front of
me but we know that districts in
your area are very interested
and are already buying locally
and then Mr Chairman also I will
have what I mentioned when I
introduced legislation while ago
you're going to see an
additional forty point four
seven percent per meal funding
for breakfast an additional
thirty eight point four six
percent and funding for lunch
and so they'll have that money
available to create those
relationships in those contracts
with the local farmers and
ranchers and they'll be funded
to be able to do that were maybe
they don't feel like they can
today the larger districts have
economies of scale it's the
smaller districts I think that
maybe you're concerned about
which I am too I want to make
sure they have the money to be
able to do this exactly Mr
chairman that's exactly what I'm
help and trying to get more of
our smaller processing plants
where they are certified by the
NM DA so we can allow that have
to happen as much beef and pork
and lamb and get that we produce
here in the New Mexico that all
that me to sit out of state
before it comes back there's a
problem here Mister chairman
Senator of page eight of your
bill of the new material right
at the top of the page.
purchasing New Mexico produce
food freshly preparing school
scratch cook foods.
Mr chairman we might run into a
little bit of funding problem
there because a lot of the
schools have scaled down where
they were serving already what
is at fault MRI's more Liz.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
make sure you're looking at the
substitute first.
That's what it says at the top
of my no very good so to make
sure Mr chairman and madam
Representative you're absolutely
right and that's that's why we
came forward with the twenty two
point
twenty four twenty three point
five million that is now
available in the budget for this
item is is actually a lot for
that purpose which you're
describing there's gonna be some
retrofitting it's about fitting
in the next year too as this is
being implemented there's also
capital dollars that I know the
governor is going to be coming
forward with and and we've done
some as much that as the
legislature okay thank you very
much for that one less thing
Mister chairman on page six of
your bill Senator under number
Hey and I'm just gonna rate this
at a public school districts and
charter schools operate in the
national school lunch program
and school breakfast program
shell establish a program to
offer high quality meals at no
charge to all students
continuing gone down to at this
budget numbers right here.
Of a Lissie tribally controlled
schools and private schools
operate in the national school
lunch and school breakfast
programs may establish a program
to offer high quality meals at
no charge to students.
It just says students and and
say all students one of says
shell and the this is may can
you tell me the difference there
Mr chairman the shall is to
establish the program the
maintenance on the quality part
we didn't want to stumble go
ahead if we base our Senate Mr
chair representative in rate can
also go to call these confirm
Petr Elia see can hop into this
environment the agency director
incorrect excuse me based on
precedent with the way that we
manage that nutrition programs
in the states of we already have
funding for the reduced price
school paper because after the
bell we this is the way that we
that we direct those funds that
we we require public schools and
charter schools and and allow
private and tribal schools too
often so that's the president of
the way that we Fund those non
public and charter schools and
if head or LUFC want to correct
the please feel free to do so
it's not okay.
Okay the difference there is
just well high quality meals are
at no charge to all students
versus.
No charge to students so how did
they account for whatever
they're trying to get their
budget together how did they
make that accountability right
here are they going to put every
stating all students it's total
enrollment but all the others
it's.
Well it's it's the funding
that's provided them and they
retool their budgets I have two
years to do that.
Okay and it's not that I don't
disagree with what you said
they're Senator Mr chairman
that's all the questions I have
Representative thank you
Representative me no more.
Thank you
Mr chair I'm gonna be brief and
and senator thank you for
bringing this I really like this
might my school district is a
title one school districts we we
feed our our students right now
anyway but but I know I really
like the the kind of focus of of
trying to get away from
processed foods is as much as
possible because I know
sometimes processed foods are
cheaper and and when there's a
certain budget especially with
federal funds and stuff like
that that that they had to do
what they could for with with
the money that they had so I
really like that there are
grants and and focus of of
getting more home cooked foods
country of responsive type of
foods you know we would much
rather what the beans in chili
and and in our area anything
else so so those kind of things
that there that the and so I'm I
really like that and the other
thing that I really like is here
as the chair tables
especially because we but and
and I know our school districts
what I when I even worked for
the elementary schools we
focused on several families that
of that of for the weekend you
know we we feed them breakfast
and lunch during the week but
then they have two or three days
especially if there's long
weekends that they don't so
these the this chair table could
alleviate some of that and sent
home with students for the
weekends and and that kind of
stuff if if if they choose to do
that so I really appreciate this
bill and you have my full
support thank you thank you for
your Representative.
Mr chair I move it to pass.
We have a due pass verison of it
second by Representative little
I did want to say one last thing
in closing is that I really
appreciate the inclusion of of
local meets on no the the
Representative the district that
I represent and and that Senator
by the representative as we have
you know small farmers and
there's a lot in terms of
agriculture but like
Representative Ezzell mentioned
is that there's less so for
local meats and one of the
things that binds I always talk
about house district ten with a
lot of rural areas that were
semi rural even though we're
Bernalillo county we still have
family farms in that includes
livestock as well as
agricultural products so I think
that's a huge step forward in in
being able to scale up that
infrastructure so I do in the
state as far as the committee is
that.
Despite the outcome we do not
show emotion because we have
controversial bills as you can
see.
But is there any opposition to
the past motion.
All right seen on Senate before
to pass thank you members of the
committee your.
Thank you all for coming as well
appreciate you all right so
we're going to roll over Senate
bill four fifty known as kings.
On that point Senate approves
not here is when you guys
potentially broke his arm last
night so it actually right now
we're we're certainly sorry
about that only played admirably
will pull your eyes you know
they're not here I think that
was not there is no I'm
certainly very sorry about that
but again he played admirably.
Is
that what that game last night I
heard was interesting the Senate
bill four fifty.
Thank you thank you Mr think
member committee Senate bill
four fifty would require coaches
of the high school level to and
dition to their coaching classes
and their first a class to take
CPR classes and ADD training
obviously something that's a
personal Representative Bach and
I had a teammate to pass away
our junior year after collapsing
on the field had caught top
quality of health care at the
time we saw with the Donmar
Hamlin situation within that
buffalo bill came recently where
medical personnel were able to
save his life and so we want to
do is make sure that we join the
thirty three other states that
require our coaches to take this
training.
Thank all right is there
opposition to Senate bill four
fifty in the room online support
for Senate bill four fifty keep
comments brief thank you good
morning introduce.
On the reserve this for the next
quest educators as Asians thanks
for not rolling over the bill
media center.
A little bit of thing from last
night.
You hearing it
the other trainers really
important tool to have
especially in schools in areas
where there may not be.
Trainer the providers present
for meeting the available
especially in more rural areas
we just fill is something that
we can save one life it's it's
with all of it so thank you very
much things percent remorse for
doing this thank left hand side
support.
Sir.
The public schools are are.
Great thank you anybody else on
the left hand side for our we
have one online Mike.
Good morning my key of up to two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Mike on
the governmental affairs chair
for the New Mexico athletic
trainers association and we
stand in full support of this
bill ideally all public schools
would have an athletic trainer
on staff to help prepare plan
and respond to medical
emergencies but we know the
reality is that not all schools
do and
all all sports teams have
coaches present whether it's a
practice or game home or away
and we feel it's vitally
important that the the coach's
be trained and certified in CPR
and ADD so they can respond to
these.
Emergencies thank you for your
support right.
Thank you seeing anybody else
Representative Madrid.
Right so we have a due pass
motion second by Representative
it I did have one question
Senator Moores did you watch the
I think it was a January
real sports episode now has okay
so how high are am honored hive
yes I would highly recommend you
if we want to call all right
with that is there any
opposition to the past motion
seeing line you have to build or
fifty as amended all right I
have one more announcement
before everybody cleans up you
all are likely students they're
all right so
this may I'm gonna treat this
like our last meeting because we
don't have anything else except
perhaps things coming from the
Senate side if that's the case
in a recess subject to the call
of the chair we'll let you all
know but thank you all for a
fantastic year sixty day session
I know these are hard and
grueling we come in early often
work late like today especially
as last meeting I appreciate
because you all wanted to stay a
little bit longer but it's
really great working with you
all and I certainly appreciate
so thank you all.
