Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee members of the
audience and all those viewing
my name is that the central bank
of a at all when does the us
most dental also had like it's
done yet those but it but others
but I spaniel give them
something in return Nicholas you
thank you so much I'm happy to
be back on the committee and
then person of once again Mister
chair I represent house district
thirteen which is the far
southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque and I'm also on the
LFC and I also currently I'm
still working on my doctorate
but I'm getting closer writing
the dissertation so on a UNM
settlement act UNM higher it
student and teacher thank you so
much Mr chair thank you to
everybody thank you leader line.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
Ryan lane to represent house
district three which is the
public portion of aspect
Bloomfield in eastern San Juan
County Mr chair I'm happy to be
back on your committee this is
the work of education important
but I also found the the last
two years that Mr chair of this
committee is very fair and so I
appreciate that as well.
Thank you later Representative
Garota welcome good morning.
When is yes good morning
thank you Mr chair this is my
first time I'm trying to see the
right thing here.
you Senator Woods Rohde from the
six sixteen twelve just a
pleasure and an honor to be here
another cater for one of more
than twenty years so this is
exciting frightening for me here
to be here thank you.
I welcome Representative
Trujillo good morning everybody
good morning Mr chair and madam
vice chair I hope you're all.
Bright eyed and bushy tailed I'm
state representative Christine
Trujillo out of house district
twenty five in the middle of
Albuquerque and I'm also I am a
retired educator most of the
this is my eleventh year.
I'm starting my eleven my god
I'm starting my eleven year.
And I've been an educator most
of my life.
I thank you representative will
go to Representative Madrid good
morning.
Mr Chairman representative
really Madrid from Dona Ana and
what that'll district fifty
three four south most of my life
in education I was a coach and a
instructional system so I'm glad
to be here chairman this money
going fifty year and the great
challenges we faced the last
four I think we're in the midst
of better times to come some
optimistic to see another great
year with under your leadership
as well chairman thank you right
thank you representative
Representative good morning good
morning Mr chair and everybody
all my colleagues and all the
people in the audience and my
name is Susan Herrera I
represent the forty first
district the beautiful North my
counties are read this Santa now
Santa Fe inTaos and it is my
honor to serve on this committee
I worked I was director of the
of the cell session laboratory
foundation for seventeen years
and in that capacity we work to
improve schools in the north I
am.
I work with thirteen school
districts in the north I would
go to those meetings in on every
month
I'll never forget the time I got
stuck in China and that with a
very I forget what they call
that policy where if a kid makes
a mistake they're out of all the
activities and a half I thought
I was going to get out there at
six o'clock I was happy and then
they came up with that and I got
twelve o'clock at night and
missing to parents you know.
The move that all their kids
getting kicked off the team it
was a mess and almost hit it now
on the way home that night so
I'm very happy to be alive and
that this committee hearing.
And we're happy to have you
thank you Representative Ezzell
good morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and member people out
in the audience thank you very
much my name is candy Spence
Ezzell.
It's good to be back on the
Education Committee I did serve
on this for just a short tenure
before they moved me to another
committee.
I've always been interested in
education my grandmother was an
educator in the great town of
LA.
Like Arthur okay.
I represent district fifty eight
which encompasses south Ross
will hate dexter I commend and
like are there and the
surrounding areas in between up
to the Lincoln County line and a
bunch over on the east side.
I to work pretty hard this
summer and I earned my PhD.
Postel digger okay I am a
rancher
I am self employed I am the
ranch hand I did get a raise I
went from nothing to see Rowe
and pay it this year.
Education is very important to
me whether it's in the classroom
or outside of the classroom and
I have been both I've been a
substitute teacher for a long
time one of my kids were
younger.
I was also a baseball coach
gymnastics coach a rodeo coach
and I'm still a four H. leader
and it takes everybody to help
educate these kids I do come
from there is the state that
does pay the majority of the
budget up here.
And yells all should be very
appreciative that and I hope you
do keep that in mind so Mister
chairman thank you very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Lara one good
morning thank you Mr chair good
morning everyone my name is Roy
not out R. I represent house
district thirty four and seven
million County
it's a pleasure being here in
person once again thank you hi
I've been in education for
twenty three years I'm currently
serving as a coordinator for
instructional resources a gas
and schools and I am looking
forward to a very productive
session thank you Mr.
Having you back Mr chair
representative Lente welcome
good morning.
Morning Mr chair thank you my
name is Tanya of on my own
Representative of low district
seven Valencia County I'm a
pretty much well it used to be
all of the east side but now
it's it's kind of a U shape so
things got changed a little bit
I have been employed by the
blind school district for about
ten years started as a the sub
went to a for secretary job
worked in the main office and
then P. teacher for several
years and now I'm currently the
chemistry and biology teacher
apple in high school so taught
I actually I didn't realize how
much of a passion I had is much
for physical Education as I do
for sciences so I'm kind of torn
between the two I love them both
although I do get my fix because
I'm still a coach I.
I coach basketball I can't coach
basketball because that's a
season right now but which
they're all kind of whining but
I also coach girls on the run
team and for about seven years
and we actually had the largest
girls on the run team for last
four years in in the middle
ground of middle real grant
districts so I'm just excited to
be here thank you thank you Mr.
Welcome Representative Baca
morning good morning Mr chairman
my name is Bryan Baca excited
service committee it's it's a
great committee education is
important I'm a thirty year
educator myself have that pretty
much every job at the school
district
And so the state is our children
our future and so I am very
passionate about trying to make
sure that they have the best
experience I represent house
district eight Valencia County
which is the western and
northern part of the land to
County thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you all come to my right
hand side so we have a ranking
member I Representative
Chatfield good morning.
Thank you Mr.
Jack Jack Miller Representative
sixty seven.
Try again.
My name is Jack Chatfield
Representative district sixty
seven seven counties over in
eastern part of the state
thirteen school districts and I
was on the school board for
sixteen years in the smallest
district in the state of New
Mexico so it's a a it's it's a
lot different the list of small
districts are face very
different problems than the
large districts in and so it's
good to have a wide spectrum of
understanding of what the what
we are all facing each morning
when we wake up glad to be here
thank you.
Thank you Representative number
and then our vice chair
Representative Garrett morning
thank you Mr chairman I'm state
rep joy Garrett Representative
northwest's Albuquerque
Bernalillo county house district
twenty nine which goes from I.
forty to Santa Fe County line
item to the real quick go to in
and out of uncertain Taylor
ranch I retired from teaching
after COVID not because of COVID
but I have taught in South Korea
everything from middle school
high school to English language
college teachers and school
teachers I taught high school at
a private high school in
Bridgeport Connecticut I taught
elementary school middle school
in California and here in New
Mexico and I've been a test
coordinator which is very
relevant to a lot of what we do
at the largest elementary school
at the time with eleven hundred
students into the west side of
Albuquerque
and that's I'm very committed to
broadband for education because
of all those experiences when I
taught in Korea in two thousand
and three we had broadband with
ceiling based cameras in every
single rural middle school and
high school and elementary
school classroom were way behind
I
Let's see what else I want to
say I'm too so endorsed my
passion for social studies
language arts media arts
but I tried everything else and
I'm also on probation of which I
was on transportation my passion
but I still have it
so I know I'll see education
here and at appropriations.
And
I really believe in efficacy and
and very proud of what we do
here in New Mexico please Nevers
talked to me about being fifty
yes we are number one in some
places Representative Unida
actually goes for dual language
education New Mexico all over
the country teaching them what
we have learned successfully
here so I want to talk about our
our pluses my two high schools
are of a cannabis stuff which is
not a title one school so they
have a lot of advantages over
many of our high schools and
Sam's charter school which I
think is a fine example of the
purpose of a charter school you
can get a pilot's license when
you graduate so I'm I'm excited
the on this this is a very
bipartisan committee we really
work together and it's just a
pleasure to serve here and also
everybody that's in the audience
every day.
To just collaborate with you
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for introduction my
name is Andreas from metal I
represent house district ten
which is the far south valley my
pride and joy grew up in those
but yes community still live in
the far south valley and I
represent parts southeast
Albuquerque as well
I'm a high school teacher I
teach in the district that
services the district that I
represent and the community that
I grew up in Editrice go
heritage academy high school
where I feel I do as important
work as an educator in the
classroom as a as we all do up
appear as legislators and I
encourage my students that the
decisions it
to pay attention to get involved
because the decisions that we as
a committee we as a body make
they're the ones that are going
to be most affected not only now
during their schooling but
throughout the rest of their
lives and I always get to brag
about the house Education
Committee because as you all
heard members come with a wide
array of ideas experiences past
and present to bring forward
into committee and that bring us
a lot of great color into the
discussions that we're going to
be engaging in it's been my
honor to be the chair of this
committee for this is my fifth
year chairing the committee some
of you I serve since then some
of you I've yet to to have that
pleasure but I'm throughout the
next sixty days should there be
anything that comes up on my
door is always open not only to
find chair and ranking member
but to all of our members and
whatever you need so please
bring any sort of issues can.
Ideas to me we'll get to some of
the committee stuff here in a
little bit kind of outline some
of the expectations go through
the syllabus if you will but I'd
like to have our staff introduce
themselves will start off with
committee staff.
Separate the
Our legislative assistant Linda
please.
Thank I'm Linda Vieira and I've
been with the house education
for this is my tenth year but
I've worked for the house for
sixteen years and I'd like to
bring up aircraft.
To set up okay.
A second a good morning my name
is Erica for lance I'm gonna be
committee assisted along with
Linda this is my first year with
the session and obviously with
education my dad was a high
school band director his entire
life and education is really
near and dear to my heart so I'm
really excited to be here and
see all the great work that you
folks will do thank you.
Welcome and thank you for being
back Linda
And then.
More than you get introduce
ourselves our committee.
Okay happy Monday my name is
Daniel of the in a seventeen
year educator within the public
schools as a.
K. for any business structural
coach and then as a assistant
principal and then the little
foundation as the coordinator
for professional development and
increase science particularly
but we expanded to do some other
professional development in the
northern counties which was
quite an honor and a great
education to expand my exposure
outside of Santa Fe and then
most recently worked across the
street as a director of educator
present development helping
revise teacher evaluation system
and that was also an incredible
challenge but incredible so
thanks for having me is my first
year so to be patient but
taxi sheet that that that could
be here right welcomed and you
know thank you
And this is my fifth year
supporting house Education
Committee of been an educator
New Mexico for over thirty years
bilingual T..
Gifted community college.
Lots of different things areas
and I am honored to continue to
serve
as an analyst for House
educations.
Welcome back.
I can see to the lectern that
season welcome any specter
seasonal caught all I like to
say that because I don't get to
say it very often of the hired
educator I'm thirty three years
in New Mexico with a whole
variety of jobs I did culminate
my career as a charter school
leader great experience I'm all
about education and
Proud to be Republican or
subjugation.
Thank you and welcome and then
we have our attendance.
This morning.
Right here in.
Public school Senator Mexicans
are very interested parties all
process works there are a lot of
the that.
First year.
Right welcome please good
morning.
This is my first year in session
both my parents are really
excited about
what.
Thank you both for being here
and welcome and then in the back
would you mind introducing
ourselves.
Securing this is my eighth year
I'm retired from the department
transportation.
All right thank you for being
here morning
and then finally with our
introductions we have our
fantastic legislative education
study committee so we've had a
robust interim session that
we're gonna hear more about
but they are here they'll
provide analysis for bills as
well as being able to answer any
and all questions that you all
have as far as education so
director Perea Warniment if you
would and then we'll go down
started in front all the way to
the back with really a safe
welcome.
What.
Incredibly honored to serve as
your.
The committee director.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is timid yelp
Missy here Alice with Ellie is
the ability to see off and on
for about five years now my
focus is our capital outlay
school infrastructure and also
taking the lead on our learning
time work.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Jessica halfway in the senior
policy analyst with the LFC and
their couple years down in their
students success team so early
childhood up to college and
career anything with the
students and.
Mr chair John Senate deputy
director of HSD open before you
tomorrow yes see I forgot Tony
you're less whatever members.
Thank you Mr chair I'll be
analyst for the majority
committee this year my fourth
year doing so.
I am a retired educator who is
taught the gamut of public
private and international
schools in Santiago Chile and
Warsaw Poland and I found it to
schools here in Santa Fe one the
first secondary charter schools
still going so successful and
the first International
Baccalaureate school the Mandela
international school so pleased
to be with you.
Welcome sorry about that Tony
welcome as always and we.
Morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Emily Hoxie
I senior policy analyst New
Delhi is seen make a satyr
educator workforce.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Eric
Andrews and a senior policy
analyst LFC I think the response
of the Martinez Yazzie and
education
talks the federal cultural
Education Act last Education Act
the Indian Education Act.
Good morning my name is Daniel
and then the LFC fiscal analyst.
Morning my name is Matt great on
the receptionist for the LFC
you'll see me throughout the
capital running around building
houses.
The members names were just a
branch office administrator for
LFC.
Chairman members of the
committee Bridget Condon I focus
on our community engagement
specifically community schools
and charter schools and anything
else that you need to students
and their families.
Hi good morning Mister chair
when is a lot going on the
financial assistance and human
resources.
Welcome to you all as I said.
Representative Trujillo you know
nothing Mr chairman now that
they've introduced themselves it
would be helpful they gave us
that LTSE a handout with the
pictures and the work that they
do I think it would be helpful
for all of our new members that
weren't on LTSE to receive that
so they know who they're working
with is that possible
Representative Trujillo I
believe the finalized version
should be out soon of the
The update that we got at our
last meeting last Monday so once
that becomes available as always
we have the distributed to
members it'll be in the back so
we'll get that all members so
and will become more familiar as
we continually have these
meetings throughout the rest of
the week but thank you.
All right so.
As I said I'm very fortunate to
be able to work with such an
awesome team you all on the
committee are wonderful staff
that make us look so smart when
we ask questions when we dive
into analyses in here
But a few things about the
committee itself so for the
returning champions for new
members our current time of
meeting is eight thirty
so we'll meet at eight thirty in
the mornings for now here in
room three oh nine those of you
they're returning champions also
know that subject to change.
Can come in as early as eight
o'clock on the week days and
then we have some Saturdays
depending on on how many bills
we get or what we need to go
through so will always give you
advance warning if we're gonna
have Saturday session so you can
make plans and arrangements
accordingly but for now we'll
stick to the weak and are eight
thirty AM start time for those
okay
the other thing is that for me
process is very very important
that we're coming in on time at
eight thirty I understand there
are other things going on bills
you may have to put on another
committees but I take starting
at eight thirty especially or
eight o'clock whatever start
time is very importantly and
will be starting promptly at
eight thirty so please make sure
that you're on time and here
and that member questions
comments our concisely right we
have a lot to get through my
understanding is the floor will
begin at ten thirty eleven
o'clock and we do get through
our agenda so if you have
questions it's awesome I want to
be able to honor all of your
expertise to be able to leverage
it but I just ask that member
questions are concise you always
hear me say at the beginning of
each meeting that brevity is the
soul of what I very much believe
that they tell us in
professional development not to
lecture our students for more
than ten or fifteen minutes I
feel the same way so please be
concise with your questions ask
them directly you will get to
the heart of the matter and
through the process to make sure
that everybody's comments
questions are honored and
answered
So we're going to pass around a
list.
The committee please make sure
you include your name your cell
phone you'll or any of your
preferred phone listings here
office number
And your legislative assistant
office phone as well so that we
can have a record Representative
I will if you know with I will I
got a list of things to go
through so we'll get through
some of these questions all
right
but please make sure it's anyway
that we all can get a hold of
each other your preferred
contact information would be
great
the other thing since I'm on
process is that we're respectful
of our audience and of one
another one of the things I
really enjoy about working with
all of you and the rest of our
team is that we're all
respectful of one another
they'll be times when we very
much agree on issues and it's
reflected in the vote for the
work that we do and then there
are times that we may disagree
about issues and that's also
fine but as long as we're
staying respectful civil with
one another and please make sure
that you direct all of your
comments your questions through
the chair at all times I think
it's important that we keep
things.
Not personalized do not make
things personal amongst any
members because we're gonna have
a variety of work to do together
collaboratively hearing
committee outside of this
committee room on the floor in
the hall ways and I want to make
sure that that sense of
congeniality is carried through
so that includes not only just
as committee members but our
audiences well because we're in
education and we know the
importance of education and how
passionate we are and our
constituencies all our in the
matter so.
I want to keep things as simple
as possible within this
committee and as I mentioned in
my introduction that if there
are any sort of issues all
always go through our ranking
member or any member in
particular that wishes to talk
with me about any issues that
they're experiencing committee
I'm always happy to answer those
questions as well
but I will be sure that with our
ranking member any sort of
changes issues that come up on
the fly as we know happens I'll
be sure to console
Representative Chatfield for
those issues as they continue
Your order did.
I'm trying.
I'm certainly trying
as far as bills that will be
hearing primarily we're going to
hear them proved in different
ways have themes because will
have different constituencies
want to come in sort of in bulk
all save and testify on issues
and then other issues other
matters we can take bills as
they get referred to us and
again any sort of changes always
confer with Representative
Chatfield certainly are vice
chair Representative Garrett on
those and then Representative
Garrett favorite issue on the
one of the things if you could
for this year we know we've been
operating the past two years on
online.
And everything through online
Citrix if you wish to have our
binders that we used to have for
those of you that are returning
champions and have been for
several years in committees you
remember that when we would come
into committees you would have
a.
Binder with your analysis the
bill all that sort of thing
along with it that is a
possibility if you would please
indicate either on your sheet
that you're being handed out for
if you would let our legislative
assistant Linda now that you
would like that but that is an
option otherwise if it's not
indicated we're going to assume
that you want it through Citrix
we're going to start hearing
bill bills on Wednesday so
please make sure you have your
log in information or you've
indicated in advance as early as
possible that you wish to have a
paper copy of the bills and your
analysis and all that sort of
stuff okay on so please just let
us know well in advance.
another thing is that there's
going to be.
Excuse me possible online public
comment on bill.
Which is great I understand that
there are some issues for now so
like anything we're going to
give the first week or so a
little bit of a grace period so
that we can get things in order
we can establish norms in the
committee room and get those
things up and going so I'm gonna
ask like I did during
the past couple COVID years is
that we extend grace to our
staff that's working diligently
on getting these things in order
for the first week so that we
can kind of catch our stride and
continue on for the next sixty
days or less not that I contract
for.
All right
So are there any question all
lasting if I may and this is a
good segue into that is that if
you wish to ask questions in
committee.
Please be sure to indicate you
can highlight to brace my index
finger some others like to wave
some others get frustrated
really start waving the biggest
get my attention get
Representative Gerets
R. LA Representative Chatfield
somebody in my proximity.
To take have you get put on the
list okay I have a running list
per bill that'll go down in time
for comments of members okay so
please make sure you indicate to
me if you wish to get on the
list the thing about the list is
that in this committee please
make sure you have your comments
questions ready to go when
you're called upon again short
concise questions and.
We'll stick with the one time to
speak each member if there's a
little bit of time and something
really burning came up I might
recognize you for a second go
around but in all please make
sure you're prepared ready to
comment things like that and we
shouldn't have a problem
but sorry forgotten about that
members with questions.
Okay Representative Ezzell
please.
Mr chairman thank you very much
and thank you for pointing it
out in order what you expect out
of us as members of this
committee I do have a question
you said that you're considering
or there might be some problems
with our online comments.
How are you going to rake in
person comments as opposed to
online comments.
Representative Ezzell that's a
good question I think we'll go
we can do a mix online in person
but making sure that we get
everybody in that wants to make
a comment
generally and that's also good
because I forgot to mention that
members of our audience as
always will have up to two
minutes but no more for their
public testimony that's online
that's in person and I keep
track of it two minutes from the
time they say their first words
all the way to the two minutes
but that is absolutely it
because I expect that our
committee members are short and
concise I also expect that of
our audience as well as being
able to respect to the.
The committee process to be able
to get our constituencies and
their voices heard as well if
there are any changes to that
course all confer with our
ranking member Representative
Chatfield because we have done
it before where we've had thirty
minutes on one side thirty
minutes on another if that ever
happens of course all console
with that on what bill that may
be and with our ranking member
Representative Chatfield but
thank you for reminding me that
thank you very much.
Representative get yet Mr
chairman just on the Citrix
probably half of us who use that
have already forgotten how to
use it can any mail be sent out
about it.
I'll I'll see if I can do that.
Thank you right thank you one
other things that I forgot to
mention as well is amendment
process twenty four hours notice
we stuck to that it's worked out
well it gives everybody a good
heads up on legislation changes
to legislation to give our
analysts time to analyze them
and give us appropriate feedback
that's something I've been very
strict on with both parties
making sure that we have
amendments twenty four hours in
advance when does very good
about sending those out and
getting those out to everybody
and I think we even had one come
in this morning first trial run.
But other questions remember
representative Lente.
Thank you Mr disqualifying the
twenty four rules that twenty
four hours in advance to the
bill sponsor to part to the
chair.
Representative Lane that's to
the committee so that we can
send it out so once Linda does
get it and send it out from that
point it's twenty four hours to
hear the bill okay thank you so
Mister chair I had a proposed
amendment I would in addition to
communicate with the bill
sponsor need to communicate with
one as well as of right that
would be preferable
Representative Eli definitely so
if for example if we had a bill
that we're hearing at nine
o'clock this morning and the
amendment came in at nine
o'clock on the day before and
got sent out we're good to go
on the twenty four hour rule.
Thank you Mr.
Other questions all your a going
back for sametime Representative
result please.
Mr Chairman is just in regards
Representative lines a query
about amendments.
How are we supposed to get a
hold of lead do we have that
number.
Yeah I'll give it to you all
thank you we'll get all that
information squared away to make
sure we have
this everybody's email address
and such that I yes I requesting
Ariel and of oil.
When I when I sent you an email
you'll have all that
information.
On the bottom of the email that
I'm sending you.
Okay so my phone number going to
assist listed because sometimes
mind is thank you Eric because
both of us thank you very much
the very bottom of that email
that I'm going to send you all.
Great Mr thank you
Representative care can
everybody get a copy of the
phone numbers.
Committee yes we'll send
everything out thank you
Representative out I'm going to
make I'm going to make.
A list with everybody's and I'll
send it to everybody.
The ticket all have everybody's
each other's information other
questions Representative thank
you Mr speaker and then includes
the the majority in the staff
the okay the analyst with yes
thank you I'll have their
information as well thank you
yep none of this stuff will be
kept secret we're all friends
here we're all going to be
working with each other rest
assured.
All right other questions from
committee.
Representative Motorola I'm.
Citrus is the name of the.
Of the place where it will
provide all the information yes
Citrix and that Citrix yes it
would be on that a committees
page mill not so your
legislative assistant should
have access to if not we can get
some of the the tech people to
come and talk to you about
getting on the list thank you.
And all right members other
questions.
All right well again I look
forward to serving with you all
will start Wednesday hearing a
few bills will put that agenda
out as soon as possible after
this meeting but with that
if there aren't any other
questions we'll move on to our
presentation so director Perea
Warniment if you would please on
so especially for those of you
that were not part of
legislative education study
committee or new members I
thought it would be helpful that
we get an overview from R. L. E.
S. C. director on the big issues
that we spent time studying
during the interim and some of
the proposed legislation that
many of us as members of LFC and
members of the house Education
Committee will be sponsoring and
that will be hearing
That very shortly so
again if you have questions
members I keep a running list so
just indicate to me I'll get you
on that list if you ask which
yes short concise questions but
with that
director Perea Warniment good
morning welcome thank you for
being with us.
Thank you morning Mr chairman
members of the committee as well
college eyes for my voice and
recovering from a little bit of
bronchitis.
Just give a brief high level
overview of the work of the
committee over the and term and
then I'm going to go over the
packet that was distributed just
now to you but for now let me
start with the little bit of the
in terms and what we have done.
As you heard briefly from each
of the analyst as they stood up
and introduced themselves the
first thing that we did as a
come committee staff this summer
Mr to organize ourselves around
a research agenda.
as I came into my rule first
thing that I wanted to do was
really shape the work of the
staff in support of this body
and the committee in a way that
would allow for a systems based
lines and I think that's a
really critical thing in order
to support you on creating
solid.
Budget as well as solid policy
and how the two of those things
link
systems based lands is something
that
you may have heard there's a lot
of different terms out there
there's framework roadmap
the large concepts system
sometimes there are different
graphics sometimes you'll see a
shape of a circle the budget
different items on it sometimes
it's a graphic design of some
sort sometimes you'll hear the
term theory of change or logic
model but essentially what a
systems based lens does is it
allows us to really understand
education as a system of
systems.
So we have what happens in
education as we have a full
concentration of environment and
we have an analyst to do really
is diving deep into all things
around environment including
infrastructure school safety
transportation particularly
things that are sort of frame if
you will education.
Part of the work over the in
terms was to go across the state
and recurrent themes that we
heard in this area were school
safety primarily that was a
resounding element of concern
from many superintendents many
education leaders as well as
teachers one of the things that
we did isn't an interim
committee was really about
prioritize the voice of
educators students and its
administrators at every single
meeting so it every single
meeting across the state each
month we heard from a group of
these individuals in the area
around their particular concerns
we try to theme them within
every meeting so school safety
as well as career technical
education career technical
education in terms of
infrastructure was a major
priority.
The second research agenda the
new that you heard was that of
Jessica Hathaway and student
success the majority area that
we've been focusing on his high
school reformation or
transformation.
over the past two years actually
the legislative education study
committee has really dove in
into research the idea of
graduation requirements there
are some marked differences that
we have as a state there it
couldn't around graduation
requirements we can dive into
that a little bit more when we
get into that topic but we
studied our graduation
requirements is a state what's
in statute we did good good
research around how that becomes
a primary lover in terms of
transformation for the high
school experience we heard from
career technical education
experts around the state we had
we had a panel that presented on
work based learning
good things around
entrepreneurship we had some
really good presentations from
the different constituents
including the public education
department and their proposal
for how to transform or change
graduation requirements the
other topic in that area I would
say that we're couldnt always
revisiting is structured
literacy or early literacy for
students knowing that that that
is a fundamental if not one of
the most critical aspects to
change the trajectory of
education for the state we
hadn't nice statute now a law
that was enacted in twenty
nineteen that really and asks
all elementary educators to
be trained in structured
literacy employs structured
literacy those are fancy terms
for simply good science of
reading and how students learn
how to read and teachers
understanding that process
there are is a interesting
history of that not being
necessarily the way teachers
learn how to teach reading so
really addressing that as a
state
the other topic that we started
to cover this is one of our last
meetings was mathematics
One of the things in student
success and this is sort of a
partnership between two of the
analysts Thibodeau and just
pathway is we really dive in
deep and taken a very seriously
how we are doing is a state in
terms of assessment data.
we're starting to create a data
platform for you all that would
serve you as well as all
constituents across the state
and we saw markedly that over
the pandemic we have third first
round of data and our state is
about where we would expect but
it's also
using national assessment data
declining pretty there's a she's
a steeper sharper decline for
New Mexico than there are for
other states any other state
really.
so in that data we also see the
impact or effect of mathematics
so the team as a group of
analysts actually dove in and
began research on what we do
from half that will continue on
into this next in terms would
like to present to you some
solid research and policy
considerations for the following
year we do see you'll you will
see some of that already
starting this year when I go
over some of the recommendations
but there's a lot of research to
do in that area including
landscape analysis of policy
that's been done for any other
state
many states are dealing with the
issue of mathematics
we it also dove in and looked
educator workforce we did some
review of the teacher residency
programs we're still waiting to
see and would like to see some
data in terms of retention of
course impact in terms of
student achievement firms
teacher residencies we know that
there's already a body of
research twenty years or more
around teacher residencies is
gold standard educator prep
but you know it's pretty initial
in New Mexico to be honest so
kind of waiting to see how the
help how it works and also what
needs our support to our
educator prep programs and
institutions colleges of
education need in particular to
really affect those with
fidelity and
to the best possible invest
possible to practice.
we did an initial review of the
idea that we don't really have a
good understanding of educator
workforce in New Mexico so we
don't have an a model of teacher
supply and demand for the state
we don't know where we need
teachers.
I am you know we have here kind
of this general idea of theirs
were missing teachers across the
state there's wide vacancies
well part of that is true part
of the story is also that we
have declining enrollment as a
state.
We also want to acknowledge that
you know in what ways does our
understanding of educators per
classroom actually meet the
needs of students and does it
allow for innovative staffing
models which potentially could
be more transformative
I asked the question of the
house Appropriations Committee
it last week and a very simple
question why do we only have one
teacher per classroom.
Very simple question.
But in terms of how we
understand education and what
are driving mechanisms that
actually could transform New
Mexico that is our role as your
study committee is to actually
study produce research around
these ideas
So what we'd like to do is also
take that and actually build a
model and look at supply and
demand of teachers over the next
in terms and you'll see sort of
policy recommendations are
considerations for you that come
from us that are really trying
to get it some of the more
nuances in that area.
I would say that the other thing
that we do as a staff is try to
look at community engagement and
wraparound services for students
understanding that we serve the
whole child in the state of New
Mexico so you saw from budget
content in her her research
which is what the starts to look
at and is diving into some of
that is supports for attendance
community schools community and
engagement mechanisms working
with industry to do so and build
better relationships to support
education particularly as a
mechanism of community health
and the connect to be with
economic development for
communities
So with that I think I'm gonna
actually also just recommend one
thing if there's one thing that
you might lean on it we can get
this to as well we produced a
report in October about where we
are this is that as a state
regarding the Martinez in the US
the lawsuit many of you are
familiar with this but I can sit
with you and brief you
individually if you'd like more
information in October what we
did is a a present to the
committee a review of.
What has been done the over
billion dollars that has been
put into education by this
legislature to support the
response to the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit but also what may need
to be considered in terms of
both policy and budget one thing
I think that as your director I
would recommend an sort of focus
on our how are we responding to
those education acts that are
also part of the lawsuit how is
funding sustained because as of
this year we're finally at the
point where we are actually
matching a level funding that
has been recommended by the
American institutes of research
as well as what policies do we
need to consider because one of
the most fundamental pieces of
that lawsuit is accountability
the public education department
M. and their relationship with
the districts so in what ways
does current statutes allow for
that and our that is our policy
that you need to consider as a
committee.
Take a brief pause there Mr
chair and if you have any
questions about the interim
start I can continue with the
packet if we could just continue
with the packet will go through
everything and then we'll member
questions till the end okay.
as a result of the work over the
in terms of what I have for you
here in a packet or two things
the first is.
Committee endorsed legislation
that resulted over the the cause
of
and through I think the bi
partisan bi cameral nature of
the committee it's very strong
committee things very
thoughtfully of of all these
things the first thing is that
up bipartisan bills house bill
one twenty six school graduation
requirements.
It proposes to I'm amend state
statute and actually decrease
the total number of units
required to graduate from twenty
four to twenty two important in
that number the actual national
averages twenty one credits.
Representative were higher than
the national average twenty two
also allows us to be in line
with our regional states one
thing the committee was actually
concerned with was how do we
much compared to other states
and how do we match regionally
in terms of total numbers of
units and what where these units
actually meaningful and allowing
for connection to workforce and
providing space for work based
learning you'll see that that's
a major thing that the committee
sort of has directed staff and
we find produce research around
the requirements include four
units of English four units of
mathematics four units of social
studies or social science and
three units of science.
Couple things about that in
mathematics
we would not be requiring I'll
defer to anymore we would simply
be requiring a algebra one and
geometry or their equivalent in
integrated maps and then that
opens up the space for students
who are honest and pathway which
is incidentally only about
fourteen to sixteen percent of
students that actually require
an algebra two or higher hello
is that pathway to continue for
opens up to a much broader
applicability in terms of
mathematics including statistics
and probability financial
literacy
career technical education
mathematics control construction
math a whole host of things that
are really allow for flexibility
and applicable it in meaningful
engagement for high school
students.
I would say that the four units
of social science includes
US history with content embedded
that is New Mexico history so
those are sort of strongly
United in one the second is
a world history and then the
third is government and
economics as well civics one
thing about that is our social
studies standards have strong
financial literacy embedded
throughout the course around K.
through twelve
We are also asking for one unit
of physical education and health
for elective units and then
total to discretionary units
that can be decided or should be
decided by the local community
one thing that we really down as
a staff and in the community I
think you agreed to is honoring
that graduation is the beautiful
nexus of.
The state in terms of the
Legislature determining statute
the public education
department's role in with stars
do that creating the how
curriculum actually is reflected
for those school districts but
also the strong responsibility
at the local level.
To really honor the local
purpose and or
actual graduation certificate
right to school boards that time
the concert ticket so really
honoring that space was
important for the committee.
Last but not least what they
need graduation requirements
would be that the
local communities would be
required to have a profile of a
graduate rather than a state
level one one that's very
specific to the local
communities.
I won't spend too much time on
all of these but I want to hit a
few of these committee endorsed
legislation.
you'll see the who they're
sponsored by the next one is a
really I'm not gonna spend too
much time but it's a was also
very popular bipartisan support
across I think it during the
interim for this this is changes
for this is what we also provide
the Calder capital outlay
omnibus bill Senate bill one
thirty one Senator Stewart
Senators stores currently
carrying the settlement put him.
This does three things changes
the local match and reduces it
by thirty per up by a third in
terms of state schools at at
match for their capital outlay
projects the second is it
actually does away with forgive
all current offsets for school
districts and then
stops offsets from here on out
as well as does not take credit
for impacted from that was
slated to go into effect this
coming year.
And then the third thing is
appropriate hundred million
dollars from the public school
capital outlay fund to go to
school security career technical
education prekindergarten
prekindergarten local
maintenance of the popular
strong bill.
The third one is house bill one
thirty.
Able to twelve plus programs we
can talk about four of the and
the bit I'm actually going to
skip that so that you have an
more questions I'll dive into
that in a little bit but this is
the learning time bill and
what's being proposed in terms
of sunsetting K. five plus in
our extended learning time
program instead just
establishing eleven forty hours
therefore allowing maximum
flexibility for local school
districts and for raising the
calendar there's a couple of
other things so I'm all of spend
more time in a in a bit.
House bill one twenty seven
education assistant salary
increased you see it the number
of your colleagues there
Representative headed a Baca
Majeed setting Cadena and
Representative Trujillo signing
on to support this currently R.
EA's or educational systems
there
minimum salary for the state is
twelve thousand dollars.
So what this does is raise up to
twenty five thousand dollars for
educational assistants are some
of the most important and
fundamental employees of the
school system particularly with
special education.
The next one is funding formula
changes also bipartisan bill of
pretty easy here what this does
is affect the factors in our
school budget increases a
principal responsibility factor
by fifth by point zero five we
have heard we've done some
research would like to also
carry this into deeper research
study over the internet but our
leadership is fundamental it's
critical for strong schools so
really recognizing that
beginning to also understand we
heard from a number
superintendents and that they
were dealing with compaction in
terms of once we gave those
races to the
educators last year there's a
compaction that was happening
with those educators at the
highest level and the principals
who they were serving.
There's also an increase in
terms of the at risk factors
that addresses the needs of the
most the schools across the
entire state that have the most
needs and a fine arts factor
that increases from point five
to just point zero five five but
there's broad support for this
is well it's not too much of it
the number increased but it does
really significantly fully
funded fine arts at the
elementary level.
And then the tribal education
trust fund that was presented by
Representative Lente that
essentially sustains a funding
for the tribal education
departments.
Thank you.
And then at distribution of the
of the EDD tribe Indian
education fund to allow for
fifty percent of the funding to
be distributed via a formula
fund to the tribal education
departments and the committee I
thought this was a good idea I
particularly really
acknowledging
Mechanism that was easily
account there is a strong
accountability for there was a a
formula that we could easily be
found was actually suggested in
house bill two last year.
in terms of return to house bill
one thirty in the K. twelve plus
programs I believe there is
another packet on learning time
the did you all receive the.
Thank you.
Pardon me.
This is a thank you okay.
This is a packet that of the
committee produce for the
Sanchez.
And it provides some talking
points about this bill so many
use it and then you'll have it
for your reference there's no
such a body of information in
the packet.
I would say that this bill does
four things.
So shorthand.
The big for things that the bill
does the first is.
It raises the instructional
hours.
Two eleven forty.
For all school districts and
charter schools across the
state.
An important important piece of
information there is the average
number of hours for.
Most schools is actually ten
seventy six.
They're not really at the
minimum there are few with the
with the minimum so we do want
to be concerned about and
provide maximum support for
anyone who would need to jump
further essentially in terms of
their minimum hours.
But that's the first piece of
the around the bill second that
the thing that the bill does is
it actually broadly defines what
instructional our means.
That's very important for you
all.
So in order to define an
instructional our that's not
currently defined in statute
actually just a school based
program could be broadly to
interpreted in fact during the
pandemic that was what allowed
for remote instruction.
So we took this opportunity to.
better define it instruction our
that of Ford's experience will
based learning for H. R. things
that are meaningful for students
work based learning.
A broader approach in terms of
instruction but that also sort
of recognizes that and we want
strong instruction period as a
committee we are.
You are in very concerned in
terms of where we are as a
state.
The third thing that it does is
it also allows for an recognizes
the reserves around professional
learning.
And professional work.
Fundamental in all of this is
the role of the educator.
Everyone knows that it's not new
this is been.
For many many many years we know
and understand that the one
factor that plays the biggest
role for student performance
academic achievement success is
the educator.
Their relationship with the
students.
Their lessons that they design
how they engage with the cost.
And if that's the case our
educators are resoundingly
saying they need time.
They need time to prepare they
need time to work together.
They need time to look and
reflect and listen.
Call parents.
And if that's the case then for
raising this number two eleven
forty at least up to sixty hours
of that should be allowable for
educator work.
So in this that's the third part
is up to sixty hours in this
bill can be counted for
professional work.
That is incidentally also
fundamentally part of any
framework or systems based
approach to transforming
education both in terms of the
whole policy institute learning
policy tool kit your no time to
lose framework.
The breadth of research around
this so up to sixteen hours in
that eleven forty can actually
be for educator professional
work.
And then the first thing this
does is it says okay if there
are such any schools that so
choose this is optional if they
are sweet any schools that so
choose to go above and beyond a
hundred and eighty days.
Let's incentivize that.
Let's support that.
Also ensure that those that are
already there are.
Protected.
And find a factor.
A point zero one two times ma'am
for that day.
So you'll notice that in our
Buck budget recommendations as a
L. E. S. C. we were very serious
indeed many many many scenarios
looking through and running
through.
How do we maximally provide for
the eleven forty.
So that those of the for this to
go can't get their as well as.
Provide solid funding for that
factor for any school that might
be above a hundred and eighty or
so choose.
Just point out a couple of
things budget recommendations
from the LFC.
This was the
Recommendation that was voted on
by the Committee.
At the end of the interview and
then for those of you who are
newer members it's also somewhat
fun to come out because our high
level.
What high level budget.
So at the very top you'll see
the prior year or this year's
current operating budget.
Pardon me.
I want to just focus in on rose
nine to eleven so I bracket
those.
You'll notice the difference
there in terms of the priority
of funding from the locally HSD
perspective.
And the difference in terms of
the executive or the public
education department and the
legislative finance committee.
Notice that the bigger number in
terms of the eleven forty is
really I think where this
committee decided to
particularly honor.
That.
John if you so decide is
legislative body for eleven
forty but then the other
numbers.
Supporting should any school
district our charter school
decide that they want to add per
day.
Pardon me.
Representative seventeen is also
important.
You'll see there are
recommendation and this is for
the educational assistance.
You also notice.
In terms of twenty three.
That we were sort of right in
line with the recommendations
from the legislative finance
committee.
Around insurance that was to get
our state employees at parity.
Although I'm.
Thank you noticed there was no
legislation from the committee I
think we're sort of.
the committee was sort of
thinking through what would that
look like I'm waiting to see.
The only other things I think
I'd like to present for just
sort of point out to you are on
the back.
In terms of the public education
reform Fund.
You'll notice that.
All the way down.
One twenty six.
All three both the Public
Education Department and LESC as
well as.
Our recommendation.
providing some additional
dollars for K. twelve plus
should more schools or charter
schools decide that they want
more days beyond a hundred
eighty we want to provide some
catch there just in case.
but there's some more to
difference there in terms of.
How much money.
And then a couple of things I
think on we're one twenty eight
you'll notice there are some
funding for just general out of
school learning summer
enrichment and tutoring
programs.
And then on follow the following
page one thirty two.
The legislative education study
committee felt very strongly
about funding career technical
education.
There's the difference that
executive is actually also a
fifteen million as well as the
LFC and based on what we heard
as a committee across the state
this is a fundamental need.
The difference here between the
this dollar amount in this space
verses the hundred million
that's going out it through the
capital outlay fund is a hundred
million can be used for a
variety of uses as well as its
devoted to infrastructure so
building of creating technical
education spaces this forty
million is really designed to
support construction materials
educators program right that
needs to happen in schools and
you need both pockets of top of
funding.
I would say that will one twenty
is important particularly to the
legislative education study
committee mind.
The educator recruitment for
educated fellows programs.
And then you'll see that we
strongly addressed
The.
A couple of other things kind of
it just sporadically in there in
terms of educator
residencies for principals
counselors social workers and
residents
And then of the rate teach
students teachers because that
was very successful this year.
With that Mr chairman I think
all.
The question.
All right thanks thank you so
much for the overview of the
past few months and the work you
all and your team have done.
so questions I have a list
going.
Please make sure you grab my
attention on my cellphone I try
not to pay too too much
attention to so I may miss you
if you rely on it please grab my
attention if you wish to get on
the list but first I have
Representative Chatfield of a
couple others if you wish to
speak on.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair of a
billion dollars in response to
the Martinez Yazzie of lawsuit
without speaking.
The for pin number.
Tell me about how you think of
that bit of what we get for our
bang for our Buck what how is
education improved in New Mexico
from these expenditure of of of
a billion dollars in we know the
for pin number hasn't changed
but
But what has changed and and
talk about some of the things
the good things you've seen come
to pass from the expenditure.
Mr Chairman representative of
the great question I would say
the the very very first thing
that comes to my mind is
investment in the state and
teachers.
that was I think was on a
message that was sent by the
entire legislature last year and
supporting educator salaries but
over the past four years that
would create the majority of
that billion dollars is actually
salary raises for educators
pandemic.
That return on investment will
begin to dept show I think in
the next couple of years and
already I think markedly we saw
a decline after the after a
significant increase in teacher
vacancies we saw a decline in
the teacher vacancies and I
think we also saw the educators
were tracked into next to New
Mexico based on the salary but.
Once you see a raise in salary
then you have a more
competitive.
Workforce right and that I think
it's fundamental that sort of
goes to the heart of how to
create a teacher supply demand
model because as an employer.
Would you rather have one person
to interview to fill the seat.
Two or three or ten people to
interview to fill the seat so to
my mind that would be the best
and most important thing that
the legislature has done of the
billion dollars.
The second thing that I think
would would be
how the state has begun to
respond in terms of early
literacy.
And there's a couple of
Places in terms of the billion
dollars that that is reflective
of eleven million or so in the
SCG that goes out to districts
to support early literacy and
then the below the line dollars
that actually support the
training for all early educators
kindergarten first second third
now rolling up into the fourth
fifth and sixth grade but the
strong support in terms of
teaching science of reading for
educators that's a that's a huge
in fundamental piece of that
I would say that
The.
A couple of other places an
increase instructional materials
that was a significant finding
of the lawsuit so there's been
some a dollar amount strong
dollar amount that's gone into
instruction materials you'll see
recommendations for both the
listen legislative finance
committee as well as the LFC
that continue to support
instructional material dollars
as well as the executive said
simply knowing that every
student needs text books needs
the online resource materials is
fundamental right
I guess those are the three
things to my mind that
Are really important that
compose some of that billion
dollars and then hopefully and I
think that is our job as your
staff to really begin to track
and see a return on investment.
Thank you Mr chair though that
was not going to be my last
question and and maybe still is
when when do you expect to see
from some of this come to prove
iterations.
You Mr Chairman representative
Any actual implementation of a
of a program or strategy
typically takes about four to
six years to see impact.
this is based on my own actual
experience of running major
state in the northern New Mexico
area increase science program
and seeing sort of return on
investment they're but I think
you know we're already starting
to see a little bit of an impact
in terms of the first grade
students who started the three
three years ago structured
literacy but will start to.
Begin enrolling space but we're
very committed to doing that for
you thank you thank you Mr thank
you Representative Roybal
Caballero please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
doctor very much for your very
thorough and helpful
presentation.
So I I I want to stay and I
think I said this in the past
that I believe
that the approach.
should be guided or actually
Be the guide.
By the Yazzie Martinez.
A lawsuit there were there was a
tremendous amount of
recommendations in that lawsuit
that really of looks at systemic
change overall so I appreciate
your systems based approach
because that very much is should
be the guiding of the guiding of
formula for all that we do
because had we not had the
lawsuit Mr chair obviously we
wouldn't be reforming our
education so having said that
I'd like to ask a two pronged
question and I I really did
appreciate your overview at the
beginning when you talk about
student success structure
literacy mathematics educator
workforce whole child the whole
child approach.
But my feeling is that we should
not have Yazzie Martinez as a
line item in anything that we're
doing it should be the umbrella
a should be everything falling
into place because the lawsuit
was very explicit about creating
the systemic changes that are
needed in order to turn our
education approach completely
around so that the child is
first and foremost so.
If in the state during this
intro in the previous central we
heard.
A great deal for more students.
And how all and and it was very
I was very taken with the their
input whenever they were asked
to provide how education
was responding to their needs so
my question is if we're
addressing everything
systemically.
And if we're making education
relevant to that to the students
professional career goals and
how our students involved in
developing their own program of
study because again the national
transient Mr chair as you're
studying the net researching the
national trends for the past
five years the national trend
has indicated that if students
are involved in developing their
own program of studies at a very
early age.
Then students success becomes
It's heightened.
And we then have a direction
from the students themselves.
On where we should be
prioritizing.
Our educational programs because
after all.
Art education is for the student
not for the teacher necessarily
not for the parents the
president students and the
communities that they're going
to go back into so that's my
very broad based question thank
you Mr chair Sir Mr Chairman
representative Representative
Roybal Caballero.
I'm imagine just a couple of
things that I think are
occurring current right now and
then I'm gonna mention one thing
that it would say we probably
need to keep an eye on and or
help promote that has not
happening.
So in terms of students at and
determining on program of study
the first thing is a pilot
project that's actually
happening happening among the
public education department some
school districts across the
state and the future focused
education and nonprofit
that sources also all
communities across the state but
I think it's based in
Albuquerque.
And they're looking at how to.
Make high school more meaningful
for students particularly by
having students design and
graduate with a capstone
project.
Then that allows them to
demonstrate readiness for
graduation it's their graduation
requirement essentially isn't as
opposed to a typical segment.
But it doesn't need to meet the
standards the academic standards
as well as is decided and
presented to the community at
large there are many many
different districts that are
engaging with this and the
variety is really beautiful
actually because you'll see it
occurring and SUNY you'll see
occurring asked at the the Mr
leaders
community you'll see it
occurring in Cuba
there's a variety of schools
that are engaging want this
because what it's doing is
allowing the students to stay
tight and employ work based
learning as a fundamental piece
of their of their
program of study as well as look
at how to make their content
area a little bit more
meaningful and responsive to
that that's one area that it's
happening right now.
and then I would say that in
terms of the place where we
probably need to pay more
attention to in terms of what
you're talking about is educator
prep and supporting our educator
prep programs to actually
support educators to understand
what and how to employee or an
act that.
Thank you Mr chairman the latter
point is extremely important
because we're still using really
antiquated traditional models
for educator preparation that
don't incorporate the students
design of program the study so I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair.
Director for women is so good to
see you and I hope you get
better soon.
I have a very.
To the question about the budget
and the way it's laid out if you
could please explain to me
especially for the sake of our
near members.
Where it says the LFC
recommendation I mean they'll
test you recommendation verses
the LFC recommendation the
difference between those two
columns please thank you Mr.
Certainly Mr chair and Mr chair.
It's great to see you as well so
the organization of the high
level.
For the new members you'll see
the very first column says FY
twenty three but that stands for
our current operating budget
OpBud is short for a shorthand
for operating budget so this is
I'm also going to ask you to
draw the line right underneath
Rowe thirty six so everything
from thirty cents thirty six and
up.
Is what we call our state
equalization guarantee that's
the funding that flows out to
the school districts via that
PED but it actually goes all out
to the districts and monthly
check they receive actually but
you'll see that total amount
down there at.
Three point two five two nine
five part of Memé million that's
how much money was distributed
in the funding formula to the
districts this current year.
The first column to the right of
that FY twenty four PED
recommendation is what the
public education department sent
in is there REC the budget
recommendation one thing to read
about this is that doesn't mean
that the that this is instead of
four replaces it means that
these are either additions or
subtractions to act the actuals
correct right so you the public
education department and is we
are all agreeing we're all
showing in our recommendations
that we would be subtracting
rose six seven and eight from
the current.
Operating budget.
Which is actually the dollar
amount those are the dollar
amounts that go into K. ten K.
five plus u'll T. P. and then
some salaries that went into
incentivize and support K. five
plus community P. instead what
we're doing is thinking about
how to use that funding and
instead employ it in our current
budget recommendations.
But typically the LFC budget
recommendation is simply voted
on or looked at as a committee
to recommend moving into the
session but it's not necessarily
always reckon recognized on the
high level that's presented in
House Appropriations or in
Senate finance which is why it's
important I think for you all to
see what the Legislative
Education Committee who are
composed of educators who are
really that the the experts in
education recommend in terms of
the education budget.
that being said our staff works
very closely with the staff at
the legislative finance
committee you'll see that
there's a lot of parallels there
right we that is our job to
serve you comprehensively As
staff.
and we also want to be able to
be mindful of our our general
revenue estimates.
So the L. E. S. C.
recommendation is what the
committee recommended and voted
on it in January the day for
session.
I'm in the final column your FY
twenty four is the LFC or
legislative finance committee
recommendation what they.
But they're proposing and then
what will be looked at closer in
terms of the high House
appropriations and Senate
finance.
Thank you Mr chair thank you to
our directory appreciate that
so.
Everything above line thirty six
is is included in the SCG
everything else is what we call
the categorical spending.
Correct that's correct Mr chair
as well as I would say the
RO sixty two in down our what we
call.
Special
these are things that go
directly to the public education
department not necessarily to
the districts they go to the
Department and their special
initiatives for them to actually
enact so for instance you'll
see.
rose sixty five it's as early
literacy in reading support.
Those recommendations go
directly to the public education
department and then they issues
requests or support professional
development.
across the state.
Thank you thank you directed Mr
chair so if you could please
explain to us for example
Me just pull one out here I can
find one so there's a
discrepancy between the L. E. S.
C. recommendation and the LESC
recommendation Mr chair out what
happens what happens then is our
negotiation fix places there's
what what happens I.
Mr chair great question so let's
actually look at route eighty.
Teacher residencies.
You'll notice that there's
fairly similar little bit of
difference there.
This she.
For House Appropriations or
Senate finance we'll have the
LFC recommendation of fifteen
million it will have the public
education the executive
recommendation as well as the
legislative finance
recommendation
it in terms of the fifteen
million that we would recommend
for teacher residencies that's
based on our own analysis of the
numbers of students in terms of
our own undergraduate programs
as well as what we're looking
and graduate programs we have
provided recommendation and it
was Representative Sauvignon are
carried the bill last year did
really strong legislation around
opening up teacher residencies
which is as gold standard of
educator prep for both
undergraduates and graduates
this broadly voted on by the
entire body very successful.
The numbers here I think in
terms of what happens with the
House Appropriations and Senate
finances in terms of your
political space and how you
speak with members of House
Appropriations how you speak
with members of the house and
the Senate what happens in terms
of the Senate but.
How you advocate for fifteen
million as opposed to ten
million incidently staff is also
been supporting and working
together with the legislative
finance committee staff now
serving house appropriations and
finance so their numbers
somewhat matches well you'll
notice on Rowe.
One thirty four.
They actually have an additional
five million for teacher
residencies so they've got a
total of fifteen million similar
to ours.
We would advocate for all of it
to be in a recurring fashion we
want to sustain solid solid
teacher residency programs for
the state.
but
in terms of negotiations or
support for the budget that's
that's I think the sport the
space of the members.
Thank you director that it is a
it's really important that that
we understand how that works and
how the process is is is working
on I I want to thank you for all
your hard work for you your
staff this is excellent
excellent work thank you very
much thank you Mr chair.
Here Representative thanks.
Thank you Mr chair thank you go
and
This budget stress crazy.
So but that but thank you for
for explaining this and so when
I look at the funding formula
the two bills that we're caring
here
for the
For the at Rick's formula so.
Representative Romero and
Bacchus bill is calling for
another.
I'm reading this right twenty
million.
And I'm calling to report a new
group of us to calling from
fourteen million for the for the
For our
Is
educational assistance bills and
that's not in the LFC
recommendation are is the full
amount recommended for the
funding formula for at risk that
is not in the LFC if they am I
reading that correct.
Mr Chairman representative you
are correct so that's fourteen
plus.
Twenty so we've got to go to the
LFC there's a reason we we put
certain people on that committee
Judy I Garrett and Christine
Trujillo are also on the LFC so
it's going to be important and
and excuse me and Brian
Representative Baca three
members on the pardon.
In.
yes on probation excuse me we
have three members of this
committee on the Appropriations
Committee so we did that
purposefully when we have people
sign on that legislation so that
we can ensure that
appropriations hopefully will
add that money right.
In that.
So so we're correct on that I'm
just we just have to track that
carefully so that gets in
appropriations
And so the so that we can make
sure those programs work and I
guess
my other question.
Is sections like ninety four
down when I look at the P. U.
depicted right.
And it's a
two hundred three million then
we're asking for a five hundred
million then I look over at.
I guess one thirty two down to
one fifty seven I'm I'm looking
at those columns.
I th in the past and I don't
know if we're getting any
further on this
PED puts it in.
They call it something different
but I think we kind of even it
out in columns one thirty two
through one fifty seven is is
that true do people just put it
in different places and and we
come out kind of even can you
explain that go and sure thank
you Mr chair Mr Chairman
representative yes that is
actually something for you to.
See what's happening there
No I'm just gonna put your
attention to RO ninety four.
Top row ninety Ford says the
general fund.
So the the executive is
recommending that these.
Appropriations to all of these
particular items.
Come from the general fund.
The legislative education study
committee as well as the
legislative finance committee.
In the inner.
Chose to actually fund some of
the similar items not completely
the same but many similarities
not from the general fund but
from the public education reform
Fund.
Public education reform from
fund for those of you who are
not aware of it is a fund that
was created a few years ago from
dollars that were unspent from
learning time from K. five plus
or ELT P. so rather than
reverting those to the general
fund the the legislature decided
to create a public education
reform Fund so that the dollars
would be reserved unspent
particularly for education hi
causes so the legislative
advocate education study
committee as well as the
legislative finance committee
typically
that knowledge is this
understands this supports
initiatives using the fund
that's reserved for that
purpose.
There are some similarities in
terms of the initiatives so for
instance I draw your attention
to.
Real one I.
From the executive that's their
fifteen million dollars in terms
of career technical education.
So how much money do we have in
the in the and the public
education reform Fund how much
is it right now Mr Chairman
representative of I believe it's
between two hundred and three
hundred million probably closer
to two thirty I believe tend to
want to put that quick service
of.
Yeah.
We will get that for you Mr
chair representative okay so
that.
It should be called it a reserve
I mean is is that a reserve fund
that wasn't use from the Cape
last and it's about two hundred
and maybe between two thirty and
two sixty right so it's kind of
a research so we took of the LFC
recommended station was to take
all of these funds and use that
reserve fund that wasn't using
K. five plus right and we're
gonna spend it this year
hopefully and in the following
manner is that correct in my
following this correctly that's
correct Mr chair and
representative in addition we'll
probably also see more dollars
that will go into the reserve
fund based up of the unspent
dollars that were used on K.
five plus an LTP this year okay
so we're gonna have the we have
that we have the let me let me
get my eight years straight we
have the money from two thousand
nineteen through two thousand
and where are we at two thousand
twenty two that was not spent
that's between two thirty and
two sixty million and then we'll
probably have more money this
year that will be spent again
that will probably go into that
reserve fund and that money will
be used to really.
Fund programs that the LFC has
looked at in the interim
committee
That we can fully fund and put
more money into things like.
Career technical education which
are school districts are saying
we we we desperately need money
because those programs are
expensive it that's is that
correct Mr chair and when Mr
Chairman representative had a
test.
All right so.
PED is calling for that to be
taken general fund and we're
trying to use that money in
reserve fund is that correct
that's with my understanding Mr
chair and vice chair.
Chairman representative correct
okay that's why these numbers
make me crazy but I I you know I
I'm gonna I'm getting it I'm
trying to get there I'm just
going to say served on probation
too so so we really now for as I
understand it Mr chair New
Mexico and we have more members
here on probation
that leadership has changed
looks like we may kind that come
to we're working together to get
these things in life and
alignment so that we can use
that reserve money is that
correct Mr chairman grant.
Mr chair yes.
Okay okay now we have to work
really hard to make sure that
the money from the funding
formula that says that forty
million for educational
assistance and that increase in
at risk I funding is is done
this year is that correct Mr
chairman Glenn.
Representative.
Okay so I'm just tracking this
the advantage that education has
and I'm gonna say it's a huge
advantage is that we have a
staff that does this you know in
other committees like I'm just
gonna say it honestly like a can
water we don't have full time
year round staff the tracks
these things from a policy
perspective ties to the budget
and brings it forward so we're
going to be working on that and
other committees to make that
happen so it it's really really
and what people need to
understand is we have a huge
benefit with the Ellis L. E. S.
C. and the way that that works
other committees don't have that
I'd like to work toward that but
that's another issue for another
time and those are my questions
thank you Mr chair thank you for
being so patient with me thank
you Representative gear.
Thank you Mr chairman for new
members noticed that we go
through the chair we I'd say Mr
chair and then whatever
Doctor Newman I have a question
on the comparison of on our bill
let's see what is it now
one thirty the eleven forty
hours the executive is proposing
eighty hours a professional
development time beyond eleven
forty.
And so people are contacting us
up based on that thinking you're
adding two weeks to my work here
as a teacher how are we
approaching that and I don't
know if if Tim has additional
points on that I'm concerned
about that I'm and as of fifty
your legislator it's like the
stuff I'm looking around and
seeing how the eleven forty is
funded through different lines I
think it's line one twenty six
and nine eleven depending on
who's budgeted is but.
Can you just talk very briefly
on that eighty hours beyond
eleven forty.
Sure Mr Chairman Mr Kirk
But so again I'm just going to
reiterate that the house bill
one thirty
that's being carried by yourself
as chair and representative of a
metal does not require
professional development
official Wertheimer learning
time above eleven forty.
It is not are the house bill one
thirty in budget up to sixty
hours devoted to professional
work time for educators so some
of those hours can be likely
should be used for educator
professional time.
Executive is proposing a a
different approach they're
looking at raising the number of
hours to eleven forty and.
Also requiring professional or
time eighty hours a professional
work time that would be a
calendar for two twelve twenty
right.
so in an extended calendar.
the implications in that or that
that definition of instructional
hours rate does not include is
the I don't know what they're
actually proposing in terms of
the debate definition of
instructional hours since that
was also part of this house bill
one thirty was broader
definition experience learning
those types of things
but certainly the professional
work time is layered on top so
the expectation would be that
educators and I believe in their
budget also reflects an
increased amount to actually to
go to that as well
but the expectation would be
that there is increased time in
classroom as well as increased
time required of teachers.
Thank you Mr chairman and our
tournament and then my second
point
it's a question because part of
the LFC Martinez a special
education students students with
individual education plans
and I'm very can I want to know
has in the laci study this
because
what's happening there's a great
move towards inclusion at the
elementary school level it often
means that the special education
teacher is rotating among many
classrooms and the stood with
the EP is not actually getting
the proper education and your
point about have we were thought
of two teachers in the classroom
comes up and then in middle
school sometimes there's
inclusion and there's only one
teacher not a second certified
special education teacher and
sometimes not even an EA so has
LFC taken any kind of deep dive
study of this or do you plan to.
Yep Mr chair and vice chair
Garrett yes yes yes definitely
more research needs to be done a
lot of research to be honest of
we took an initial stabbing
looked out over the in terms
first of all how much money does
the state put into special
education that's a good question
actually for you all turns out
it's over six hundred million
dollars of state funds that
support special education
largely that goes out to the
factors to support students who
are special education they get
an increase to dollar amount
terms of the funding formula as
well as a pretty heavy factor
that goes to support ancillary
staff
and so over six hundred million
dollars is going out of state
funds
close to seven I think it's a
close to seven hundred million
dollars is going out there's a
large amount of course of
federal dollars that go to
support special education we
wanted to take a just a cursory
look to sort of get a baseline
approach of what's the dollar
amount the next question is how
effective is that dollar are
those dollars being used so
effectively are they being used
and to what extent and.
to your point vice chair what
does it look like in terms of
both ancillary special education
teachers and general and
teachers Fund saying I think
I've heard it from the special
director actually the Public
education department special ed
students our general ed students
first.
They are always considered
general ed students first right
the there of students with
disabilities or special needs
are always our general students
and so if court instruction is
really what we need to focus in
on the state.
To have an impact how we teach
reading how we teach mathematics
our special ed students are part
and parcel of that discussion
you'll notice in the budget on
route one fifty six.
We have a slight recommendation
and this is supporting special
education training and
credentials we work with staff
at the LFC tend to focus this is
focusing on this as well or is
just slightly higher but this is
actually brought training to
support our general ed teachers
to know how to support special
education teachers that is of
such a fundamental need those of
you are educators right the
training in terms of IEPs co
teaching with other educators to
special education teachers so.
But in terms of a broader study
that will be one of the major
pieces of the work plan in terms
take thank you very much thank
you Mr chairman.
No.
Mr chairman thank you very much
of.
My fellow.
Committee members up here have
had a few more questions
answered I do have a question
for you thank you very much for
your presentation is very high.
As far as your academic
standards are.
Are set he said that there low
scores in math overall diss also
pertain to private schools and
charter schools.
Yep Mr chair and Representative
Ezzell it does would pertain to
charter schools or charter
schools in New Mexico are
considered public schools they
simply have different
governments and yes I would say
I without having better reserves
for you immediately all that we
can get that to you so if you
are able to see sort of where
the highlights are if you will
across the state who's really
performing well because we also
plan to do a study case studies
on those high performers that
we're seeing so sharp growth or
just really strong performance
like I can name a few off hand
Login district that's pretty
high performing right now
Gadsden is seeing really nice
ability to close gaps right now
so as we study those things in
our eight for those districts
and charter schools in
particular we're able to sort of
focus in on best practices and
strategies and bring that to you
in terms of policy or budget
considerations but for now I
would say you know to answer
your question.
I don't I've I feel like we have
to have a better.
A better understanding of
It double affects so many give
you an example of this
If a student is the low socio
economic is that impacting their
performance if a student is an
English learner is that
impacting the performance what
about a student who is.
Low socioeconomic and English
learner.
Right is that going to affect
their performance so better
understanding of the nuances in
the levels and how they all play
a role.
Hopefully will help you all on
decisions that you make moving
forward in terms of private
schools we don't have data
around private schools most
private schools don't use our
assessments so it's hard to do
an apples to apples analysis.
Mr chairman of that was very
helpful for me I was curious if
we were on board they're not one
thing Mr chairman of that I've
heard.
Ever since last year okay
because I'm very involved with
all five of my school districts
that path Representative I of
this local control and I see the
dollar trying to get that
addressed and I think that's
very important for the success
of those schools and those
communities because they they
are based on the ground you know
what's happening there.
Mr chairman of.
Can you.
Expand on what it at the
requirements are.
For the education requirements
for the pre K..
Sure Mr Chairman representative
so great question right now we
have prekindergarten our our.
I'm gonna just prekindergarten
and I can also talk a little bit
broadly about early childhood in
general but our prekindergarten
programs across the state
or kind of comprehensively
looked at as one with two arms
if you will the first our
community based programs also
consider private pre K. programs
the private programs very
important in terms of economic
development across the state
because they're small businesses
quite frankly in the support of
women of many women business
owners
the but they are also accredited
by the state and recognized as
high level rigorous
prekindergarten programs are
accredited by the state about
really childhood early early
care department the other arm of
this our public pre K. programs
and they are always associated
with the school district or
charter school very strong they
typically perform very well
because they have a credit
teachers that our employed by
those programs so so it should
historically we've seen in terms
of data the public pre K. are
performing very well they've got
teachers who have a license and
a degree in teaching but I think
that the work to be done and
that is already happening is
sort of
providing equity across both
types of programs instead of
raising the level of rigor an
expectation in both types of
programs also notice knowing
that you need both across the
state for for variety of
reasons.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for that response which leads me
to my next trip for the
educational requirements for the
he's.
Certainly Mr chair
Representative Ezzell and if
there are levels of EA's the
first level of an education
assistance and we need to be
over eighteen
have graduated from high school
or other equivalent Greg a GED
and then also typically are
enrolled in or have graduated
from an associate with an
associates degree okay all right
thank you very much Mr chairman
just one last comment here of
like to make under your house
bill one twenty six graduation
requirements I was kinda shocked
to see that there's no
requirement for foreign
language.
But.
Sure Mr president as of
certainly so of the four
elective units one of the things
about that is that we're also in
statute in the bills with the
time we spend when we focus on
that bill a dive
I'm sure deeper into in the
Sanchez can present it but the
the for elective units would be
requiring two units that are
sequential in in the that can be
for language it can be career
technical education but the
research around that is that
sequential items of really
impactful and support students
and graduating and allow them to
sort of have a meaningful
trajectory okay thank you very
much for that and and which
brings me to my next.
Point I'd like to make studies
have shown that younger kids
respond better to the foreign
language learning whether it's
German or French to whatever the
case may be but those the
students that are in.
What is it second third graders
are more responsive to that
learning in.
Later on.
Mr chairman thank you very much
for allowing me to ask
questions.
Representative Trujillo please
yes just a quick response on
line one fifty six when you were
talking about special ed and the
training credentials does that
include training for gifted
teachers.
Mister chair Mister it's
certainly could it should
certainly should have given to
students in New Mexico are
considered students
special ed students right that
thank.
Representative who wrote a
please thank you Mr chair thank
you and thank you for being here
being sick for thank you at the
movies thank you since
Representative if you mentioned
already about party thing which
I'm very interested about quit
cold I'm you were talking about
Doing
okay better understanding of
what if that's not performance I
know that areas in like you were
talking about private school
charter school but also a
specific programs like anyone
program for language learners
things like that will that be
also
think of we can we access
information without yes Mr chair
representative really just
anything that you need we're
here for at your service so if
you have an inquiry in terms of
performance of the school
district the charter school the
history of any of that how
current programs are being could
funded the success house schools
or districts are actually
performing in terms of let's say
so you want to question around
how is this.
District doing in terms of the
bilingual programs and over the
past four years what is student
achievement look like in that
district related to my little
programs what about the number
of deals in that district has it
increased stayed the same right
in terms of funding has
supported so yes anything that
you need if you have a question
about that certainly and I think
a the other part of that would
be read recognizing that
bilingual multicultural funding
in our recommendation it curves
into spaces one that you can't
really see that's actually
embedded in the SCG and that
supporting programs that already
exist and the other is an actual
below the line recommendation
that would support.
funding for our native languages
teachers with the five twenty
certificate to sold certificates
for educators and students for
bilingual educators and just one
last question I'm programs
change a lot throughout the Mr
chair thank you madam chair
thank you.
Relationship lot accrued to the
leadership so that is
initiatives and they don't.
State long enough to see like
twelve years to see the impact
of students
I'm assuming that is consider in
this kind of research.
Yes Mr chair representative
correlate yes to Representative
Chatfield this point
Unless you have a systems lens
unless you understand and our
funding policy in alignment with
budget and then look at setting
a vision for a comprehensive
five to ten years it's hard to
track the results of some of
what you're signing.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
ma'am right thank you so
Representative Roybal Caballero
had a quick question following
it yes Mr chair thank you it is
in reference to the discussion
about special educators
do we have are they assigned
educational assistance.
Does every special education
teacher have an educational
assistant.
Mr Chairman representative
Calero not necessarily it
depends on the local school
district and the job of the
special ed teacher so for
instance there can be a special
ed teacher who role in a
district would be simply to run
and be in charge of the
individualized education plans
or IEPs for the students there
are actual engagement with
students is not like their
primary roles actually as a case
manager the students
some special education students
teachers do have an EA
particularly related to the
needs of the students in their
educational education
individualized education plans
so depending on the plan of the
student and what they also need
is reflected sort of in the
staffing I would say though
largely this is one of the
biggest there is a vacancies
needs that we have crossed
state.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Great thank you so we're back to
on the floor but I had a couple
things that I did want to point
out and thank you director for
your presentation this morning
is that throughout the interim
and this is what I think is most
conducive to the policy that we
work on and the budgetary
implications that we work on is
that if you notice on the L. E.
S. C. LFC recommendations is
that we have lots and lots of
alignment the other party
members are pointing out
the vast majority of them we
have legislation for so when we
talk about our differences in
the eleven forty requirement
there's legislation for that
when we have differences about
instructional assistance we have
a bill for that
And to go through this process
we've had a change in leadership
in house appropriations and
finance and I'm working closely
with the chair and as it's been
in this committee is to push the
policy along with the budgetary
implications on for the budget
so I look forward to continuing
to work closely with our
appropriations
Appropriations process but
continuing to make sure that
where we allocate money is also
backed up in policy and vice
versa as part of this committee
so I look forward to doing that
and I think we have partners in
HSC that are very willing to do
that as well continuing network
so if there isn't any further
business we'll see each other on
Wednesday eight thirty in this
committee thank you all will see
you then please make sure if you
haven't already Citrix or a
binder please make your decision
as soon as possible we did have
one last announcement from our
our school board association
really more tease please.
Will be brief because I know
you're rushing to get out of the
farm bill of your teeth the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school boards association
and the New Mexico scored
Association to do two things
today.
We would like to thank you for
all the work that you do for
education and we want to invite
you to our customers which we're
hosting next week the school
board association hosts aboard
leadership conference here in
Santa Fe we are expecting over
three hundred school board
members from around the state to
join us for the media the
convention center we will be
having a practice of of the
party morning the carpets in
your packet to receive a letter
of invitation that invite to
give you the date just Friday
the third for the practice seven
AM and we will be also in the
packet is a a pandemic scores
Association as well as our
twenty twenty three legislative
platform which we will be
addressing as we move forward in
the session but there's your hot
off the press copy of the twenty
for.
School board members from around
the state approved medicine four
approved all those over sixty
six positions in that platform
so we'll be discussing those
with you as we move forward but
we would like to invite you to
join at seven AM Friday the
third at a free conference for
this and we will have an
opportunity for you to speak to
the four members at that
conference briefly say hello
introduce yourself so that the
school board members from around
the state know who are how's
Education Committee members as
well as our Senate Education
Committee members so it's solely
for breakfast honoring House
Education Committee members we
thank you we look forward to
seeing you there and thank you
Mr chair for giving the
specifics of thank you and
that's a good reminder to
members if you do have a company
handouts for the committee
please get them to land are
provided a system as soon as
possible so we can get those
cleared please have enough
copies are requests that copies
are made for accompanying
materials but without that will
recess till Wednesday.
