For witness.
I do not see him on the
attendees list or do I see him
on the panelists lists so I'll
keep an eye out for thank you
because this is definitely not
my area of expertise.
So so what we did after feedback
from the from the committee as
well as the that back that we
receive from the community Mr
Reynolds went and met with I
believe he communicated with do
it and PED so this reflects the
changes there it clarifies the
language that all public schools
and charters are eligible
without prescribing who gets
them when and then it addressed
the issues of alignment with the
federal guidelines.
With the so so with the
statewide education technology
infrastructure network would be
develop it do it do it in the
end decided they do not want to
manage this and that we would
use the current systems are in
place and then I'm looking for
the language on the federal
standards.
The federal cybersecurity
assistance programs are dressed
in here on page one.
Without them the questions.
Right or wrong questions for the
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty two.
Russians from committee.
Representative care please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dow for doing the
committee substitute it I think
it aligns much more with all the
meetings that have been held
involving.
Do it PED a public school
finance authority everybody so
so thank you for doing that.
I support it.
Representative care
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair my only
question was when you said that
do it didn't want to manage it
but the money is going to do it
what is going to be the process
of that.
Mr.
Chairman and and Representative
Sweetser I don't think the
money's going to do it.
So Mr chair what does the
money's going to the Department
of rations technology I well I I
cannot answer that question I
really hope that we get on that
okay Mr chairman and
representative I mean maybe we
can fix this appropriation for
we get to that point because I
know they're working on the
Senate side what we're hoping is
that some of the reverted money
from that since we didn't
mandate K. five plus or extended
learning could be applied to
this and so hopefully Mr
Reynolds on soon I was texting
him and he says he's trying but
I guess we don't see him.
But do it does not want to
administer.
They don't want to implement the
program maybe they'll transfer
the funds are put out in Garcia
I'm not exactly sure but but
they discussed so I couldn't I
really couldn't tell you.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
and Representative and that
would be my only slack I think
is the Max going to them and
then it doesn't say what happens
after that it would probably
need some clear delineation
thank you Mr chair.
Right thank you Representative.
Six other discussion from
committee members.
FOR a motion from committee
members.
So we need an appropriate
motions of the program I should
be a do not pass on house bill
one twenty two but eighty two
passed on the house Education
Committee substitute for house
bill one twenty two.
Mr Chairman.
Well played Representative.
I have a second all right so we
have a.
You know what I had said motion
by Representative Chatfield a
second by Representative Baca
madam secretary called the roll
on a do not pass but I do pass
on the committee since two
quick.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Representative Sweetser yes and
I'd like to explain my folks
these.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Herrerra.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes.
Yes.
Is there all right so we have a
unanimous so Representative
Sweetser plates to explain about
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative usually important
must move forward but it says
we're for the money goes to do
it for three full time employees
and I really do think we need to
get some clarification on that I
don't want to stop it but we
need to figure out what's
happening thank you Mr chair.
Great thank you so you have a do
not pass the house bill one
twenty two but in the past and
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty two thank you
Representative staff.
Thank you.
All right so madam vice chair.
Will swap roles.
Thank you.
our next bill is house bill one
sixty five it's web based native
American student to all and our
sponsor is share Romero and the
start when you're ready Mr
chair.
Right.
Thank you madam chair so house
bill one sixty five it is to set
up a native American web based
tool consisting of various
studies performance measures and
really documentation us
programming geared toward native
American students
it this along with house bill
one sixty six is modeled after
the federal department of
education clearinghouse which
has all sorts of different
categories and associated
studies on programming geared
toward all different sorts of
students
this is a way I think for us is
the state to start compiling
information associated with
Martinez Yazzie and I'm kind of
talking about full bills here in
order to
for anybody and I should say
because I have that question
this morning which is an awesome
questions it's going around in
your head who's this for on this
would be for everybody so that
we can start compiling all the
work that is being done for our
students and the evaluations
associated with them so that we
can make more informed decision
making and not engaging in
duplicative work as far as the
system so PED would be the one
in charge of carrying this out
that's why there's the
appropriation for two hundred
fifty thousand dollars is it's
for an F. T. for somebody to
begin this work and then
maintain this work as we go
through through the years
So with that madam chair all
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair I'm we are
going to go to the audience now
for comments
I'm going to start with people
who do not support house bill
one sixty five and then we'll go
to people who do support house
bill one sixty five if you would
like to make a comment
in opposition to house bill one
sixty five can you please raise
your hand.
Okay I see nobody in opposition
if you would like to speak in
support of house bill one sixty
five please raise your hand.
Okay and we will start with
heather Bassett.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and APS supports house
bill one sixty five and the next
bill for the same reasons we
think the sponsor for putting
aside funding dedicated to New
Mexico's unique resources for
New Mexico students and setting
the president of the state can
take authoritative lead on
curating things like open
education resources and other
resources available digitally so
that we can honor their
perspectives indigenous
populations this will allow the
access of culturally and
linguistically responsive to
realize to classrooms to
complement those that are
published and in print in
classrooms now thank you.
Thank you heather.
our next speaker is up from any
a New Mexico.
You have two minutes.
We can't hear you.
Good morning can you.
Yes we can hear you okay.
US.
Right.
Hello.
Right.
And.
Is very.
The.
This
is.
Our work.
It was.
And also.
Or we.
This.
Thank.
Thank you.
Our next speaker is of little
immediately made.
You may see you have the for for
two minutes.
Thank you very much more than
good morning madam chair and Mr
chair members of the education
Committee I'm really more teas
are Representative The New
Mexico school board association
and I won't repeat what my
predecessors instead because we
agree with they are thinking and
MSBA continually and generally
supports increased funding and
resources for students we want
public schools students to have
the tools that they need to get
the best education we support
public schools and we want our
create a positive educational
experiences to be provided to
our students we want improve
outcomes for them and madam
chair and members of the
committee we support this bill
whole heartedly we ask for your
positive.
I move on to the next committee
thank you so much thank you only
may.
Is there anybody else that
wishes to speak in support of
house bill one sixty five.
I don't see anybody so we'll go
to our panelists.
Madam chair if I may I'm sorry I
forgot that there I do have an
amendment
Okay.
So the two oh two number is two
two two four hundred.
Point one.
Okay is that in the chair file
it should be.
The double check.
Madam chair I move the amendment
for discussion yes try to and
madam chair I second the
amendment for discussion.
Okay we have a
Is there anybody that objects to
the amendment.
Okay.
I'm.
You have an amendment Mr chair
do want to explain anything
about the amendment.
Sure thank you madam chair so
the amendment.
Instructing the joint powers
agreement inserting inter
governmental agreement that's
something we that Representative
Trujillo had propose when we
were dealing with joint powers
agreements
on the series of bills are
tribal remedy framework from
from last week so there was some
suggestion that we should insert
that sort of language as it
deals with.
Tribal intellectual property so
we did just that.
Okay thank you to somebody want
to move the adoption of the
amendment.
I'll second okay we remove in
second is there any objection.
Okay you have a amendment.
Okay with that will take
questions.
This anybody have questions.
Yes on the bill as amended.
actually I do have a question
but we do have a motion from
Representative Chatfield also
and we have a second
Representative Dow
Representative Mr chair can you
just explain when I read this I
felt that tribes and pueblos and
that Navajo Nation would be able
to upload materials actually for
use of students that this
resource wouldn't just be a
resource for legislators the
public and people but there
would be actual materials that
could be used in the classroom
my understanding that correctly.
Madam chair yes this shouldn't
be anything that's geared toward
just you know those policy
makers but information for for
students educators
administrators all at the ground
level as well on I don't see
anything in the bill or either
of the bills that would preclude
any of that but I think that's a
that's a really good distinction
to point out.
Okay thank you.
I'm and with that is there
anybody who is in opposition to
this bill.
I see no opposition Mr chair you
have a just for house bill one
sixty five.
Thank you.
We'll go to house bill one sixty
six this is the web based at
risk student resource tool
Mister chair if you would like
to explain that right thank you
madam chair so it deals with the
other side of the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit in.
Creating and maintaining the
public education department what
this sort of clearing house for
the same sort of information
that we went for native students
for at risk students writ large
and again it's a way for
everybody to see what sort of
work has been done in the area
what may be here not be
effective I'm so we're not
duplicating work come but it's
practically the same except
minus the language around tribes
and nations and entering into
air governmental
for joint powers agreements with
with any of the tribes or
pueblos so with that madam chair
all stand for questions and
there's not then it's time.
Thank you Mr chair we will go to
the public is there anybody who
would like to comment.
On house bill one sixty six is
there anybody in opposition.
I don't see anybody in
opposition if you would like to
speak in support of house bill
one sixty six please raise your
hand.
And we'll start with really more
cheese.
Morning madam chairman members
of the committee again
millionaire T. so the New Mexico
school board association and we
again support this bill we are
certainly in favor of bills all
right maybe any identified
deficiencies and that will
provide tools to to create
positive educational experiences
and outcomes for students we
support this bill and asked the
committee to move forward thank
you so much thank you.
And our next speakers from any
and if that's you Steve it was a
little hard to understand you so
I hope you can speak very
clearly.
Yes.
It's not great but we can
understand you.
State.
We.
Do we can't hear you.
State we can't hear you at all.
Okay Steve see if you can come
on another way.
our next speaker is heather
Bassett.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm against
either with Albuquerque public
schools and we support house
bill one sixty six for the same
reasons part bill but we also
appreciate the sponsor
perceptibly identifying at risk
which will help districts and
schools take an active
participation down to the
classroom level and addressing
Yazzie Martinez thank you.
Thank you heather I see no more
public comment will go to our
committee a committee member's
Disini Betty have a question.
Okay nobody has their hand
raised this somebody would
somebody like to make a motion.
What department house bill one
sixty six.
Okay we have a due pass from
motion from Representative
Roybal Caballero the second
Representative Baca is there any
opposition to house bill one
sixty six.
See no opposition Mr chair you
happy to pass for one sixty six.
Thank you thank you committee
set makes light work
I guess we will meet again I
think we're starting four
sessions a little bit earlier
will start at
would start at eight thirty
starting on Wednesday how does
that sound so eight thirty on
Wednesday.
Well I had no idea there would
be as many questions today so
that's awesome but have a nice
rest of your Monday and Tuesday
we'll see you on Wednesday at
eight thirty.
Have a good one everybody.
