That invites chair here
chairman here will have a car
and all right thank you so we do
have a couple bills good morning
everybody I hope you're well
house memorial thirty two so
last week we did hear this bill
we won't be taking public
testimony or anything because we
did have a committee sub that
was talked about but never moved
causing tate
so we'll need to
pass the committee sub because
you are remember on the house
floor we voted on memorials as
being customary the past couple
years as a bundle so we could
not do the committee sub on the
house floor because it will be
part of a bundle the sponsor are
vice terrible zoom did not want
to have the original because
that's not what we had discussed
it was just by mistakes out with
that
madam bicycle.
I do not test.
I'll right thank you so we have
a motion for a do not pass on
house memorial thirty two but a
due pass on the house education
committee substitute for house
memorial thirty two second by
representative chat field we
have any discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
due pass motion seeing none
alright.
There was even quicker than I
thought mr chair that's great to
present a bill without seen
I I thought about it the fight
had crossed my mind
representative.
All right
okay so senate bill two thirty
nine since it went quicker than
we had expected wall I think
senator impose on her way as
well but.
The.
And so forward this we do have
an amendment but representative
if you would go through the bill
in then once you finish with the
bill we can move the amendment
for discussion all right so
this representative when you're
ready.
The.
Could morning mr chair and
committee i'm here we are hoping
that center
could him fill comes but
meanwhile I will start my expert
witness is vdhis narrows and
analysts with the senate finance
committee
this is senate bill two thirty
nine and we do have an amendment
and if you would present the
bill and then we can move the
amendment for discussion once we
will talk about it within the
context of the bill
thank you.
Okay at seventy two thirty nine
makes changes to the lottery and
the opportunity scholarship acts
the title just says lottery but
there's actual err some simple
but effective changes to the
opportunity scholarship actors
well it give students more
flexibility
in setting up their yearly
schedules over the fall winter
in summer
sessions well ensuring that the
fundamental guidelines are still
in place to set them up for a
success so looking at the
legislative lottery scholarship
in the bill has the changes to
the lottery scholarship followed
by the changes to the
opportunity scholarship it
changes the definition of full
time for determining eligibility
it adds three summer semesters
eligible for scholarship funding
which means that our students
can actually more quickly finish
their degrees it removes
references to legacy students
and I have forgotten what legacy
students are so done as it
removes credit our limits to the
semester prior to graduation so
if you need one course of three
units to finish but here to for
you are required to have six
credits you don't have to have
six credits if you only need to
recredits by changing the full
time definition and including
three eligible summer semesters
students are able to apportion
thirty credit hours between
three semesters every year that
they receive a scholarship money
at a four year college and a
portion twenty four quarter
credit hours between three
semesters at a two year college
every year so this this support
students who are struggling to
keep up with course work and
maintaining jobs as you know a
great number of our new mexican
students are juggling family
jobs and their education at the
same time the changes allow
those who want to make.
A thirty credit hour program and
spring and fall that they can do
that as well changes to the
opportunity scholarship which
focuses more on our students who
are twenty six years old who
aren't eligible for the lottery
scholarship include that if they
took dual credit courses and
high school that credit cap
doesn't apply to their tuition
scholarship it also means that
students with disabilities may
have their definition of full
time adjusted according to their
disability so it means a minimum
of six credit hours during the
fall and spring semesters and a
minimum of three credit hours in
this summer so removing the cap
on the dual credit hours allow
students to continue to earn
more credits after high school
towards their potential
batteries degree
that's the basic bill at this
time do you want me to talk
about what the amendment does or
do you want to pass out the
amendment yes so we do happen
amendment I believe it has been
passed out to members.
All right so we have emotion to
discuss the amendment to send a
bill to thirty nine second by
representative roller alright so
we're on the amendment
okay so the amendment which is
the two two eight three two oh
one has us six parts.
The amendment provides guard
rails to ensure a students are
successful with the new
flexibility.
By still providing a minimum of
credit hours for the fall in the
spring semesters it gives the
higher education department rule
making authority for summer
credit our minimums.
For programs that have specific
summer credit our minimum so
some programs may say you have
to take this much so higher
education can work with that it
includes a sunset provision to
ensure viability and I believe
that's in twenty twenty eight
and it removes the words in new
mexico
to return to the original
language that's for the
opportunity scholarship a
student who gets the opportunity
scholarship doesn't necessarily
have to be a new mexico graduate
lottery scholarship you do and
with that we stand for questions
all right so we're just on the
amendment folks so commons
question.
All right so
we have.
An adoption motion by
representative chat field was at
a question representing his.
All right so I hold off on the
motion representatives.
The way i'm understand to get mr
cheer and representative a
legacy student is one that their
parents have a tier to that
college that's why I understand
is somebody can correct
mr chair bugin have my expert
witness remind us what the
legacy is in this context.
Go into more detail on that
place miss german and represent.
I am sorry.
Further record step near the
three guest cabinet secretary
of the new mexico higher
education department and she
explained it perfectly but
essentially in twenty fifteen
when the funding was going down
for lottery scholarship the
legislature passed a definition
that the cohort of students from
twenty fourteen that were
lottery eligible were deemed
legacy students so it's an out
her outdated term that we're
just striking out now
missed chairman I do appreciate
that that explanation there.
And so anyway legacy students
has been removed from this
totally okay so we don't have to
worry about that anymore no and
let me see what was made of the
qu.
Mister chairman and
representative with the minimums
that are put on here it the way
i'm understanding this is these
dual credit classes can be
spread over the entire year not
just the two the false minister
the spring semester it's
balsomates just breaks minister
semmer is that correct mr chair
and representative the dual
credit pertains to high school
rights so this bill doesn't this
just says that if you were a
high school student who took
college classes that were dual
credit they did those credit
hours aren't counted in the
scholarships.
The.
Ha.
Okay I guess I was
mr chairman and representatives
that I was and i'm referencing
In the.
Applied to the the limits of
what credit hours they can tick.
They're starting over again in
other words.
Okay so it falls in line with
what a minimum forest trying to
do is that correct
too so anybody that is
attending.
A community college.
This is following three with
amendment number four I think I
see the sponsor the building
just came in second yes senator
if you w.
This determined thank you very
much whenever I was trying to
fill in here over the summary
and
the
analysis which did include the
amendments in it
and following along on the min
that three in the minimum forum
page six of the particular bill
I was under the assumption that
a college I mean the high school
credit could use.
The.
Let me see
their credit hours that they'd
already earned while they were
in high school to be spread over
that time
but I guess that's not the case.
Mr chair and representative they
can use those high school dual
credit hours towards the degree
they're pursuing but they would
have our but they can no as he
full time or part time college
student they can do their credit
hours anyway they want.
The.
So if they decide away until the
second year that they're in
college they can do that.
If they want to
mr charity of their completely
separate programs that's what
the her education secretary
rodriguez is reminding us
and mister chair and
representative the door credit
component states that the any
college credit received by high
school student through dual
credit shall not count toward
the credit our caps for the
opportunity scholarship okay and
where are you reading that
missed chairman and senator i'll
have my expert witness speak
also mister chair
so under the.
I'm sorry mr chair members of
the committee there is a limit
in credit hours that students
can currently take under the
opportunity scholarship and I
will reference that here very
quickly
and so now with this with this
bill we essentially
allow students to
start that minimum that they
have to take once they get to
high arm sorry when they get to
their undergrad program so any
credit hours they took in high
school will apply for their
program but the minimums that
were initially capped don't
apply any more is there
essentially getting a start over
with the minimums all their
credits still count and so
mister speaker and in
representative and center that
many members twelve hours is
that correct.
So mr chair and members of the
committee the minimum of twelve
hours that's for the lottery
scholarship
okay
thank you for making that
distinction for me now I get but
this is trying to say here is
kind of little bit confusing
mister terman that's all I have
thank you very much
I hope your use of mister
speaker doesn't for shatters up
later today
the rest of the session for that
matter representative we're
going to take terms okay
I was going to say demote me
like that I don't know
other questions on the
amendment.
All right so we did have a
motion to adopt the amendment by
represent chat field I think
it's second by represent me to
buy my sarany opposition to
adopting the amendment seeing
nine it's been amended and since
we have the sponsor senator if
you wish to give regard remarks
before we go to our audience
please.
Just mister cherry I believe
this is a bill that will provide
additional flexibility to
students and new mexico to help
provide them the flexibility and
support they need to be
successful obtaining higher ed
degree so that mister chair we
stand for questions thank you so
much so we'll go to our audience
those in support online for send
a bill to thirty nine as amended
please indicate by raising your
hand alright we'll start off to
marry him side those in sport of
center build thirty nine as
amended please please sir you
have up to two minutes welcome
yes
chairman marks another
interventional council
university presidents I
represent an executive director
in representative.
For this legislation also should
be amendment.
Graduate in progratuation rates
and so that we start for support
thinking
great thank you others on my
right hand side that we should
speak in sport.
Alright we'll go to my left hand
side those who wish to speak in
sport madame secretary you have
up to two minutes welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee I do want to note that
legislators came to the higher
education department is set we
need these types of things to
happen in the bill to make it
more flexible for a student so
that they can complete college
and attend so I do want to say
that the sponsors and other
legislators did work with the
higher education department in
the executive and we are fully
supportive of the spelled thank
you thank you all right sir you
have up to two minutes welcome.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee my name is jady
volinton speaking i'll be half
the green robert chamber
commerce supports said a bill
two thirty nine this though
makes positive changes that can
take full advantage of the
programs that we want them to it
clarifies important requirements
and grants our college students
meaningful flexibility like
counting credit requirements on
a per year basis can set a
person master making summer
semesters eligible for
scholarship coverage and this
built would hold our high school
students harmless for the dual
credit courses they may take
after all it shouldn't account
against them when they use do a
credit to get a had because
that's exactly the reason the
dual credit program was created
in the first place thank you
thank you others in the room
that was speaking support.
Will go to opposition is there
anybody online or in the room
that is opposed to senate bill
to thirty nine is amended
opposition.
All right see none will come to
committee committee comments
question concerns represent his
el
missed chairman got it right
that term thank you very much I
do have one question how
sustainable is this fund right
now.
Mr chair and representative
thank you for the question i'll
let my expert witness speak on
behalf of this fund
so uh mr chair and members of
the committee according to the
legislative finance committee
since the opportunity
scholarship already allows
students to take courses over
the summer
allowing students to do it
through the lottery scholarship
as well should not impact
have a vast impact but there is
a sunset provision so that we
could always return and see
whether this is still viable.
So mister chairman and
representative and senator
expert witness when is that
sounds it provisioned coming
about
is it less if I read I read a
day and the only twenty twenty
twenty eight twenty twenty eight
okay in mister chairman
see I guess that's all the
questions I have a do appreciate
that response
that's all thank you thank you
any other questions comments
concerns are representative
thank you mister chair thank
you.
The senator for bringing in this
bill
the part of that is because my
attention the mast is a do I
create
we always have a book for us to
take what credit in high school.
So once
the sunset is twenty twenty
eight.
The status
where high school in that year
i'm not going to be able to
participate in this or how is
going to be closer transition
when I have.
As to chair members of the
committee so at that time
legislators will come together
to determine whether
it is still viable if they if
it's still possible to move
forward with the provisions as
they stand in this spell think
you thank you mister share so we
will need to come back and
review this so does that the hop
rate is that my understanding.
Mr chair representative as far
as the policy is concerned
there's no sense that on this so
the policy that you prove today
will go to the house for final
adoption saying by the governor
and the policy will stay in
place the sense that actually
pertains to the distributions
for the sustainability of the
fun in the event that we do not
have enough money to cover
lottery or opportunity okay so
thank you mister charles so this
was twenty people to apply for
this program covered if and sat
available
mr chair they will automatically
receive funds for both programs
if they're high school graduates
or new mexico resident think
you're taking mister thank you
other questions from committee.
Alright so we have emotion pass
on senator two thirty nine is
amended by representative you
sell a second
and secretary for all time seek
if you call the room on the due
pass.
Yes.
Yes.
Right by a boat of eight thirty
ever do pass on senate bill two
three nine thank you all so much
all right members we never know
what will happen but or reset
subject to the call the chair
but thank you all thank you to
our staff thank you to you
members for being here
