Representative cap you.
Representative.
Representative.
We have.
All right thank you so good
morning everybody we have Senate
bill one forty this morning on
before we get started we are
expected to be on the floor at
nine o'clock so if we keep
things moving along very pointed
questions very pointed answers
and then same thing on the
attendees side when we go to the
attendees side please be brief
Brevity is the soul of which as
I always say in appreciate that
court so please.
Please be so cool without
further ado Representative
Garrett good morning welcome
Senate bill one forty please.
Morning Mr chair good morning
fellow members of the committee
I'm really honored to present
the opportunity scholarship Act
Senate bill one forty
the committee substitute because
I am an adult learner who
returned to school all US six
credits at a time and so this
this is something very special
to second here I've covered it
this expands opportunities in
higher education for especially
returning adults we still have
the lottery scholarship which is
fully funded for the next four
years but this scholarship
really is for adults people who
weren't eligible for the lottery
scholarship lost the lottery
scholarship
it benefits it simplifies the
financial aid and expands the
opportunity for our adult
learners people who are juggling
jobs and family working parents
people who started college and
did not finish how does that
work it covers all tuition and
fees for any New Mexican
resident rolled at a public or
tribal college or university
they can work towards training
certificates and associate's
degree or a first bachelor's
degree that only applies to
credit bearing courses they have
to maintain a two point five GPA
they have to be enrolled for at
least a six units
it allows students to enroll in
fall spring and summer again
they can't they can't have more
than eighteen credit hours.
It the the other key point to
understand it has to be in a
high need workforce area as
determined by data from the
department of workforce
solutions and concert with the
higher education department and
examples of these fields are
wind solar energy all the health
care professionals including
educators in the bills I T.
cybersecurity computer science.
All the stem courses
construction education social
workers there are present your
produce and translators.
We were the first state that
made the lottery scholarship for
students and I feel that this is
really important in.
Leading access to higher
education and career education
right here in New Mexico.
So with that up close for
questions I do have the
secretary of higher education
steep Rodriguez the director of
financial scholarships and
institutional financial
situations Dr Harrison Rommel
and I have the Senate finance
analysts Adriana this led to
answer questions that you may
have about the financing of this
act so Mister speaker I stand
for questions and my experts
will be available to answer all
your questions during this
recession great thank you so
much Representative welcome
madam secretary welcome Dr all
thank you for being here Mister
of the la so we will go to the
attendees side so those in
opposition to Senate bill one
forty please indicate there is
in your hands but opposition
first.
Position and.
All right so you have up to two
minutes but again.
Please be brief.
You have up to two minutes but
prefers better
Good morning opposition you have
up to two minutes welcome.
No I took my hand down Mr chair
I'm a supporter well well then
we're gonna vote you back then
Linda.
All right need to listen to
directions please if you would.
We'll go to support support
please.
Your support please indicate by
raising your hand since we
didn't have opposition.
A lot please be brief from
minister allowing you to speak.
Joseph you have up to two
minutes but prefers better.
Thank you Mr chair on behalf of
the council University presents
a which I chair and I'm we have
western New Mexico university we
stand in support of this bill
specifically we stand and
support because this bill unlike
the lottery benefits those
students who are older students
returning that single mom that
single dad who's going back to
school this allows them to get
that education and advances are
higher education abilities here
in the state of New Mexico as
well as our workforce we applaud
the governor we part of the the
legislature for those who have
state stood with us on this
particular bill for the
betterment of of New Mexicans
and with that Mr chair I know
there's a ton of people waiting
to speak and I yield my time to
all those others but I
understand the counts of
university presidents as well as
western New Mexico university is
strongly in support of this bill
great thank you.
Thanks bye okay good morning
welcome you have up to two
minutes please.
Good morning the honorable
Committee members packs Baca
from highlands university vice
president finance administration
cover locations I support the
this legislation and complement
the governor and all those
working on and then stab issued
a culture for higher education
thank you very much.
Right I appreciate the privative
NEA New Mexico which I think is
Steve Steve good morning up to
two minutes welcome good morning
Mr chairman members of the
committee ECCI is government
relations director for any New
Mexico and on behalf of our
members we appreciate the
sponsor for bringing for this
bill I'll be brief we fully
support the noble spirit of what
this bill is going to accomplish
in essence SB one forty provides
a solid pathway and economic
means for disadvantaged students
especially those working
families to go to college
succeed and contribute to the
growth of our state indeed this
bill has the power to touch the
future and shape it in a way
that will benefit all we do in
the voice is supported we
respectfully ask that you put in
favor this bill thank you great
thank you I appreciate the
brevity of Steve for all of
please president welcome to
minutes.
Yes thank you very much
committee members Mr chair want
to say that New Mexico tech
stand strongly in support of
this bill on behalf of all
students who would be able to
take advantage of this and with
that thank you very much all
right I appreciate it thank you
family good morning of its two
minutes please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Emily will die
with New Mexico voices for
children thank you to sponsors
and everyone who's worked so
hard to continue bringing
opportunity scholarship forward
we support this bill because our
students need this assistance
with their tuition particular
part time students and we love
that the support students
whether they're pursuing a
certificate associate's or
bachelor's degree many students
need to be part time so they can
take care of their own children
or other loved ones or simply to
work enough hours to pay for the
other costs attendance like food
and housing so this financial
aid is is really beneficial to
help increase lifetime earning
of our students and ultimately
brings in more tax revenue for
the state as our graduates can
earn more income so for these
reasons and others Mexico was
for children is in support of SB
one forty we asked the
recommended passing thank you.
Right thank you.
Warning Patrice up to two
minutes please.
You may be muted but your time
is going please.
Patrice going once twice.
We'll go to Becky good morning
thank you have a two minutes but
prefers better welcome.
Thank you Mr chair for my I
needed now finally you're a
needed now.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
miss Becky rally I'm present of
Santa Fe community college and
chair of the New Mexico
independent community colleges
both of these entities support
SB one are at that the bill
completely that opportunity
scholarship we're especially
grateful for the inclusion of
certificates the we're noticing
more workforce certificates are
helping our students and we
appreciate the secretaries
working altar staff on this work
so we just want to express our
appreciation thank you great
thank you all right John good
morning sun will come up to two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you
today Armstrong power
presentation in Mexico
university across well and also
the president of the New Mexico
it's really a community colleges
we stand behind this legislation
and appreciate the secretary and
governor's work in the
legislation that's gone before
this to allow increase access to
higher education for New
Mexicans and assist the
statement critical workforce
needs thank you.
Thank you all right.
Welcome back up to two minutes
please.
Thank you Mr chair Linda saying
on a long time board member of
the Santa Fe community college
and I also represent all the
nursing groups and this is an
incredible opportunity to bring
older students back into the net
into college and into the
nursing profession so on behalf
of all those nurses that are
going to be starting school
because we just committed
fifteen million dollars to go to
all the schools of nursing to
expand the number of students
they can think this is going to
be a golden opportunity.
we supported.
Thank you fourteen good morning
mark thank.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Matt Damon and I'm speaking on
behalf of central New Mexico
community college as their
policy liaison CNN strongly
supports this bill as it will
truly be transformative for
community college students and
their families in Mexico this
piece of legislation will have a
significant impact on our dollar
winners will compromise the
majority of our certificate and
degree seeking student
population thank you great thank
you might think so nine.
Earnings and I have welcome.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is not
a good idea and then the
internet New Mexico Dream Team
to New Mexico highlands
university is important that our
community has an opportunity to
attend college if they want to
just be one forty will help
financially assist future
students thus creating more
professionals in our state many
students do not attend college
because of financial burdens
financial burden second follow
us throughout that through the
rest of our lives I strongly
encourage you all to vote yes on
SB one forty an awful all
students in New Mexico a helping
hand thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee great
thank you so much
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Amanda name here with the New
Mexico Dream Team many of our
community members unfortunately
did not get the privilege early
on to see college as an option
for them I myself was a first
generation college student top
of the many difficulties I had
entering higher education the
biggest hardship of the mall was
finding the sufficient money to
pay for my classes the
opportunity scholarship has it
in the name opportunity
opportunity for everybody an
opportunity for those who might
call maybe having considered the
option yet it is a striking to
me to see just how many people
would love the opportunity to go
to school one only focus on the
classes and not the financial
burden that this might cost them
New Mexico can use this
opportunity feel in those job
gaps that the state has with SB
one forty let's give everybody
the opportunity to contribute to
the state and vote yes on this
legislation today thank you.
Thank you president Stokes.
Morning president welcome.
Mr chair and members of the
committee you know we value and
believe in the value of the
various degrees available in
higher education and the data
are really clear about the
importance of the degree
completion so we support this
effort to make access to earn
higher education credentials
greater for all New Mexicans we
know that financial barriers
remain the most serious issues
for higher education learners so
we are grateful to the executive
and the secretary for their
support and access to higher
education in New Mexico thank
you.
It thank you Philippe at.
Good morning briefly please
running chairman and members of
the committee my name is Philip
Benedict S. on part of the New
Mexico Dream Team where
statewide you let organization I
went to college from twenty
fourteen and twenty eighteen it
was definitely because some of
the largest ownership that I was
able to do that after that they
start working in the nonprofit
which is what I do now that
serves Gen people around the
state I definitely want to
have enough here to west of the
participants in any of going to
college in New Mexico and I know
the person responsible and what
by that that access to add some
more people than
In our state and so I hope to
support the bill and Melinda
just on that I'm just before any
I mean just the one point great
thank you.
Barbara.
Good morning Barbara please.
Warning this is Dr barber Medina
president of northern New Mexico
community college of our legacy
campus no right the and our main
campus in Espanola I'm I'm here
today to offer my strong support
for the opportunity scholarship
I thank you chair and members of
the committee for your kind
consideration we thoroughly
believe that northern that we
are the door to the future for
our students and our community
and we think the secretary for
her leadership in this we also
appreciate it the executive
leadership as well.
Thank you for
all right thank you present.
Right Tony.
Good morning Tony.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Tony Pendergrass and I'm the
president of San Juan college
the language in this bill would
allow for award funding to
provide be provided during the
summer terms by allowing awards
during a full academic year fall
spring and summer our students
would be able to stay enrolled
on uninterrupted and keep
focused on completion this would
shorten most students time to
degree and provide earlier
entrants into the workforce
Furthermore this scholarship
focuses on degrees and credit
bearing certificates in high
need workforce areas which is a
key part of our mission the bill
would also allow for an appeal
of mitigating circumstances for
award continuance rather than
termination of the award based
on a single performance or
outcome this can be considered
as an equity measure as a great
number of community college
students are first generation or
come from under represented
groups that are more negatively
affected by financial and
economic downturns or life
circumstances that may cause
them to pause their education
for term before returning
in conclusion this bill delivers
increase access to higher
education to our residents here
in New Mexico by increasing the
affordability of a college or
university credential thank you.
Thank you president.
W. secretary Perea Warniment
good morning.
Good morning Mr chair thank you
for your time committee W.
secretary Bennett Warniment on
behalf of the Public Education
Department and in partnership
with our sister agency we stand
in strong support of this thank
you.
Thank you
Robert good morning Robert.
Please briefly.
My immediate you are in muted in
your time they going please
thank you good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee
my name is Robert Martin and I'm
president of the us to reckon
the arts in Santa Fe New Mexico
and.
I'm speaking on behalf of not
only do is to marketing arts our
students but the other three
colleges tribal colleges here in
New Mexico
is is you know this would
increase access so we standards
strong support of SB one forty
and up many of our students are
are not.
First time students they've
they've been rolled before
they're older the average age is
about twenty five and Committee
of of our students of course
faced financial challenges and
and or or with families and and
single parents and so this bill
would really support not only
our students and tribal colleges
but maybe students across the
state so thank you very much for
years your support of SB one
forty.
Thank you.
Edward please.
All.
And we're good morning welcome
please briefly.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee Edward Martinez
presented to Luna community
college hi I'm here speaking on
behalf of not only that Luna
community college and myself as
a supporter of of my institution
but also the students from the
rural areas
I first had no how important
something like this is for rural
students in a rural northern New
Mexico I I was in a
nontraditional student myself
and I have family obligations
had many other types of
obligations including try to
keep a job so that I could
support myself and my family to
go to school and so something
like this would have been very
beneficial for for me at that
time and so I know first hand
how important something like
this and the support opportunity
scholarship provides for
nontraditional students students
that are struggling to keep a
job in our rural areas where
jobs don't come easy so I just
want to thank everyone for their
hard work put in this bill
forward and and I am in strong
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you Karen.
Please Karen briefly.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
getting down by and I am here
with the New Mexico Dream Team
like many have already said
unfortunately a lot of our
committee members do not see
college as an option due to
financial burdens I was the
first college student myself but
due to financial hardship I had
to cut my study short this all
reality for many of our students
in our state are are you all to
say yes on SB one forty and help
all of those students would just
need a little extra help and
extra questions that the state
can find thank you.
Thank you.
Sure.
Good morning treat I have a two
minutes welcome.
You may be muted trade.
Chair Romero and house Education
Committee members thank you for
your work and then the Mexico
legislature to provide funding
to support students in higher
education I am sure the Martinez
brought us from Westchester
currently this is a business
unit that's non and I work
directly with the first year
students here and that was that.
My commitment to the success of
our students is highly dependent
on scholarships to give access
to those without resources The
New Mexico opportunity
scholarship paves the way as the
first that academic journey and
many more New Mexicans will
benefit from continued funding I
humbly ask for you to vote for
Senate bill one forty thank you.
Thank you.
thank you.
Care and we heard from you.
Yes you have cool thank you
place it in your hand.
Please our energy it's good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and the
director of governmental affairs
for the associated students of
New Mexico State University and
on behalf of the NMSU student
body we express our support of
Senate bill one forty towards
the betterment of our students
and we just ask you to please
vote yes on this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you for the privative Dan.
Dan good morning welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee we are
it I'm Dan our reserve chancer
New Mexico State University and
we at New Mexico state whether
with our students are in strong
support of the of this
legislation the data suggests to
us that when a student has both
the lottery and a Pell grant
that outcomes are much better we
fully expect that with adding
the of the opportunity
scholarship financial aid that
those student outcomes will be
much better for our at risk and
underserved students to extend
some support and thank you for
the opportunity state I thank
you chancellor Charles good
morning Charles.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am the
president of Clovis Community
College on behalf of myself and
along with all the supporters
for one to have said I want to
add that about seventy percent
of New Mexican college students
part time in community college
and this bill will help at all
you all to support I'm not
supported thank you thank you
president.
Call in.
Good morning calling.
Okay.
You hear me chair Romero we can
now welcome awesome thank you
on a wheelchair and house
committee members my name is Dr
Colin Bowman I'm the provost of
Navajo technical university the
opportunity scholarship provides
access to higher education for
our students in certificate and
degree programs that are
necessary in order to fulfill
the workforce needs in our state
and in our four corners area we
look at this opportunity to help
our students who are wanting to
be part time struggling to meet
the needs of their families and
and continue that dream to have
a college education Navajo
technical university stands in
strong support of Senate bill
one forty thank you.
Thank you doctor.
Eduardo.
Good morning and one of the
welcome.
Earning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is a little
bit a lot of those commitments I
listened with the New Mexico
Dream Team I graduated from UNM
in twenty eighteen and my degree
took me six years to complete
one of the reasons was because
of the challenge of finding
sufficient financial eight this
bill would help to complete my
degree with an ease financial
burdens New Mexico students need
to support and I believe it is
necessary to continually invest
in our higher education and so I
ask you all to please vote yes
on SB one forty thank you great
thank you what about.
to mark good morning mark
briefly.
Morning Mr chairman members the
committee I just with and with
the executive director of the
council members present I just
wanted a couple of really quick
points within the bills that I
think it needs to be aware of
this bill does take goes from
for scholarships to two
scholarships and makes it a lot
easier for students to apply for
and for institutions to manage
secondly that one of the one of
the the problems we have are off
schools that students have with
the lottery is that they're
required take fifteen credit
hours a semester in a lawsuit
cannot meet that demand so what
this bill allows students take
it during the summer so improved
graduation rate time is great
but it also still can't take
those three credit hours Santa
for spring and they have to take
only twelve they can make that
up in the summer and that's
really important for the
students and I just want to also
point out the fact that the
council worked closely with the
secretary on the substitute bill
and and I really appreciate the
funding that that's been
recommended by the less that
finance committee House
Appropriations finance committee
and the Senate finance committee
that provides substantial amount
of money for this for the this
culture and lottery thank you Mr
chairman members committee and
sponsor brings forward and madam
secretary thank you
thank you.
Stephanie good morning Stephanie
welcome.
Good morning thank you hi good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is are
just some of that and I am the
northern New Mexico field
organizer with the New Mexico
Dream Team today I'm here and
will support of SB one forty I
had to drop out of college defer
to financial burdens I wish I
had that opportunity to finish
school but it can be very
expensive and only help that we
would be able to get would be
through scholarships but even at
that they can be very difficult
to obtain I know that there's
many students with similar
stories to money I also know
other students who may have to
do the same thing as me because
of four nine financial burdens I
think it's time we give our
students an opportunity to be
able to continue their college
career or to be able to go back
and finish their college career
I urge you all to vote yes on SB
one forty million hundreds of
students in New Mexico are all
counting on you thank you so
much.
Thank you Meredith.
Good morning briefly please.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
for all of your hard work
I hope I don't need where
your support for for help with
very this the committee
department one of the most
important we Mexico
second grade F. one are going to
current form what Kahneman
help rid your current job R. I
urge you on behalf of a hearing
governor New Mexico the legal
one voter New Mexico and that
the need to consider thank you
so much for all your work thank
you.
Yes compliance counsel
governments please briefly.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Raul
Rodriguez the third high and the
regional planner for the eastern
plains council of governments.
I'm I would strongly I'm like to
voice my support for this bill
Senate bill one forty for the
opportunity scholarship act
like a lot of the previous
speakers here I had to drop out
of school because of financial
burden on and trying to get back
into it has just been.
Such a difficult difficult
difficult road I would I am they
tend thing youngest child of the
New Mexico farmer came up out of
poverty and now I am working
with the government thank god
almighty has blessed me with
such a great job but I.
Really would like to have a
great education and you know go
into the path that I feel would
very much benefit society in New
Mexico along with this bill I
believe.
Just all all people all citizens
of New Mexico will benefit and
once they do so well our economy
so well.
All our education system so well
everything else that is just so
anyone stand everything that
this bill will help with thank
you so much for your time and
letting me speak may god bless
you.
You.
When a good morning welcome.
Yeah that's a on a wheel chair
Romeo and how's Education
Committee members my name is
leaning Largo I am totally in
this eight oh DG buses Jean she
the subject Division LA thank
you for providing me with that
New Mexico opportunity
scholarship the funding has
given me access to higher
education and level technical
university to earn a degree in
nursing a college education is
expensive and scholarship
support definitely reduces the
financial stress associated with
obtaining a degree I am one of
the forty one students the into
you into you who have received
the New Mexico opportunity
scholarship and I am a strong
supporter of Senate bill one
forty and staff.
Thank you.
Kerry good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee cherry robin
grounder registered lobbyists
and not expired schools network
we are a network of schools
across the state that work with
leaders in indigenous
communities to create and
sustain schools that are focused
on college preparedness while
also ensuring students are
secure in their language culture
and identity we view the
opportunity scholarship and the
legislation in front of you
today as an important investment
in our communities that can lead
to transformational change for
our families and for the
individuals who may not be on a
traditional track through the
lottery scholarship and our
state we are so very grateful
for the sponsors for bringing
this forward and know that even
in economic downturns when our
state invests in the education
of its citizens we can never
take that education back it's
something that our people will
have for the rest of their lives
and we urge a do pass today
thank you so much Mr chairman.
I'm just.
Welcome briefly please.
Hello good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee and on
the system then I am with the
New Mexico Dream Team I was what
was by support for SB one forty.
to me education should be a
right now Rep which will soon
with those of money I urge you
all to vote yes on SB one forty
thank you all right thank you S.
manner.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you my name is
Sam mentor of the president New
Mexico highlands university I've
been here about six and a half
years I love my tenure here at
intimate you and Mexico what a
great place to live and work but
I am more excited about this
particular piece of legislation
that I have been us really since
I've been here in in regard to
hire it this has the potential
to really move us ahead
nationally serve so many more
students I implore members of
the committee to vote
affirmatively for this we've
worked hand in hand shoulder to
shoulder with secretary rod
Regus it's been a case study of
collaboration were there let's
get this done I urge you to vote
yes thank you very much.
Right.
Please briefly.
yes I'm sure we don't have a
certification committee members
my name is kisha hardware I am
and you can initially but then
the bus team come on Mr chair
naked ambition or obtaining a
degree in instrumentation go to
scholarships as well but in the
end of the PC Mexico and I will
never take million officially
without one in the animal
between the scholarship I will
be able to take steps to reach
middle aged to vote early for
Senate bill one forty to help me
and in New Mexico students make
their goal become a reality
thank you right thank you.
Right.
I don't see anybody else in the
attendees sign.
So we will come to our panel
Representative Sweetser please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for bringing the
bill and thank you to the many
many people who commented I I
don't disagree with a single
thing that was that I I think
it's an important investment in
New Mexico I think the potential
is undeniable but I have some
questions one of the things that
when I came up here I thought
and I even spoke in my community
that this is a red flag was to
put nonrecurring funds into
recurring initiatives and.
Yes get New Mexico into an
economic by the end so.
I try as you know Mr Chesterman
has appropriation I try not to
bring the probation bring into
this spring but this bill is not
going to appropriations so I
just have some questions I would
like to ask each of our sponsors
so
Mr chair Representative you
started out by saying the
lottery is fully funded for the
next four years my question is
is this opportunity scholarship
fund fully funded for the next
four years.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for that
important question I'm going to
ask the secretary and the Senate
finance analysts to reply to
that question.
Mr chair Representative Sweetser
so there is a sixty three
million dollar nonrecurring
appropriation as you noted in a
twelve million dollar recurring
appropriation additionally with
the collapse of the financial
aid programs we're looking at
twenty one million dollars
Houston on additional three
point five million from the
legislative and down so that
will give us a little bit of a
head start next year and then we
can also review the demand and
need and find another
recommendations even next year.
So thank you for them thank you
madam secretary Mr chair I think
that's my my where my concern
right so we have twelve million
dollars in recurring revenue
which and then in house bill two
which is already passed the
house and the Senate and and is
now in can in conference for
concurrence she bears sixty
three million non recurring we
actually left the house with
fifty three million the Senate
but ten million more ten million
they took from lottery by the
way input into opportunities so
so twelve million recurring
twelve million we've budgeted
for sixty three million is where
our question is and and I agree
with the secretary that we have
twenty one million that went
using that's again one time
money so so I have some other
questions one of them
Representative you when in your
opening comments you also said
that that that
Participants had to take six
units so two classes typically
to keep this going but up to how
many units at this this
scholarship would pay for up to
how many units for students.
Mr chair and representative I in
the current bill it well done.
I believe it is up to and
correct me if I'm wrong madam
secretary.
Units is that correct for an
associate's and a hundred and
sixty.
Excuse me a hundred and sixty
four eight BA and the thinking
behind that if someone for
example started college ten
years ago but now they want to
become a nurse they're going to
have to make up classes in the
sciences so it is unlikely that
people would use that however it
allow it prevents them from not
being able to achieve one of the
high need well paying job
careers.
Thank you for that Mr chair so
what is a typical bachelor's
degree how many hours if I may.
Mr chairman and.
Representative typically a
hundred and twenty although
people do it because this looks
at the high need the stamina
health areas it can take for a
due to the nature of those but
typically a hundred and twenty
four bachelors typically sixty
for dissociates with many people
going to two year programs at
our.
Community colleges the nursing
programs can often be quite
beyond sixty units right so
Mister chair I think that's
another one of my concerns is a
typical degree is a hundred
twenty hours this would pay for
up to a hundred and sixty that's
a lot more than a typical degree
each so and I agreed with the
flexibility you know I taught at
WNMU Deming I know returning
students bring credits but
they're moving but even if they
were starting at Blanca hundred
and twenty inch which should get
them to where they are so so
that's one of my things I think
we ought to look at is how you
know the hundred and sixty the
six hours you know students
could be in school for a long
time taking six hours and I get
working parents can't take more
than six and I I think it's
incredibly valuable Mr chair to
be able to fund help for working
parents who are returning to
school that's what I think is
transformational in that so when
I came up here I thought we need
to look at this one time money
and make it transformational for
New Mexico that's what this is
doing but we also need to look
at recurring expenses and non
recurring money and that's also
what this is doing and that's
where my flags come in so I know
other people answer questions
and I know our time is short but
but what I would like to know is
if we don't pass this bill that
six as seventy five million is
in house bill two so what
happens if this bill doesn't
move forward and that seventy
five million is there do you
know Representative Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
going to do for to my
expert witnesses to answer that.
Mr chair representative I stand
it's a great question so the
concerned with passing this
would just agency to language in
the language is focused on
associate degrees Credit
variances.
It also doesn't have that safety
lever workforce oriented
certificate and adicional E. it
would find it would require us
to use opportunity funds before
using any lottery funds in the
house bill two language why is
this important it has those
letters in there so we have the
qualification criteria.
everything that you need and we
have agreed to at the
legislature in coordination with
our office which I think is a
great.
So thank you for that and and
that is a good answer I guess my
point being.
It.
Again we're looking at putting
nonrecurring revenue into a
recurring program which and if
we kept it at with the language
of house bill two then we've got
two year and and workforce areas
Covered for more than.
Three years is what I'm told by
the analysts up maybe after four
years which gives us more time
to come up with recurring
sources to pay for these
associate and credit workforce
area would you cut credit
bearing certificates which I
think is really valuable it
gives us time I'm told and and
you made that a really good
point Representative Garrett Mr
chair that.
Probably all of this money will
not be used in one year a
potentially it could and then we
will set students up for four
Year programs and beyond as we
said without the money to pay
for them when they come back and
so that there in lies my concern
if we leave it with the wording
in house bill two as madam
secretary so eloquently said it
will be for for credit bearing
certificates and associates and
the money will go a little bit
further so with that I think
I've expressed all of my
concerns Mr chair I'm gonna turn
it over for my colleagues to ask
more questions I'm sorry we
don't have more time on this
bill because I do think it's
transformational I also do think
it's concerning thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser Sir or Representative
Roybal Caballero please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and thank you
secretary
Mr chair for a very long time
and that my entire life I've
been a strong proponent of I I
advocate for free community
college always have with
pathways to.
Excuse me to higher education
and so it's very important for
me to see this through I want to
make a couple of COVID yes the
question and then when the
public make a motion Mr chair so
my question is am hearing and I
agree with Representative suites
are one of the concerns and that
yes this is the question how is
it that we can or are is there a
plan to leverage what are funds
are with and align them with the
the pipe US department of
education and how are we going
to tap into the resources
available through the department
I know one to the New.
Federal administration there's
no huge our new approach in the
department of the N. and
supporting efforts such as this
nationwide because as we all
know and as the title of the
bill connotes opportunity to
higher education pathways to
skills and training and all the
other components that we just
spoke about that would elevate
our families and bring our
families back into training and
education is what we're focused
on so I I'm interested in
knowing because it in the if
we're concerned about recurring
and non recurring
then this is a perfect
opportunity for us to be able to
use whatever it nonrecurring
there is to leverage increase so
that we're making an investment
and we're seeing obviously a
return on investment but we're
also seeing five year
grants and and other types of
leveraging on in in the in the
pipeline as well so I yes
secretary perhaps could
addresses I would appreciate it
Mr chair.
Mr chair if the secretary can
briefly addressed that.
Mr chair yes the U. S.
department of education has
procreation at State executive
offices of higher education to
start looking to create some
sort of infrastructure for
tuition free college in the two
year sector which we are trying
to DO and expand eligibility
what would happen is once cost
at the federal level they would
find a match to the state in
which that will slowly start to
decrease our dependence on state
funds for the two year
secretary.
That's exactly what I was
looking for flight crew we do
appreciate you continuing and
encourage you to use every
opportunity possible to tap into
those pipelines thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman interested
real and with me on the floor so
I'm gonna go out in the give of
my time so that we can the take
a voting going to the next one
thank you for recognizing them
structure.
I appreciate Representative Baca
workers representatives will
Trujillo please.
Thank you as you saw I was a
little preoccupied but she's
adorable anyway I wanted to make
a pass and I know that the
justice said that but Mr chair.
Okay so I'm talking to.
Okay for now Representative Lane
please.
Thank you Mr chair are.
Given the.
The time crunch I I want to ask
you questions I just just as a
general policy I mean obviously
run this this committee cares
deeply about education both K.
through twelve was higher at.
but my my concerns with the way
the bills drafted is is I don't
think it's good policy to use
taxpayer dollars to subsidize
the higher education of wealthy
people so the way the bills
written for example I can make
half a million a year.
And still be eligible for the
scholarship
I don't think that's right I
think if you can for college you
should pay for it and so that's
from an thank you.
Great thank you so much so I had
to do passed motion from
Representative Trujillo I think
Representative Roybal Caballero
with on a second at seventeen.
Our.
I was hoping to make the bill
passed motion that sorry but you
ask questions and our service
for member who had I will give
you the second representative
robocop and madam secretary if
you would call the roll please
Senate to pass motion Senate
bill one forty.
I do have concerns will yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Okay.
Representative dial.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Rafal
continental.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser.
No.
Representative Trujillo.
Absolutely.
Representative.
Representative vice chair
Garrett yes.
Chairman yes.
Seven two three if they do pass
all right so you have the I do
pass on Senate bill one forty.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
Thank you so much reading vice
chair and secretary Dr Rommel.
Mr Abela thank you so much for
being here.
Right all right on.
I don't know in let's see so Dr
Perea Warniment if you would
raise your hand I'm in I don't
know yes Senator Stewart was
going to be here or if I was
going to be putting it on.
Okay that's fine.
For either just double checking
to make sure okay.
In.
All right.
So madam vice chair if you would
please take over I lost you on
my square.
We lost you okay I'm
Representative Sweetser would
you mind taking over the chair.
Not at all Mr chair thank you
and please proceed with your all
right thank you madam chair good
morning everybody so Senate bill
two forty three is
Want to say some fix supper
cleanup work from
Last year if you remember we
passed the family income index I
forget the bill number but it
was Senate Bill passed off the
floor with a lot of support and
basically there was a provision
in the bill that was on school
districts that were awarded
family income index money had to
use it
three different ways and for
three different categories this
is getting rid of those three
different categories that school
districts felt were constraining
the use of those funds so to
free up those funds for
programming that'll work to get
that money flowing to students
this is the correction for some
of those issues so I have to
drive Perea Warniment as an
expert here but that is just a
Senate bill two forty three
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and we
will go to the audience briefly
because we are due on the floor
at nine o'clock and I can't see
those affirmative.
Cannon you Mr chair to pull the
man but let's start with people
who are have
input to offer in opposition so
let's start with the opposition
if you would please raise your
hand and Mr chair will recognize
you.
We have any in opposition we
don't madam chair all right
again briefly E. those in favor
of these changes if you would
raise your hand and we will take
your input again.
Or anyone in favor so it's lily
may.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the Education Committee I'm
and madam chair excuse me I'm
sorry about that
I will be here she's the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
and I quickly want to thank you
all members for an appreciate
the opportunity to speak and
voice New Mexico school boards
positions on different issues
throughout the session I want to
thank this committee for all
your hard work and thank each of
you members for your dedication
of education and speaking to the
bill madam chair The New Mexico
scored Association supports this
legislation removes restrictive
language it opens up
opportunities to some provides
more flexibility and includes
services to expand approved
career technical education or
work based learning for students
Mexico school boards association
wholeheartedly supports this
legislation and thank senator
start thank you madam chair.
Thank you lily may.
All right any after we make.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Steve stands
government relations director
bring a New Mexico.
And on behalf of our members we
we appreciate the sponsor bring
the spill and we stand support
and all of our members we also
want to thank all the members of
this committee your time.
Ation and hard.
Thank you for what you do for
public schools for students.
We value and appreciate all of
you.
What's is supported respectfully
ask that you vote in favor of
this bill which is.
Thank you Steve.
Heather.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and we support the
changes to the family income
index and we look forward to
continuing to study this pilot
and what it's teaching us about
high poverty schools thank you.
Thank you heather.
Madam chair all right thank you
and thank you audience for being
brief as you if your input will
go to committee now and we'll
start with Representative Baca.
Service thank.
Ushers of Bill
we will be having trouble
hearing you referenced.
I have done my headset are you
I look to this bill and I think
for you know I'm gonna go ahead
make a motion for do passed on
this so this bill.
All right I'll hold your motion
for just a minute but I don't
see any other hands if anyone
else would like to offer input
or ask questions from the
committee going once.
Going twice all right
Representative Baca with the two
passed away in the second also.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero if you would you know
I think this is one is there
anyone in opposition to this
motion.
I see no what in opposition
Mister chair and and Senator
Stewart you have it you pass on
Senate bill two forty three
thank you madam chair thank you
members not there.
Two three.
Some of it.
You know eight we got it cool
thank you madam chair thank you
committee so I think that
concludes the work of the
committee I want to thank you
all for your hard hard work I
know it was early mornings one
weekend after a very long floor
session ended early morning
today which I think this is the
first time we've had at least
and I chaired a meeting during
the final week of the session
but I appreciate your diligent
work and I look forward to you
all in us working in the interim
and then all coming back and re
convening for the next
legislative session thank you to
Linda and Molly are Canadian and
US secretary Rachel and Mary are
committee analysts are majority
minority analysts Joey with
legislative education study
committee thank you Jody thank
you to the staff of the
legislative education study
committee for all of your hard
work Dr Hawker are interim
director and everybody that was
able to it and our meeting
certainly the public education
department Dr Stein house
secretary a Perea Warniment
Johnson and the staff of the
Public Education Department
everybody that would come and
make public comment so thank you
all so much and we'll see you
all on the floor and affirmative
thank you all so much have a
nice rest of your day take care
everybody.
And everything.
