July.
here.
Representative Marribal Moya
representative for ball
Caballero.
Present
Representative Collins.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
representative Vincent.
Vice chair Garrett here.
German.
We have a course.
Right. Good morning, folks. So
we'll start off with
Representative Brown, has Bill
473, please.
Good morning, Mr.
I do have house Bill 473. It
relates to school security
personnel.
Um, Mr. Chairman, we know that
we have a shortage of school
security personnel.
And what this bill would do is
add a category called assistant
school security personnel.
The Level 1 and level 2, and in
those categories, these
individuals would not be
authorized to carry a firearm on
school premises.
Uh, the bill, um, would, um,
have the level 3, and this would
be an officer who is, uh,
there's mandatory training but
basically we're adding another
amount which would make it
easier to positions.
Um, my expert witness is Doctor
Schools.
Um, I, uh, worked on this bill
at his request, and I'm gonna
turn this over to him now, Mr.
Chairman, so he can give you
some background information and
um I think he'll really make a
compelling case for why I give
you Doctor Washburn.
Please welcome Superintendent.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for
your time and your commitment to
education and to school safety,
uh, you apparently didn't get
the memo, uh, today is National
Wear Blue Day. I notified the
superintendents of Hobbs and
Artesia, but they wouldn't send
a memo out to their staff to do
that, um, so the legislation you
have before you today as a
result of a multi-year effort by
Carlsbad Municipal Schools to
strengthen school safe school
security in response to the
growing threat of violence.
in schools across our state and
nation throughout this process,
we engaged our community through
community public meetings,
gathering input from parents,
educators and law enforcement
officials to develop a
comprehensive approach to
prioritizing students and staff
safety as part of this effort,
we have made significant
security upgrades, secure
vestibules are in place in
nearly all of our elementary and
middle schools and all new
construction includes bullet
resistant glass and secure.
entry points
We are also actively replacing
non-bullet resistant glass in
older buildings to meet the same
safety standards.
a partnership with the city of
Carlsbad, we secured a cop's
grant to fund 6 additional
school resource officers
contributing 300,000 annually
for 5 years out of our operating
budget. In addition, we hired
additional school security
personnel prioritizing retired
law enforcement officers and
structured a salary scale that
provides additional compensation
for certified armed security
staff.
However, this is where we
encountered a critical issue
that this legislation seeks to
correct.
Several retired Eddy County
Sheriff's Department and Eddy
County Correctional Department
members joined our security
team.
Believing they met the
qualifications to serve as armed
security officers under our
district's pay scale.
Many of these individuals had
previously been certified to
carry firearms had served as
firearms instructors or were
even part of SWAT teams.
They were highly trained, highly
decorated, and most importantly,
deeply committed to connecting
with and protecting our
students. Unfortunately, current
law prevent prevented them from
carrying firearms on campus
because they had not attended
the state police academy. As a
result, we lost highly qualified
personnel due to an unintended
consequence of an otherwise
wealth, well-meaning law.
Additionally, all other security
staff without prior law
enforcement.
experience were willing to
undergo rigorous training to
become certified, but no pathway
existed for them to do this.
This legislation provides a
structured, comprehensive
training and certification
process to ensure that qualified
individuals can serve as school
armed security personnel.
does not lower standards, it
enhances them.
By allowing districts across the
state to access highly trained
individuals committed to
protecting students. I urge you
to support this legislation.
It's not just about Carl's bath.
It is about ensuring that every
district in New Mexico has
access to well-trained security
personnel dedicated to keeping
schools safe induration.
So, Mr. Chairman, um, I, I
appreciate Doctor Washburn
giving you the uh the summary of
the bill, uh, we're in the
private investigations Act where
we make some amendments to allow
for this new category of
personnel, and again, I want to
emphasize.
Mr. Chairman, that um there are
rigorous, uh, so we, we think
this bill is very consistent
with um what we really need to
have in our schools as far as uh
security personnel. So we'll
stand up for questions, Mr.
Chair.
Great. Thank you all so much for
the presentation. So we'll go to
folks in our audience, um, folks
on Zoom, if you wish to speak in
support of House Bill 473,
please indicate by raising your
hand.
that populate, folks in the
room, if you're here in support
of House Bill 473, would you
please indicate by raising your
hand.
All right, so if you line up
behind our presenters. Remember
folks, you'll have 2 minutes, up
to 2 minutes, please do not be
repetitive, but please 2 minutes
talking,
Mr. Chairman, good morning. Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents Association.
The coli of educational leaders,
we stand in strong support of
this bill.
As Gary indicated, this is a
real world issue.
As a practitioner myself as a
superintendent for 27 years.
These are the kinds of options
that districts must have.
This is a clarification law that
needs to occur in this
legislation stands to improve,
we believe, the security in our
schools.
Great. Thank you so much.
Anybody else wish to speak in
support?
Right, so we'll go to our
audience again, those in
opposition on Zoom to House Bill
473, and if you wish to speak,
please indicate by raising your
hand.
Folks in our audience, if you
are here to speak in opposition
to House Bill 473, please
indicate by raising your hand.
They don't have anybody.
So will come to committee,
committee folks, represent
Vincent, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Brown.
Just a couple of clarifying
questions. So these, they will
not work for the police
department. They'll work for the
schools. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Vincent, so, um, currently some
of the personnel, this would
actually, I mean,
Allow the school district
we have school security
personnel that are uh
Working for Carlsbad Municipal
schools, uh, this bill would
enable those folk armed
personnel, currently the we have
Um
two members of our security
staff that have been through the
State Police Academy, uh, but we
lost 5.
We absolutely.
Incredible people we needed, the
SROs and those two officers are
the only ones that are currently
armed on staff.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. So our, or do
they work for the schools or do
you contract them through a
private security company. They
work for the schools they're
part, they're part of our
operating budget.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Will each school would each
school have a, like in my
district, I've got one SRO.
And he covers multiple schools.
So he might be at the high
school, then he might go over to
a middle school and then he
might run through the elementary
school.
Were these people be at is there
gonna be people at each
individual school.
Under our model that we would
have an armed person at every
building, either an SRO or a
school security officer. Right
now we have a total of 9 SROs
that are divided out across 12.
schools, uh, we have one that
starts on the south end of town
and covers elementary schools
and one that starts on the north
end of town and covered and, and
they cross each other during the
day. The others are assigned to
schoolspecific schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I look forward
to supporting this.
ge.
Uh, thanks, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative and thank
you, Superintendent. It's good
to see you again. Um,
Obviously they have to have a
background check.
Right.
OK
Yes, that is correct, Mr. Chair
Represented Garrett.
And Mr. He, then I'm reading on
line one on page 5.
Um
They have to do, they do have to
take a school security personnel
training. That was one of my big
questions because working with
whatever age group your school
level is.
Is that part of the training
that they have to go through.
The way our model is designed,
um, we have our school security
guards, uh, meet with our
special education staff to go
through restraint training,
training, uh, we have, uh,
entered into an MOU with
of the Carlsbad Police
Department to do the firearms
training and to be trained in
verbal de-escalation, uh, and
With SROs and with security
guards, um, you find people that
have a heart for elementary kids
and you have 5 people that have
a heart for middle school kids,
and you find people that have a
heart for high school kids, and
that really is a part of the
process that every district has
to go through. You got to get
the right people working with
the right group of kids, but
absolutely, uh.
All the folks that we would arm
psychologically evaluated and if
they aren't former law
enforcement with a significant
amount of experience, uh,
they're going to have to go
through extensive, extensive
training with CPD before they
can actually carry a firearm on
campus, and Superintendent, if
you wouldn't mind keeping the
conversation in the dialogue
through the chair, please.
Thank you. um.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think my final thing, I, I
support the bill, however, the,
the um FIR, the fiscal analysis
notes some significant issues
and amendments, and one of the
things they said that it would
take probably 3 months to get
things, they're recommending
that you change the day that it
would go into effect in January
1st, 2026. I wondered if you had
time to look at that um.
The Department of um
Public safety notes further
steps. This is on page 2 of the
FIR.
If it's passed, there's
stuff that has to be done.
Um, and they have some
amendments that they feel are
necessary. Have you had time to
look at those yet. It's, it's
not questioning the value or
that we should do it, it's just
stuff they think has to be
amended. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Representative Garrett. So,
um, we're open to, to those
amendments. I think they're um
they're reasonable. Uh, we, at
least I wanted to collect input
from the committee before we do
any kind of amendment if we're
gonna make several, be nice to
capture them all at the same
time, so I don't find that to be
unreasonable. We're open to it.
Thank you.
Right, uh, Brogo Cavio.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative, and thank
you expert.
I um have a few questions.
And, and, and thank you to vice
chair because I was referring to
we're gonna ask about the
background checks and how
particularly were to the um
Assignment.
That would be um
a security guards carrying on
campuses, and so
Um, I know that there's
particular Mr. Chair, um,
Background checks that are
particular to these kinds of
assignments. So you did indicate
that
That would be um part of what
they go through, correct?
Ma, I mean, Mr.
Cha. So yeah, we have that
covered in the bill, um.
Staring at page 4.
19, um, and I'll just, it's very
quick to read it's a prior to an
offer of employment.
The school district shall
require for each potential
assistant school security
personnel want proof that the
level of board is eligible to
hold a valid registration
pursuant to law.
Um, second item would be
successful completion of school
security personnel training.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, 3 is a
background check.
That indicates the person has
not been convicted of a crime or
engaged in behavior that
violated the school personnel
Act, and then number 4, any
other conditions required by law
department rules. So, Mr. Chair,
represent, we've lifted, uh, so
the school district can.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I did see that.
I, I, I feel I need to have an
added assurance, but
This is, this will be a start.
I'm not a proponent of um
security guards.
Uh, on campus or anyone on our
campuses.
Harry, I understand, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative um that
we have had.
multiple incidences, not just um
in our state and in our nation
that causes us
to look at um our security.
Um, on, on our school premises,
and, and I understand that part.
Um, but I also grew up.
Meaning not as a child, but grew
up in the world of um the last
maybe 30, 40 years.
Where schools have instituted um
Ways in which to
Continue to secure our children
and protect them of things like
and and this is a question. Have
we uh looked at
Um
Securing our schools with things
like cameras.
Um, things like not allowing
public entrance or secured
public entrance.
Um, meaning,
Well, you know, the guards at
the door, but not caring. Um,
that would prevent.
Systems and ways in which we
prevent the public from entering
on other types of security. I
know Mr. Chair, that in my
district for ever since I've
been elected, um, Mr. Chair,
I've been providing capital
outlay.
to secure the the schools in our
district.
With cameras.
Um, with security systems, alert
systems, um, Mr. Chair. um, and
this is just in my district and
I'm aware of that being of that
happening. So,
Have we looked at these types of
enhancements.
Security enhancements as opposed
to having um
Level 3 security guards.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that question. I
think there's a lot we can, so I
believe there are a lot of
measures. I'm gonna let Doctor
Washburn amplify a bit on that,
but I just wanna clarify for the
sake of the committee, Mr.
Chair, that we have levels of
security personnel, um, levels 1
and 2 would not carry a firearm,
at the level threes would be,
uh, like Doctor Washburn wanted
to let you, uh,
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
I understand your concern. Um, I
I have wrestled deeply with the
idea of putting armed personnel
in schools, um, is
Unfortunately, and
An aspect of the reality of the
world that we live in, whether I
like it or not. A national time
when a school shooting occurs
is.
Yeah, all of it happens between
2 to 5 minutes.
Uh, the response time for most
law enforcement groups to get
their falls.
Outside of that range, so having
people that can respond to
somebody actively threatening
children and staff members is
the intent behind that. Uh.
I, I wish I could tell you, I
mean, we have
We've have bulletproof glass in
all of our new facilities so
that we can have windows,
because I think kids have to be
able to look out of windows. We
have secure vestibules. We are
now uh in the process of looking
at putting metal detection units
in front of uh all of our
stadiums and those places that
are more difficult for us to
secure. I think that every
superintendent, uh, in every
school board.
the state
is actively working on passive,
uh,
Responses to make kids safe.
Um, but at the end of the day,
uh, the final step in that is
putting SROs in most communities
do not have the capacity to put
SROs and every one of their
schools, so what this law does
is it gives those two
conditional personnel and to
enhance that security.
Mr. Chair and Representative and
Doctor Washman, thank you very
much for that response. I think
I'm gonna take another approach,
um.
I'm the grandmother of a 2 and a
3 year old. Those are the
youngest, and of course the 10
and the 8 year old.
And Mr. Chair and um,
And representative of the 8 and
10 year old, um, a few years
back that they're in the Los
Angeles school district.
were out in the playground.
And there was a um
Uh, drive-by shooting right on
the corner of the where the
school is, and they were out in
the playground.
Um, this is a
These types of things, and they
were in they were protected
because they were in the school
grounds from that standpoint,
but when you have a drive-by
shooting in the neighborhood,
which is right on the corner,
that couldn't point I'm trying
to make is that they're living
in a world.
And then I'm in a world where
Carrying guns, seeing guns,
gunfights.
Uh, are becoming more
predominant, and I understand
that. However, I had not seen it
from the lenses of my son, who
was the father of the 3 year old
and the 2-year-old.
And one of the things that
they're considering right now in
terms of do we homeschool?
Or do we send our children to
public schools, and we, they
grew up, Mr. Chair, in the world
as that's what.
My husband and I.
have been active in promoting
enhancing and increasing um our
students' successes through
public education.
Um, but
They raised the issue.
Of also do we
send him to a public school
where everything is where where
there's guards.
Police, active law enforcement
presence.
What is the message we're
sending to our children.
If we're responding to guns with
guns.
And that, and they are seeing
that.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Play out in the real world.
How is that
How are we demonstrating safety
and security.
by combating it in the same
fashion.
I understand about the response
time and that was gonna be one
of her saying that because
I've also sat in um
presentations by our law
enforcement since the school
shootings have begun.
To be more common.
And they indicate that they have
increased all of their response
time.
Simply because of that.
Making sure that they can get to
the schools within.
Very little time um.
Based on what occurred and what
has what we've occurred, and
they've coordinated.
Um, their school security and
response with with the schools
and the securities.
Programs that we have in the
school, so
From that perspective, from what
the message that we're sending
to our children.
From that perspective is how I
have to.
Also consider and look at when
we have these types of um
Pieces of legislation because I,
I would not have thought about
that unless I had a conversation
or they had a conversation with
me about.
Mom, what do you think?
Should we send our, you know,
this is what we're considering.
The world is scary right now,
and we have a 3 year old who's
about to go to preschool.
And these are the things that
we're considering, and I have to
jump up and think about it.
So from that perspective is
where I will be um making a
determined decision on this
piece of legislation because
As I said, Mister
Chapresentative, I understand.
Your intent and the purpose.
Um, but I'm not convinced that
it's something that we want to
demonstrate to our children, so
I wanted to
And um we came up in our class
together and we're still here.
And we're still um um addressing
very important things um in the
lives of earth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative.
Represent Corona.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative and um
superintendent.
Thank you for uh bringing this
bill. I think it's uh we always
try to address safety for
students from every aspect and
representative Carra Garret and
Royala you don't really address
some of that my same concerns.
I'm uh, my most of my experience
has been in middle school, so my
students don't have, and we know
that brain development in the
same way that we
But we hope the adults have and
my concern is um the training
too, so, um, I, let me give you
an example, uh, in my, the
school that I stayed the
longest. We have an um assistant
who his job was to monitor the
holes and be around during the
playground where the kids were
playing and the prevention was
like probably like 90% of the
time, Mr. Cha. uh, we, we did
have incidents.
Uh, but he was able to build
that relationship with the
students and the prevention help
to grow our students in a best
and most positive culture, um,
once he retired and we couldn't
fill up the position all the
incidents related to the
officer, the security officer
escalated.
Uh, we even have a tragedy.
2 years after he retired.
Things that we saw preventable,
uh, suddenly become a national
news. So, um, that's my concern
always when we put emphasis on
this type of safety, um.
The kids and we want to grow
them instead of.
stopping the, the, the violence
we want to prevent it, so, um, I
want just wanna um ask you a
question. What will that
training look like? We were
talking about experienced
officers who deal with um adults
who are doing horrible things,
but then we are moving them to
classroom settings.
So what would a trainee look
like for, for them.
To be in that huge shift, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh.
I'm gonna answer your question
by starting with this. I have a
student advisory committee that
is uh
27 kids from all gray, well,
from freshman.
Senior's representing uh
everything in the world, um.
In our conversations with him,
it's about everything that
operates at the high one of
those kids goes, some of your
security guards are great
people.
And some of them really need
some training on.
Uh, being nice.
And uh
We took that very seriously, and
we spent a lot of time working
with the police department and
with our staff on getting
training in place where
understand that their first
option is de-escalating
verbally.
And the last thing you do is lay
hands on a child.
And we have been very committed
to that.
And um I and our kids have
responded to that. I would say
that our biggest thing about
security guards and SROs.
They establish a relationship
with students, because in
establishing that relationship
with students that de-escalates
a huge piece.
Of the possible violence that's
out there.
Mr. Representative, I hope that
answer your question.
I might just um assuage your
concern with what we see on
there's a definition for school
security personnel starting at
line 2 on page 3, and it says it
means
Retired or former certified and
commission law enforcement
officers, and we add in retired
or former commissioned peace
officers for Level 3 they are
registered pursuant to the
private Investigations Act, so
there's, and I can't speak to
all the details, but Mr. Chair,
there is a lot of training that
has gone into former certified
commission law enforcement
officers.
some of the, I mean.
We have a lot of great training
programs, yeah, there's the law
enforcement training center, for
example. So whatever their,
their background, they're
getting some very intensity
their job, and we'd like to be
able to tap into these former
commissioned officers because
they are highly qualified
security personnel.
I hope that answers the
question, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for uh your responses. I, I
really
Why not make us can make sure
and hope that that training is a
holistic so again dealing with
kids is if you don't dealing
with adults, right? Um, and the
other question that I have
actually, you just pointed out
is what was the um what was
exactly this um
These people selected to be in
the bill.
The, the added that language
exactly um it is um.
This is a research and data that
you have, um, I'm a teacher so I
like that. Do you have any data
that say that this is a number
of people retired in my
community and this is what would
be more effective, Mr. Chair, or
on other areas other professions
who could fill up these
positions too, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chan represented gorilla,
so, um,
We know there is a shortage of
school security personnel and
we're just looking at a very
obvious, highly qualified.
Many of them have years and
years of experience, um,
they're, they're kind of
How can I phrase it off the
shelf ready to go.
But we just needed this law
change to basically qualify
under under our state law, so I
think Doctor Washburn talked a
little bit, Mr. Chair, about the
district, uh, tried to hire,
but, but the statute didn't
really allow.
Um
The law was in place uh when,
when we started, uh.
Hiring people and uh we weren't
fully aware of the restrictions,
um.
So really what this law does is
all it does is take those law
enforcement folks that have been
working in sheriff's departments
and, and correctional
departments that have years of
experience.
Um, and have retired.
And gives us the capacity to
hire them in addition to the
others that are already covered
under the law.
Um, and
Law enforcement.
typically retires at 20 years.
And so they still have
tread left on their tires and uh
so I get it, being able to give
them the ability to give back to
their communities.
In what they consider to be a
much lower stress environment,
uh, and we're, I mean, that,
that's really what, that's
really why we drove to do that.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you for that.
The answers. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for uh bringing this
forward. Um.
If you've heard me talk at all
during the last 4 years, you
don't know that school security
is a priority for me, um.
So the, the, the idea here, Mr.
Chairman and Representative is
is very much.
On the minds of, of everybody.
Not only um
Not only from a school district
standpoint.
But I have 3 kids in school as
well.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative um during the
different focus groups that
we've had.
in a recent middle school focus
group.
Their number one priority was
school safety.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
The
The reality is
Is that
In the last couple of years,
there's been over 400 incidents.
On school sites.
It varying degree, so Mr.
Chairman and uh Representative
Brown.
My, my question is really, uh,
how does this differ from our
current model because Mr.
Chairman and Representative.
My our school district, my
school district has school
resource officers.
And we also have school security
offices, so how does House Bill
473.
kind of differ from
Current
Um, practice it allow for school
security officers now, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative, um, what this
law does is it it adds another
layer of individuals that would
be available for school
districts to be able to hire.
Right now, if you want to hire
an armed security guard, they
have to have, they have to have
been through the state police
academy, uh, they have to have
at least 5 years of law
enforcement experience, and
those are really the only people
that are eligible, what this law
does, what this change in the
law does.
as it enables those law
enforcement officers that have
been commissioned by Sheriff's
departments or correctional
departments that have
significant experience.
And make them eligible to be
able to carry what it does,
particularly in
In small rural communities is it
gives them a pathway to train
someone to put armed personnel
in a building that they might
not otherwise ever be able to
do, and I, you and I have both
heard many times Mr. Jarrett
representative, uh,
superintendents, uh, testifying
as to the length of response
times in remote rural districts,
so by, by adding this layer
there, it gives them the ability
to.
Enhance those response times,
locally in a way that really
isn't open to them right. Yeah,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that. Um.
And again, and I, I think that
the school security that we, we
definitely want to take a look
at it, Mr. Chairman and uh
Represent around and
superintendent, um,
What I, I think that really that
This issue of it, and I agree
100%.
About that it has to go not only
with the
The laws or the the statutes
that will guide this, but also
funding that also results
because I know, Mr. Chairman.
And Representative Brown, many
school district is not.
You have a compact, uh,
compounding issue between the
lack of
qualified applicants.
And a lack of funds to actually
higher for these things, because
currently,
These funds or these uh
employees are paid for out of
your general fund. Is that true,
uh, Mr. Chairman, and, uh
Superintendent.
Mr Representative, uh, yes, we
pay for all of them out of
operational dollars, um, we did
a little bit of uh extra work
on.
On the front end when we were
doing that, I've always said
that I can't have uh long-term
employees funded that way and so
we moved them to operational and
it does create a
A operational burden to school
districts in the sense that it
is going to cost more money.
Uh, but
Is the point where there's just
some things to spend some money
to take care of it. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you, and,
and again, I, I think that's
really
Really highlights an important
part of it is that
We have to really
Study and talk about this type
of um
Kind of systemic change.
And um
As I say, I think that it
highlights it, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Representative Brown, we
talked about it and I will say
for many of us sitting up here,
many in the audience.
We all hear about Maslow's
hierarchy needs.
If somebody does not have the
basic needs met foods.
Water, safety.
And the learning can take place
to the degree that these folks
are capable of.
So Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative Brown, I mean, I
thank you for bringing this
forward because I think that it
attempts to
Address a need and Mr. Chairman
and Representative, I think
that, you know, we have to
really take a look to see is how
do we accomplish both, and how
do we meet this need? How do we
provide for
The structure and then how do we
fund this structure?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
he represent Torres Velasquez.
Um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Superintendent and senator, um,
thank you for your bill.
Um, I just want to share that,
um,
When I read it, I had flashbacks
to what I saw in Uvalde because
I have personal friends who were
affected there.
And I also know that students in
our schools have voiced very
strongly that they do not feel
safe in our schools.
They feel anything could happen
at any time, and they, they
don't feel protected. Um, we had
numerous schools that had um
let's see now, what, what were
they called, but there, there
were calls where there were
threats that there were gonna be
um gun.
Shooting slots last spring.
Fault.
Wait, it was while I was
campaigning. I remember that one
of my students called me. He was
teaching here in Santa Fe, and
he said, I can't do this
anymore. We've had the council
school, we've had lockdown every
day this week.
And I just can't do this
anymore. And so he ended up
resigning, and I thought he was
done with education. He
contacted me later. He's gonna
go on for a PhD and look at
educational policy type things,
but I wonder how the safety
issues are affecting our
students and our teachers and
our communities. I think this is
one piece to a very important
question that Representative
Baca posed, and that is that we
need to study and talk about
these issues and
Because we need to look at the
systemically. Our system needs
to be able to address things so
that while we're addressing that
safety.
We're also addressing the needs
that Representative Real
Caballero brought up because
those are very real, and I know
that because I've got a son,
I've got 2 sons, and one of them
is dark like me and male and um
there was a period of time when
everyone was after him because
they assumed they knew he was
some kind of villain or
something and um lots of things
happened around that. He's not a
villain and he's safe and sound
now all grown up.
But
I, I know the, the damage that
misperceptions of who people
are, um, can do on their, on
their lives, their daily lives
and um a lifetime effects. And
so the things that
representative Orvo Caballero
would you know that I would hope
would be in the training, um,
representative Baca really
addressed most of the questions
I had. He's always got
incredible questions. um, but
there was one I just 2 actually.
One doesn't have to do with this
pill.
But just out of curiosity.
Can you tell me when an incident
does happen at the school.
Um, is it the responsibility of
the security officer at the
police officer, whoever the
security officers there to make
the decision on for themselves
if something happens or in that
training that they receive, do
they learn how to do this, how
to address things in a way that
saves lives and also addresses
the issue. So I, I'm, I don't
think that's part of your bill,
but I would like for y'all to
consider that in your training,
um.
Because I
It, it can lead to um some real
serious consequences. Um, but my
only real question now after
Representative Baca's questions
was, um, and Romo Caballero, the
representative of Caviero.
Does this bill increase the
number of security officers at a
school, or does it just give the
opportunity for who can be
hired.
It would give the a school
district capacity to either
increase or to higher, so, uh,
it, it basically would address
both. In our case, we would
rehire some folks that do have a
Um
placed in the bill. It's on page
5 line when we talk about
success before their.
You know, eligible for hiring,
there has to be successful
completion of school security
personnel training, but it's a
specialized type of training for
obvious reasons, I think we're
dealing with children, certain
scenarios that might arise, and
so that is truly part of this
whole uh proposal.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Turk
and more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative and
Superintendent, um, will I have
to reiterate.
When we toured your school, it
was amazing and I, and, and, and
I really enjoyed the tour of
your school, um, several months
ago, but, um, my question is,
um, did nothing in here requires
you, any school district to have
to have an armed security
officer, correct?
That is correct.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
and superintendent. So this is
completely optional if that's
what you feel is good for your,
your school district and for
your needs, um, now you have the
opportunity to be able to do
this. Um, I personally, I, I, I
have a, a unique.
I guess, um
Perspective in in in the fact
that, you know, I am a teacher,
every time there is a uh
lockdown which in Berlin we at
least a couple of times a year,
we'll have one, but I not only
have to worry about my students
in my classroom. I have children
in school, in in that school. So
I then have to think, where are
my kids?
Um, and, uh, and, and I was also
there, um, there, um, PE teacher
when we were in elementary
school. Now, the high school in
Berlin is right in the, in, in
the middle of town, so anything
is gonna be, um, you know, um,
responded too quickly. Um, the
Two elementary schools I taught
at, where one of them was 40
miles from town. It was out
there. Um, you cannot get any
emergency people either, and
it's actually in Socorro County,
so it's a Berle school in
Socorro County, uh, right in the
middle of everything. So at
sometimes the corral police
comes beforecorro County. And so
those are, those are the kind of
things that, that is the middle
of the nowhere school.
Where if no one is there to
help.
By the time anyone gets there,
it's done, and there is no help.
Um, and that's what worries me.
Um, so I think this is something
that will get those now
then we, we worked pretty hard
and uh cause we're, we're not a
rich school district, we're not
a, you know, uh, uh, the town is
even we, we worked with MOUs
with the, with the Ble police
department. We started with one,
police officer who was our SRO
and now I think we went to 31 at
the high school, one at the
middle school, and one that
services 7 elementary schools
spanning from, I think the
distance.
between them is probably about
60 miles between one on the
north side and the one on the
south side, so, so those kind of
things, that's one person. So
hopefully he there where there's
they should be if something
happens.
But I think one of the major
things that this does.
is
And I think it, it, it speaks to
Having law enforcement come in.
And help secure.
kids that they don't know.
is one thing.
Having a security guard that is
there every single day that is
watching them get off the bus
that is seeing them at lunch,
that is telling them good
morning, that is helping them
tie their shoes, that is
helping, you know, helping them
do everything that is someone
that they are comfortable with.
That person is gonna make them
feel secure, not the one that
they may see in the car
somewhere else, or maybe if
something is going wrong when
they're already in a heightened,
uh um.
Uh, state of, of emergency when
they see that person, they'll
attribute it to that stress.
Where every single day this SRO,
this, this person, this armed
guard, I can guarantee you, uh,
you know, the first couple of
days, they might be.
Looking at the gun.
After that, they're looking at
the person and they know that
that person is there. It is that
relationship.
That is gonna make those
students feel safe. It is that
person that is there every
single day.
That is gonna make that person
safe, not and, and, and, and
that I think is gonna ease,
because I've seen it happen.
I've, I've seen it. I think we
even had um a parent at one
point in time was unarmed and
everything else, but he just
stood out every single day in
the front door just to make sure
that nothing was gonna happen.
And, uh, and he was a former,
uh, uh police officer. And he
just, he just stood out there.
He was like, no, my kids go here
and I'm gonna make sure that
that this school is is is safe.
Now the kids got used to him.
And, and they're like, oh yeah,
he watches for us. And, and they
were, they were totally fine
with it. They weren't freaked
out. They weren't, you know,
it's new for the first couple of
days, but I, it's that
relationship and that's what a
lot of people
Don't understand. We see these
guys every single day. They walk
through our halls. They, they
talk, I've, I've seen them, um,
and we have lots of uh um law
enforcement, um, and, uh,
correctional officers and ex um,
um, I think one of them is even
SWAT and and everything else at
our high school. Um, none of
them caring and um so but they,
they, um.
They, they talk with, I mean,
the students know them by name.
You know, they, they, they,
they, they are, they, they
relate to them. So when they
need help, when something
happens, they trust them.
A lot more than they would
possibly trust someone that they
never see at their, at their
campus. So I think this is a
perfect opportunity.
To gain trust and to gain that
sense of security for students.
So thank you.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative and Mr.
Superintendent for, for bringing
this forward ahead. I had a
couple of um uh questions as,
as, as I was hearing the
discussion, I think uh two of my
colleagues have mentioned the
relationship building and, and
uh the relationship between the
security or the SRO and the
students.
So is that is so, is that aspect
included in the training for
these for these security
personnel.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Jay Representatives, uh, all
the SRO training and all of our
security guard training directly
mirrors the SRO training and it
is very much aimed at explaining
to a school resource officer
that induced him to being a
police officer.
They are working with students
in a school community, and their
first responsibility is to
establish relationships with
kids.
because that creates a positive
for seeing law enforcement, uh,
we've, we've taken that model
and used that uh with our
security guards through the MOU.
So, yes. Thank you for that, Mr.
Terry and Superintendent. So I
think that's, that's uh as long
as it was mentioned before, I'm
not gonna harp on it. It's very
critical and it's important that
we, that that that be included
in there. One other thing that
uh Mr. Chair and Representative
was uh that I wanted to ask.
I, no one's talked about the
community and how the community
feels about it, and if they
support something like this,
would you, would you mind
speaking on that, Mr. Trump?
Mr. Terror Representative, um.
Our community pretty much
demanded that we get uh security
guards in every one of our
schools, uh, they.
They, they believe that our
police department, our sheriff's
department will respond as
quickly as they can.
But they also know what the
reality is.
And they wanted somebody there
that could respond immediately,
so in in our community there's a
100%
Uh, support of this, um, because
they do believe that it did.
brings a very safety.
Thank you for that and
of a school superintendent
parents about this, and I can
say as a state representative.
that my constituents want school
safety, and 3 would do that. So
I'm, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank, thank you for that
representative and Mr. Chair
because that's, that's so
critical.
Just to get that that buy in
from our community and from our
parents because they're the ones
that ask us for this, or the
ones that demand it from us.
Um, uh, we have had, uh, our,
our issues with, with safety in
my legislative district.
And uh we've had issues with
staffing and getting SROs into
our schools, and I think this,
what you're proposing, uh, Mr.
Chair and Representative is an
excellent alternative.
to get certified trained
personnel onto our schools that
will provide that security and
that safety for our students.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Garcia.
Thank you, uh, chair.
Representative and
superintendent.
I come from a district that's
very wide range.
We have uh
To where um responses quickly
and there is a MOU
with the um
With the law enforcements there
to uh
with the schools for our
security, uh, within that
district.
But it doesn't cover all of the
schools, there's only a couple
that are able to do that.
Then the rest of the district uh
is very
rule and far apart.
And I covered two counties.
And um
The thing about it is, um,
who have this kind of build in
place, and then try to recruit
uh I think that would
accommodate you because of the
remoteness of the the schools
that are out there.
A response would not be the same
as uh in the town of Grant, the
response time.
from
11 to 3 hours because it's on
the now law enforcement is far
in between them and
And all that, so, um,
I have um someone there uh
security would help during the
time that they need to address a
situation that may happen.
May be happening in itself, I
wonder how, uh, who does the
training and who developed the
training so that
Uh, it's wide range to address
song wherever they may be.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Our training is developed, uh.
Through uh a memorandum of
understanding with the Carlsbad
Police department and it's tied
to the national training.
For school resource officers,
uh, the other training that is
available out there is the New
training that they can offer to
security guards and to school
districts, so with that variety
of training, we can arrest
address all the training
components within the
legislation, um, and make sure
that we.
are putting the most qualified
people in those schools. I hope
that answers your question,
yeah.
That was uh the other portion of
it would be, uh, not only are
they protecting the kids from
the outside things that might
happen. It's also ins inside
where they have to provide
security that's, and I know that
we have a big issue of student
sets a a biggie thing that's um
that's occurring and uh we had
the SOR that was in one of the
school and was very, very good
at addressing things like that,
you know.
In a friendly
But firm way and working with
the students, and that seemed to
have come down until that person
retired and it was hard to find
somebody that would have
Um
The same quality, the same
character to to start working
with I do it my way or.
And that was it. There was no
really good relationship that
was being developed. So, uh, I
guess that's another area that
uh
students uh would feel more
secure if we we find someone
like that within and happen.
because to to develop a good
relationship in order to do that
between the personnel, the
school personnel, students
themselves.
And that has also been addressed
in that way. So I find that not
only are you providing security
for your owns to understand.
what needs to, how they need to.
Thank you. Um, I don't have
anybody else on my list. Um,
thank you for bringing this
forward. I did have one
question. Um, so with these
school security, um, be
enforcing school policy or um
law violations.
Law violations are enforced by
SROs, the school security
personnel are there to enforce
uh school district policy and
regulation and in the event um
if they are uh
It's their qualified to uh carry
firearm in that in that event,
they would be responding to
that, but um.
All violations of law are
responded to by um
By law enforcement under our
operation now, I mean, APS has
their own.
Um
Police department, so those
officers would be responding to
it, but, uh, security guards are
responsible for district policy,
not for enforcing.
They they don't have
Uh, detention.
Law enforcement capacity.
Right, I appreciate that. Um, so
what I would suggest the
representative is that we get
some of these amendments that
RLD is suggesting, particularly
as it.
Um
Uh, pertains to the enactment.
Um, because 90 days for them as
they stayed is a very short
period of time, um, and get with
those folks to talk through some
of their technical issues, um,
and then we can bring this bill
back um as soon as possible in
this committee to consider those
amendments. Does that work for
you, Representative?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, it most
certainly does. Um, I will
spring into action and get back
with our drafter and we'll have
something um perhaps by the time
this committee meets again, I
hope that would be by the end of
the day today, so that we can
get those distributed before the
weekend to folks and update the
agenda and all that stuff, so
please, we appreciate it.
Thank you.
Representative Sanchez.
32.
And so I understand
representative you have an
expert on Zoom, is that right?
Yes,
Mister Chair, committee, uh, I'd
like to introduce uh casety
McGovern. She's with the
nonprofit ECAS every child is
swimmer.
Right,
so if you would to represent me,
give me a moment so that I can
promote her as a panelist and
would you remind me of your name
again?
It's probably under ECAS, but
it's Casey McGovern. Casey
McGovern, I think I promoted the
right person. Casey, are you
with us?
Yes, I am. Thank you. Welcome.
So we'll uh Representative
Sanchez to um present the bill
and then we will go to you for
additional comments.
Mr. Chair, thank you for this,
uh, legislation does is it
requires uh schools charter and
public to provide water safety
guidance at the beginning of
every year.
No, I'd like to go to to see if
she has any uh brief comments
just to add to that.
Absolutely. Can you all hear me
OK, and, uh, please excuse me,
it wouldn't let me have my
camera, so, um, you know, I will
do my best to convey the message
appropriately. Um, but good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I really do
appreciate your time. My name is
Casey McGovern, and I am the
executive director of every
Child Swimmer program, but I'm
also a mother of a drowning
victim. I lost my daughter at
the age of 19 months, um, on
August 3rd, 2009, which set the
course of my journey.
um into the drowning prevention
realm in the water safety,
preventative measures. Um, I
worked within the Health
Department of Health for 8 years
where I learned and really grew
What we need to do to be
preventative and
And really ask for your support
of the House Bill 532, which is
a vital life-saving piece of
legislation that will provide
information to parents and
caregivers at such a crucial
point in their life. Um, what
the legislation does is it
provides water safety
information, risk factors, and
where to go for local swim
lessons through the school
system. Drowning is 100%
preventable in education is the
key. And with sharing this
information with the schools,
it's just a
net and a touch point that's so
vital. Uh, drowning is the
number one cause of death for
children 1 to 4, but it's also
the #2 cause of death for
children 5 to 14. And so being
able to share this information
that is truly life saving within
the school system. Um, it's just
a big broad net to be able to
have that touch point educate
parents at such a crucial point,
um, in their lives. Um, it also
helps.
To provide um the importance of
learning to swim, and what they
can do to prevent a future
drowning from happening, fire
safety is shared in the, in the
schools throughout the month of
October across the entire
country. Yet nobody talks about
water safety, and water safety
claims, um, more lives than
fires do at this point. At this
point, they say about a little
over 4000 individuals lose their
life to drowning each and every
year in the United States alone,
but also for every
um fatality, 8 people are
impacted by a non-fatal injury.
So we have a large problem and
we need to try to come together
to be able to solve those issues
and I just ask you to support
this, to be able to help us
continue to push a broad message
out to the schools and being
able to reach every parent at
such a critical point.
Mr charge just want to mention
this is already uh happening in
other states. Uh, there's her,
uh, Casey's nonprofit offers
free materials to support this
to our schools uh I know in our
state, uh, you don't think of
water as an issue, but we have a
sea ditches, uh, arroyos.
Swimming pools, lakes, so uh it
is an issue in our city. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Now it's time
for questions. All right. Thank
you all so much. So we'll go to
books on Zoom if you're here in
opposition, we'll go to
opposition first to House Bill
532. Would you please indicate
by raising your hand if you wish
to speak.
Folks in the room, is there
anybody here that wishes to
speak in opposition to House
Bill 532.
your hand.
seeing anybody. It will go to
support. Is there anybody here
in support of House Bill 532,
please indicate by raising your
hand or on Zoom.
folks in the room anyway here to
speak in support.
Oh, OK. Thank you. So we have
one person here in support.
All right.
Nobody on Zoom will come to
committee, represent Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you, Representative. Um, I
firmly believe in, in water
education. I myself was a water
baby and around dose around it
is exactly as you mentioned. Um,
I just have some logistical
questions of how that would
actually be implemented, um, a
lot of our rural areas do not
have pools. I mean, that's just
the, the reality of it. If
you're talking about
implementing swimming lessons.
Has that been a consideration
for areas that do not have pools
to get access to. How would you
properly train?
students in swim lessons. I
think this would be great to
have an implement, but has there
been some thought as to how to
get access to our students that
may not have current access.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative, uh.
Basically this is just setting a
foundation for basic
uh education of parents uh just
to make them aware of, of the
hazards so it doesn't get into
that detail. I do this just
calls for the schools to provide
a either a digital or reading
guidance, so uh we're not taking
it that far yet. Maybe at some
point we can do that, but right
now we're just bringing
awareness to the issue. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and a follow-up question
with that, um, you mentioned
that there were national
resources. Is there a curriculum
that maybe could be shared with
our public schools or maybe a
plan of action that could be
implemented, um, so as to ease
the burden on the local
responsibility of the local
school district to implement
this program, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, I'll, I'll
let Casey maybe briefly just to
add to that.
Yeah, absolutely, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
great questions, and we would um
be able to recommend many
resources. We have a tool kit
and a resource guide on our
website, and we would recommend
probably um as a broad effort,
whoever would ask it be the
American Red Cross whale tails
curriculum, and again, it's
sharing that information,
sharing risk factors and what to
do, whether they have access to
swim lessons or not, even
bathtub safety because all it
takes is 2 inches of water for a
drowning to occur.
So just that awareness and that
education point is so critical,
whether they have access or not,
we'll, we're teaching them what
to look for, what parents should
do, um, and we do have the
resources in the curriculum to
be able to share that and with
the school, the states that have
passed our legislation, we
provide a flash drive or tool
kit for them that they can pull
any of those resources that
would be, that would apply in or
relevant to them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, expert for that
question. Um, just one closing
comment, um, probably gonna age
myself here, but I remember the
days of the ditchwitch campaign.
You remember that, um, along the
times of the dare, um, I will
never enter a ditch with a flash
flood warning, you know, can
come in pretty fast, but no, I
think it's important, you know,
for that awareness. So, um,
thank you for bringing this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
My one question is, how come you
didn't ask me to be a sponsor on
this, Mr. Chara, it's not too
late.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
gonna get on that bill. This is,
this is a great step and I, I
wish it went a little bit
further where we could teach
kids how to swim all the way
from kindergarten to 12th grade,
so we don't have those problems.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Baca,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for bringing this forward.
Um.
Uh, the thing that kept me away
from bitches is like yourana
that kept me away from the
ditches so I didn't sing, you
know.
Uh,
Madam, Madam Chair
Representative.
I support this. Has there been
collaboration?
With other entities in New
Mexico, your parks, your rack,
your state.
To develop these materials, or
is it just
Material from this group that
we're looking to enforce. Mr.
Chair, uh, right now it's just
with this group, but uh, I, I,
there's other resources
nationally, uh, the Red Cross,
uh, other organizations, uh.
I know, like I said, this just
starts the conversation. I think
there's a lot of work to be done
after this, but this is just to
get it going.
And, and thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you and I.
I support the concept 100% and
to the expert at with this were
very sorry for your loss, and I,
I, I just think, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative Sanchez that
If we talk for my thing it's all
about.
Um, you know, make sure that we
get this word out there and by
communicating and collaborating
on these materials.
We're sending a a common message
out.
Whether we're talking about
public swimming pools.
Local lakes
Private swimming pools and so
Um
As you said before, I, I do, I
do support this, but I, you
know, as I said, I would just
encourage you.
Um, to make sure that we get
some of these other agencies
involved in the creation.
And also, um,
Distribution
Of these materials. Thank you.
I.
Thanks, Mister Charon,
Representative, I think
Representative Vincent has a
good point because I know that
as a fire chief,
They're the people that are
called to do all the rescues,
the the rapid water in the
ditches in Albuquerque, we have
drownings every year, but I had
was half the way from Eli. See,
look up, there's no standards
about teaching anything about
water safety.
And our
Standards, which is actually
quite an interesting point. So,
um, I hope we can develop
something, but not just for the
parents because ultimately it's
kids that sometimes make bad
decisions, so it's something
that's really worth talking
about. So thank you for bringing
this up.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else on my list what's of the
committee,
we would do, right, so motion on
House Bill 532, seconded by
Representative Royal Caballero.
If there any objection to the
DuP pass motion?
No.
Du Past, thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, committee. All right.
Thank you expert.
All right, so we will move to
Senate bill 242, so Madam prote,
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for doing the work you
do here.
I'm about at 6 hours of sleep a
night, so I'm sure that's what
you all are experiencing too, so
we will try to be succinct.
Um, I am so pleased today.
Uh, to have with me a doctor
Linda Cavazos.
She is the executive director of
Ayas.
Which is English learner
Leadership advocacy support
counseling.
She has been working with the
state for about 6 years. Uh,
when we passed our dyslexia and
structured literacy bill in
2019, but she came on board to
help us, uh, promote structured
literacy around the state.
So this bill is directed mainly
towards higher re.
It requires our educator
preparation programs.
Tote incorporate science of
reading instruction.
Uh utilize high quality
instructural materials in that
teaching.
It eliminates discredited
literacy teaching practices.
Two things apply to the public
schools are requiring a timely
and consistent printal
notification at least twice a
year on those students who are
having difficulty learning to
read.
Um, it also uh requires us to
stop using this discredited
teaching practice, which doesn't
do much.
The good news is that we've all
been working on this for so long
that we have districts that have
stepped up.
in a stunning way.
Uh, the handout you just got is
from Roswell.
Um, we gave you the copies of 3
schools, uh, that have improved
their instruction so incredibly,
it's just kind of unbelievable.
Uh, so, Nancy Lopez Elementary
has a 60% English learner
process, uh, progress.
Uh, these are sports taken at
the end of last year, I can't
wait to see the scores at the
end of this year. Um, there are
3 schools that were showing you
um their end of year progress.
Um, they use a structured
literacy, they've moved away
from balanced literacy.
And in these schools, English
language learners far exceeds
the progress in the district.
So, uh, Doctor Cavasos will
certainly talk to you about some
of that.
Right now we're spending about
20 million a year.
To retrained teachers so that
they can teach according to the
science.
The science of reading is a big
overall uh uh name uh for the
things that have been
researched. It includes
bilingual education,
multicultural education and
includes structured literacy.
As a method for how to teach
reading. Now, some people think
that structured literacy is just
phonics. Phonics is 1/5.
Of structured literacy.
Uh, the requirements for the
colleges will be to actually
teach teachers about structured
literacy. It includes phonemic
awareness, the sounds, the
language makes in any language.
Structured literacy is used all
over the world. It's used in
Mexico, which has about a 95%
literacy rate.
In part because Spanish is just
easier to learn to read. Pure
phones, um,
English has 44 phonemes out of
those 26 letters, 8 ways to
spell the long A sound, Spanish
has only one. They have 28
phonemes for 26 letters, so it's
easier to teach, it's easier to
learn.
But these schools are using
structured literacy in their
bilingual programs, uh, which
is, uh, how we've trained
teachers.
And uh so I have with me also a
deputy secretary Amanda Bell,
who's been working on this. I
would like to have Doctor
Cavasos make a few comments.
Um
Mr. Jack and members of the
committee. Happy to be here with
you. Uh, structured literacy is
really the most evidence-based
approach to instruct students,
and that includes English
learners. So the majority of my
work has been with uh English
runners and English runners that
are duly served, that have
special needs, as well as
students who have uh reading
difficulties and the
The principles of structured
literacy support the practices
that help students to read.
And so a lot of the uh
information that
is often offered to support that
approach, include some of the
other things that we know work
for English learners. It's not
just structured literacy,
there's other things we need to
add to that, but for in a global
way across New Mexico, students
will profit from that
instruction, from that approach.
We've seen a historically uh
data from students where they've
underperformed, and part of that
reason has been because they've
been taught in a way that's not
aligned with their needs in a
way that was either too implicit
or in a way that
followed old strategies,
sometimes still used some,
there's some resistance for
those strategies. So this bill
would balance literacy, we
really need to move away from
that, because it hasn't helped
students in New Mexico and it
hasn't helped students
nationally. So New Mexico, I
actually my roots in New Mexico
go a bit further. I in 2014, I
led the New Mexico achievement
gap Research Alliance for the
Real Southwest Institute of
Educational Sciences. I spent a
lot of time here and at that
time we weren't using signs of
reading.
Or structured literacy, but we
were talking about those
strategies because we were
seeing a lot of underperformance
with English runners and with uh
a lot of the native groups and
students with disabilities. So I
can say that they're the same
strategies they've been now
grouped into a bundle for
structured literacy, but it's
what works best for these
students, and I think the data
is going to support that.
It's already, we're already
seeing a rise as uh um senator
Minchin in, in
In student outcomes, but it
takes a while for those outcomes
to really reveal themselves, and
that's true anywhere, any state
in New Mexico is just one of
many states that I support, and
I can tell you that the tide is
turning to structured literacy,
science or reading nationwide,
and I, I'm always so proud to
say that there's a lot of eyes
on New Mexico because it's
working for English learners in
New Mexico. And so that means
it's certainly gonna work for
students that are English
proficient.
So there's, I think it's really
important, this bill what I
think is critical is that you
wanna prepare.
In-service teachers.
When they become in service
teachers. If you wait for them
to get work in the schools to
learn these strategies, it's too
late. There's gonna be a lot of
students that are not going to
get the support they need and so
aligning uh the ITs and the
EPPs, the educated prep programs
with these strategies is really
in the best interest of all
pre-service teachers. It's gonna
benefit them and it's gonna
benefit uh the students in the
in the schools. And so that
alignment has to happen,
otherwise,
What they learn and what they do
is not gonna support the
students that you do have a bill
already and a rule in law or
structured literacy across the
state. So it's, it's a good idea
to match those because that's
what students need and that's
what teachers need.
And um I, I just think that this
bill would support that, will
enhance what's already
happening.
So Mr. Chairman, I, I failed to
mention that Doctor Cavazos has
also written a pamphlet a
booklet book for us, uh sites of
reading for English learners in
New Mexico, a review for the New
Mexico public department, and we
can email that to you all.
Um, let me just say a few more
words and then I would really
like to have uh a deputy
secretary to speak and tell you
a little bit about what PED is
doing. Uh, so, we have been
meeting with people about this
bill. We certainly have been
looking at it over the years in
LESC, um.
And, and we're uh professors in
our colleges of education, um,
are starting to actually take
the letters training. Um,
there's, there's a cohort right
now, uh, Doctor Valenzuela from
Highland, uh, met with us and uh
said that they were starting to
do that training. So we've
started to move forward, uh, the
deans have mentioned that they,
some of the deans, they would
like this statute because it's,
it's easier to say you have to
do it if we have it in statute.
If we are asking our educator
preparation programs to change,
so if uh a Deputy Debell could
make a few comments, Mr.
Chairman, and then we'll be
ready for questions.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
morning. Um, the advancing the
Science of Reading Act is the
pet's next step in improving
reading scores. Currently we are
at 39% proficiency, statewide.
We want to be able to ask our
EPPs in the bill, it's TPP to
incorporate science of reading
instruction, utilize
high-quality instructional
materials and eliminate
discredited balanced literacy
teaching practices.
Additionally, the Act mandates
that timely and consistent
parental notification, go out to
families so that families are
aware of how their student is
doing at any given time.
It also requires intervention
plans and progress monitoring
for students that are exhibiting
signs or characteristics of
dyslexia.
This legislative body helped to
bring a focus on literacy across
the state, and this is our
opportunity to extend the same
strong focus to our teacher
preparation programs in order to
ensure that our teachers are
ready and prepared to teach on
the very first day that they
start school.
The literacy and Humanities
Bureau was in the interim
talking about this work the
summer before last.
It is our intention that this
bill will ensure that future
teachers.
Exactly what they need, in
phonemic awareness, phonics,
fluency, vocabulary, and
comprehension instruction. All
of those elements are essential
for effective reading
instruction.
This bill does not negate
explicit language instruction
that might be needed by our
multilingual learners across the
state. The bill introduces
literacy coordinators in our
educator prep programs to ensure
that programs are teaching
structured literacy. It allows
for the pet to hold the PEPPs
accountable, requiring them to
align their coursework with the
New Mexico literacy framework.
We have been working with our
teacher preparation programs and
will continue with our partners
through the rule-making process.
As a reminder, the teacher
preparation programs are
overseen by the Public Education
department in order to align
with what is being taught in the
K-12 classrooms, and we work in
collaboration with Higher Ed. We
want again to make sure that our
in our literacy scores are
improving and.
this bill does just that. We
want to see increased graduation
rates, increased college
readiness rates and a stronger
workforce overall. Furthermore,
this bill will work at reducing
the need for expensive remedial
programs for which we are paying
right now.
We have made historic
investments to improve literacy
rates in the state.
And again, this act builds on
that effort and investment that
you have made. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh, we're
ready for questions or support
or opposition.
All right, thank you so much. So
we will go to our audience,
folks on Zoom, if you are with
us in support of Senate Bill 242
and wish to speak, please
indicate by raising your hand.
So let that populate.
All right folks in the room, if
you're here to support and speak
in support of House Bill or
Senate bill or rather 242,
please indicators in your hand.
All right, if you would, please
line up behind our presenters.
We have quite a bit of folks
we're scheduled to be on the
floor at 10:30. So if you would,
you have up to 2 minutes, but
please do not be repetitive, um.
Please, let's go ahead and get
started while we can't.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole. I'm
president CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I'm standing today in support of
SB 242. All of you on this
committee are very familiar with
what the signs of reading is
about. What's important to us as
business people is at a high
quality workforce is available
and the foundation for that
starts with children learning to
read and comprehend.
The chamber has long been
involved in efforts to help lift
student achievement.
Through all that work going back
almost two decades, we know how
critically important learning to
read is.
It's one of the reasons we
started the Albuquerque Reeds
program, staffed by volunteers,
reading to children, helping
them to love reading. The
current method of teaching
simply hasn't worked. After
decades of research, including
brain science, there has emerged
effective strategies of teaching
kids to read.
It said that the science of
reading is the converging
evidence of what matters and
what works in literacy
instruction. We believe this is
the right direction, and we urge
you to vote yes on the bill. We
also commend the sponsor for her
many years of working in this
arena and in particular today
for this bill. Thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Mandy
Torres Education Reform Director
for Think New Mexico and a
former elementary teacher.
We stand in support of SB 42,
and we thank the many people
working to ensure that teachers
are well prepared to help
students learn to read. As a
former elementary teacher, I did
learn about both balanced
literacy and structured literacy
in my clinical experience in
Massachusetts. What I learned
early on is that balance litter,
the balance literacy approach
can lead to issues with
comprehension. Using queuing
strategies means that students
guess it where it's based on the
context, or based on what letter
a word begins with. If a student
guesses wrong and does not have
an adult to correct them, there
is going to
could be a misunderstanding of a
text. On the other hand, I also
had the opportunity to learn the
Wilson program during my
clinical practice. When students
can decode words according to
rules, they have skills and
knowledge of how to break apart
a word and how to read the word
correctly. And when they read
words correctly, they are more
successful with comprehension.
The film moves New Mexico in
line with evidence-based best
practices, and not only
decoding, but also encoding
vocabulary, fluency and
comprehension.
We think parent communication is
essential and appreciate the
inclusion of this in the bill.
We also hope that more support
will follow a teaching materials
and support with classroom
implementation. We stand in full
support.
Thank you.
Please you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Sherry Jet. I'm the
chief academic officer for
Albuquerque Public Schools.
I'd like to express APS's
sincere appreciation for the
extensive effort that has gone
into the development of this
spill.
Passage a Senate Bill 242 is
critical for Albuquerque Public
Schools.
As it will empower us to achieve
our literacy objectives, improve
student outcomes and ensure that
our educators are exceptionally
trained.
and qualified.
We fully agree with Senator
Stewart's vision of delivering
world-class literacy instruction
to every student, New Mexico.
And therefore we stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 242.
Thank you.
Thank you. Please, you have up
to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for
Disability Rights in New Mexico,
as many of you know, um, in our
special ed student population,
its kids with learning
disorders, dyslexia, things like
that, that's the largest group
of our special education
students. This is a demonstrated
success uh approach. Uh, this
really works in teaching uh kids
how to read and to overcome some
of those um learning
disabilities. We are also
particularly
Supportive of the requirements
or the the encouragement in this
to get information back to
parents, get them involved, uh,
give them an opportunity to
support the students and what
they're going through in terms
of uh how to uh improve their
reading ability and so on, so we
encourage the support. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh Maria Hernandez,
the chief academic officer for
the Gadsden Independent School
District, also in support of
Bill 242, um, in our district
myself, I have been a bilingual
teacher. I have done dual
language. I have also done
English only instruction and
like many of us in this field,
through the years, the um
bilingual students have been
left behind in regards to
instructional practices, um,
Gadsden ISD is directly involved
with the Martinez Yazi case. So
we take the instruction.
our at-risk groups very, very
seriously, um.
And so I would just really want
to thank uh uh our
representatives for bringing
this bill forward currently, the
district spends many, many hours
training teachers on this um
initiative that the state has
provided and allowing that to be
at the um
higher ed level would really
support and improve um the
instruction immediately coming
out of campuses are coming out
of college for our students
without, um, I don't wanna say
wasting time, but really taking
up valuable instructional time
for teachers that could be using
this effort to implement these
pieces in the classroom. Thank
you.
Thank you.
This.
Good morning, Chairman, um, and
committee members. I am an
English learner. I am a product,
current staff member, and a
literacy specialist for the
Gadston Independent School
District.
I am also a parent of a Gadsden
students.
I mentioned my nail status
because I want to circle back to
this in a bit.
But I would like to share the
impact structured literacy has
had in Gadsden Independent
School District over the past 7
years.
So according to the uh defining
guide from the reading, the
science of reading is a vast
interdisciplinary body of
scientific research about
reading and writing that has
been in place over 50 years.
Interdisciplinary research
includes cognitive psychology,
communication sciences.
Developmental psychology,
education, special education,
linguistics, neuroscience, and
school psychology.
Literacy is a human right,
regardless of the zip code?
Ethnicity, dialect, or language
we all have.
Although the research has been
collected for over 50 years,
educators have not had access to
this information.
Prior to being a structured
literacy district, we followed a
balanced literacy, whole
language approach to teaching
reading.
As a bilingual teacher, I always
felt there was a missing link to
the instruction I was providing,
no matter how hard I tried or no
matter how hard I worked with my
students.
In 2018, our district received
the striving reader's
comprehensive literacy grant,
which brought a new
understanding of how children
learn to read through letters
training.
Bilingual teachers pushed back.
Including myself.
Um, we thought that the research
didn't support our English
learners.
And boy was I wrong. We know now
that structured literacy is
systematic and explicit
instruction for all students.
Oral language development, which
is a critical component for you,
thank you.
Please, you have up to 2
minutes, Mr. Terry and board
members, one of the, I'm Jessica
Castrobuna, a kindergarten
teacher in Las Cruces, New
Mexico. Structured literacy is
very important for all grade
levels, and has a critical
alignment with bilingual
education as an important piece
of New Mexico. As I think about
my student Yesenia, I'm grateful
that she has the opportunity to
be in a bilingual school. When
she started kindergarten, her
home language was a mix of
English and Spanish. As the
first days came around,
Uh, we could not understand what
she was saying. We, uh, we try
to grasp as much as we could,
but most of the time we failed.
Teaching structure, literacy and
the science of reading has has
been a game changer in
kindergarten class. Stricter
literacy provides multiple
avenues of support through
phonological awareness across
both languages, fluency and
comprehension begin to get
easier. Teaching explicit
vocabulary in both languages
also reinforces concepts and
supports that we need for
academic language development.
ensuring our students become
more successful. Equipping
schools with literacy programs
that include bilingual
education, will provide academic
success, but most of all, would
give equity to all of our
students. By meeting all of our
students where they're at and
valuing their language, we make
sure that bilingual students are
not um falling through the
cracks. As a kindergarten
teacher who has taught in
bilingual schools, I have
witnessed firsthand the
tremendous impact and structure
that structure literacy.
literacy has had, most of all,
when we align it with by
language education, we see a lot
more success. Yesenia now speaks
both languages fluently with
minor errors and is proud of who
she is. By prioritizing literacy
and bilingual education, we can
ensure all students have the
opportunity to succeed as
members of our community, muchas
gracias.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Dominika Chavez, advocacy
manager at New Mexico Kids Can.
We strongly support Senate Bill
242 and ask you to vote yes. New
Mexico's literacy crisis is
generational and unrelenting.
Right now, only 39% of our
students are reading at grade
level and more than half of our
4th graders lack the
foundational skills needed for
reading proficiency. Many of us
know someone impacted.
by this crisis. I think of my
family members who struggle to
read due to dyslexia. My
classmates who graduated unable
to read and comprehend complex
texts and the parents who are
told to wait and see if their
child catches up, or worse, the
parents who have no idea, their
child is behind. Literacy should
not be a privilege or left up to
chance. We know the science of
Reading works for all students,
including English learners. In
Gadsden, English language
students outperform the state's
18.9% proficiency rate for
English learners, with 37% at
grade level at Anthony
Elementary and 44% at law Union
Elementary, proving,
evidence-based instruction leads
to real results.
In the Yazi Martinez ruling, the
court found as a matter of fact,
that teachers must be trained to
teach reading with direct.
Explicit sequential and
systematic instruction, which is
exactly what this bill does.
Please vote yes on Senate Bill
242. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Chrissy Sawers, and I'm
a structured literacy coach in
the southwest corner of the
state.
Coaching teachers in 3 rural
school districts, and a member
of the professional practice
Standards Council.
I'm here today to express my
full support for Senate Bill
242.
It is imperative that teacher
candidates have access to
coursework on the science of
reading and structured literacy
in order to be successful in the
classroom.
We need teachers to provide the
students of New Mexico, high
quality instruction and reading,
and we need systems in place to
support this vision.
Teachers need to understand how
the brain learns to read in
order to teach students how to
read.
Learning about the science of
reading provides our teachers
the necessary knowledge and
tools to do just that.
Every day in my job, I am
working with teachers to
implement signs of reading and
literacy practices to improve
instruction in the classroom.
I'm working to help teachers to
learn about structured literacy
and make the switch from
balanced literacy, which many
teachers received in their
college coursework.
While the effort is also vital,
while this effort is also vital,
we must provide more proactive
must be more proactive in our
efforts.
This bill will provide our
students with teachers stepping
into the classroom already with
the understanding and knowledge
of the science of reading and
structured literacy, which is a
win for students of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Very.
Microphone.
I am a disciplinary literacy
coach is serving in Albuquerque
South Valley. As an educator
with over 25 years of experience
across elementary, middle, and
high school, I've seen
educational initiatives come and
go, but one that must stay is a
science of reading, and it must
be a required part of teacher
prep programs in New Mexico
colleges and universities.
Reading is a basic right that
belongs to every student,
regardless of race, color,
national origin, sex, religion,
or age, yet too many students.
are denied this right, not
because they lack potential, but
because many teachers were not
properly trained and
scientifically proven reading
instruction, myself included,
states that are successfully
closing literacy gaps have one
thing in common, they follow
structured science-backed
systems, but this training must
start before teachers enter the
classroom, not as an
afterthought once they are
already responsible for
students. Universities have a
big responsibility to ensure our
teachers are prepared to be
effective in their role. We
constantly emphasize the
importance of current and
ongoing research-based
practices. Well, this is the
research. Teachers should not
have to piece together effective
literacy instruction after
graduation, they must be trained
in proven methods before they
step into the classroom.
Furthermore, literacy is not
just an elementary issue, every
teacher, whether in math,
science, or social studies,
plays a role in developing
students' ability to read,
write, and think critically
within their discipline.
which happens in every subject.
That's why teacher licensure
must require demonstrated
competency in structured
literacy and the science of
reading through both coursework
and hands-on practice. Our
students deserve people,
teachers who are prepared for
day one. I urge you to support
SB 242, literacy is not just
about education, it is about
opportunity. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Asia Curry and I'm
currently serving as interim
director at Rio Caina Charter
School in Las Vegas.
I'd like to share our story with
our journey of structured
literacy. And what happens when
structured literacy is
implemented with consistency in
a school.
We have started with very low
proficiency scores over the
years in our reading and
struggle to find what would work
for our students.
After implementing structured
literacy with guidance from the
state, a coach, high quality
instructional materials and
myself as an administrator with
tools to support my staff.
Our scores are now at 80%
proficient in K2 in reading.
My 5 year old daughter is in
kindergarten at my school, and
her favorite activities of the
day are the activities that are
structured, foundational reading
activities.
I can walk by the kindergarten
classroom and hear them working
on their sounds and letters, and
her pride shines through, she
tells me after school, I'm
learning to read, Mama.
Being a part of the PED
structured literacy and letters,
both as a teacher and as an
administrator has changed the
way we do things in our school.
My staff does not think of it as
one more thing or additional
paperwork or something else to
do, but instead say that letters
is the best PD they've had and
the most impactful for our young
scholars.
My team and myself look at the
extra tools and accountability
as an opportunity to stay on
track and do the right thing.
We appreciate the structure
provided with explicit
instruction and reading
foundations as it's not up for
everyone to have to guess and
find their materials.
My students and youth all around
the state deserve to have the
most quality instruction
possible. It's unacceptable for
our schools and our students to
have literacy instruction that
does not effectively prepare
them with the foundations of
reading to be successful
throughout school and beyond.
This impacts much more than a
student's current grade-level
work, but everything that they
do after. Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Lauren Scott and I'm a
kindergarten teacher in
Albuquerque, and I'm here in
support of SB 242. I think the
sponsors did a very informative
job, so of the other speakers of
why this type of instruction
works. Um, I'm here to speak
about the strong emphasis on
field experience hours.
Some might argue that the new
teacher requirements will
exacerbate teacher shortages and
teacher turnovers.
I would argue that if new
teachers know why they are
teaching reading this way by
receiving thorough preparation,
they will stay committed to
teaching and see the results of
their efforts.
Teachers stay in the classroom
when they feel effective and
being adequately prepared to
teach, does just that. As a
teacher who is working with a
resident teacher, um, completing
her last semester. I have
directly seen how important it
is that teachers having courses
in the science of reading and
field experience are. When she
first began working with me, she
had the belief that many do,
that English is arbitrary and
tricky.
Now since spending time in the
classroom and learning that the
way we spell and read is
governed by specific rules and
structures, she is more
confident teaching reading, and
I feel really proud of her going
into next year. For this reason,
I urge you to support SB 242.
Thank you for your time.
Good morning, um, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Giriano. I'm a bilingual
specialist from Gaston
Independent School District.
At JSD we serve about 11,500
students in kinder and 12th
grade.
Um, 48% of our school's
populations are classified as
English language learners.
Our district only consists of 14
elementary schools, 9 out of
those elementary schools, um, 9
out of 14 elementary schools are
dual language schools serving
the fifty-fifty dual language
program. Um, we understand the
importance and the urge of
supporting English language uh
students, English language
learners need to develop
language, and for that reason,
our district is currently
implementing the structure.
Framework
Uh, we understand phonological
skills is an important
component, um, the, the
destructure literacy framework
uh bu assist us with. This is
where our explicit instruction
comes in. At the same time, we
also implement strategies and
scaffolds.
We collaborate in partnership
with dual language of New
Mexico. We implement strategies
to develop not just the oral
language, but also to develop
the background knowledge,
comprehension, and vocabulary,
which all of these are
components of the structure of
literacy framework.
With all of the help of this was
instruction strategies and
implementation of scaffolds, we
are able to assist all of our
students, not just our uh
English, but also our English
language development.
At GISD with their language
skills.
Lovely.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Ana Nunez and I am a
literacy specialist in the
Gaston Independent Schools
District.
As a prior instructional coach
in a dual-language school. My
role was to guide teachers in
the effective implementation of
structured literacy and all of
its components such as phonics
morphology, reading
comprehension, syntax,
semantics, and writing in both
English and Spanish while being
true to our dual language model.
We realized that for this
approach to work, it was
critical to deliver direct,
explicit, and systematic
instruction of foundational
skills in both languages
simultaneously.
Any dual language school, it is
imperative that teams work
together to make sure that
students' language proficiency
and capacity is strongly
developed in both languages.
preparing our future educators
and higher ed institutions in
the explicit and systematic
structured literacy approach, we
will ensure success for all
students and the development of
bilingual and biliterate
children. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Annabelia Parra, and I'm
the instructional specialist
with Gaston Independent School
District.
With the implementation of
structured literacy at Gadsden
Independent School District, it
has been important to provide
students with linguistic
differences and focus attention
on oral language development.
This is one way we have ensured
equity with all of our students.
Robust conversations in our
classrooms support our English
learners.
Um, academic language,
vocabulary, and grammatical
structures in all content areas.
Um, as a local facilitator as a
local letters facilitator, I
have firsthand seen the
differences that this training
has made uh into our classrooms
and with our students and for
this we stand with full support
with this bill. Thank you for
your time.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, Nubia Tarazona, a
director of Language inequity
and cultural artsges and
independent school district.
And GISD we currently use
structured literacy structures
in our bilingual programs are
dual language and our
transitional program. Structured
literacy is systematic and
cumulative diagnostic and
explicit instruction, no matter
if teachers are teaching a
Spanish language arts or an
English language arts block are
English learners deserve
equitable equitable teaching
methodology in both languages.
to ensure that we meet the goals
of our bilingual multicultural
multicultural education program.
Bilingualism and by literacy is
our goal. English learners in
our district master their native
language while acquiring a
second language, and our
teachers should come prepared
and ready to be ready on day one
in the classroom, so we should
allow
this bill to pass, so we have
We don't extend that gap for
children.
Learning if teachers get to our
districts and do not know how to
teach reading, that affects the
students at the end of the day.
Thank you for your time.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, stand
rounds for the school
superintendents this time.
Mr. Chairman, you've already
made the decision on this.
7 years ago you decided the
letters would be trained for
every elementary teacher in New
Mexico.
We are in that process. We have
operationalized that.
But this legislation does is it
now says the higher end
institutions, you need to
recognize that that's the new
direction that is being taken,
he need to align what's
happening there, what's
happening in the field.
I want to remind us that about
35% of our teachers and
elementary education don't go
through the college education
process.
Hence, we're going to have to
continue doing training as
districts.
And I'm concerned, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee that we
don't have a long-range funding
mechanism in place to ensure
that we have consistency and
continuity, and I think that's
the next thing we need to do,
Mr. Chairman, you're going to
hear other negatives about this
program because change is hard.
And I'll talk to you as a
practitioner of a lot of years
in this state.
We need to go very carefully and
very deliberately through those
changes.
We want to recommend Mr.
Chairman, that we moved the
effective date to July of 2027,
which allows a two-year period
to turn the ship, not the
rowboat of education. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman Chris Balzano,
register lobbyist for Rian
Public schools, and we stand in
support of this piece of
legislation.
Don't worry, brevity, I like it.
All right, so we have folks
online.
So
Alyssa, good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alisa Cooper de Uribe.
I'm a first grade bilingual
teacher at New Mexico
International School in
Albuquerque. I support SB 242,
and I thank Madam Protem for
bringing this to the session for
my bilingual learners,
structured literacy is
essential. My 19 1st graders,
they're learning to read in two
languages simultaneously, and I
see through my progress reports
how evidence-based instruction
helps them thrive, as you all
have heard this morning. In
Spanish, I have always had
access to structured structured
literacy aligned materials, but
for English for years I was left
to piece together resources on
my own, and despite my
alternative licensure training
in bilingual and cult culturally
responsive teaching. I lacked
the preparation to confidently
teach English literacy in my
earliest stage as an educator
until being introduced to that
previously mentioned Wilson
program. I remember the moment
that reading clicked for me.
Shout out to my hometown in
Ratton, were structured literacy
methods were used.
But for my teenage daughter, a
bilingual learner, that kind of
moment didn't happen. She has
since become an academic
powerhouse, but she still
struggles to read fluently and
spelling can still feel like an
insurmountable challenge. She
was not identified and diagnosed
with orthographic dyslexia until
middle school because her
teachers, including me, had not
been sufficiently trained in our
educator preparation programs to
recognize those nuanced signs
and provide the best targeted
support in elementary school.
This bill ensures that future
educators are equipped with
those structured literacy tools
they need in both languages so
that students can learn without
those unnecessary barriers.
Again, I urge you to support
this bill. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman.
Rika, good morning. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Good morning. My name is Ria
Smith. I'm the assistant
principal at the Arts Academy at
Bella Vista Elementary in
Clovis. I am also a licensed
dyslexia therapist and certified
academic language therapist.
As a therapist, I have seen the
positive effects of reading
instruction based in science
many times over. Students come
to me thinking that there is
something wrong with them. They
have little to no confidence in
themselves. Once they understand
that their reading issues are
not their fault. We undo the
balanced literacy instructional
miscues that they have endured
and implement structured
literacy practices, these
students soar. Some former
students have gone on to become
valedictorian and salutatorians.
The
through 5 campus of the Arts
Academy became one of 3 model
schools for structured literacy
in the 2223 school year. As with
many schools, our Title One
campus was hit hard during
COVID, bouncing back has been
more of an uphill push than a
rebounding bounce.
However, the implementation of
reading instruction based in
scientific fact has helped ride
our ship. Our school made gains
in every grade level 3 through 6
last year on the Namesa reading
test. On iStation reading, our
kindergarten scores have gone
from 12% proficient at the end
of the year in 21, 22 to 40% at
the end of last year. Third
grade went from 10% proficient
in 21, 22 to 54% last year. We
still have work to do, but our
trajectory is a
Positive one. Just a few years
ago, teachers at all grade
levels were trying to figure out
how to get students to be able
to decode and pull words off the
page. Now teachers are receiving
students who are able to read
and can now focus more on grade
level appropriate skills. As
educators, our job is not just
to educate those who are easy to
teach. It is to reach every
student. Structured literacy
practices allow educators to
reach more students and help
develop them to their greatest
potential. Thank you for your
time.
Adriana. Good morning. You have
up to 2 minutes.
Maybe Adrian.
Good morning, Chairman. Can you
guys hear me?
OK, good morning, Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Adriana Barragan and my kids
attend Hurley Elementary.
The science of reading act in
New Mexico has been a game
changer for my daughter. My
daughter is a 2nd grader who is
in danger of being retained last
year, but thanks to her hard
work and the amazing programs at
her school. She has made
tremendous strides at the
beginning of the year, she was a
level 2 in I station. Now she is
at a level 4. She has grown 4
levels in the DRA assessment and
then the star reading
assessment. She went from a
pre-primary level with 2.1,
which is second grade level. She
is now exactly where she needs
to be. These
programs have provided her with
the tools and support she needed
to excel. My daughter also sees
a wonderful interventionist who
provides her with a strong
literacy program. She has shown
incredible growth, and I
couldn't be more proud of her
dedication and perseverance.
My daughter's achievements are a
testament to the power of
quality education and
determination that her little
has to offer so much.
I know we kind of lost you
there.
Hello, can you hear me?
OK. Guys lose me.
It, it sounds like it.
All right, we're gonna move on
to Diana. Thank you.
To
Morning, Tara. You have up to 2
minutes.
Tarry with us.
Right, so.
Sarara, please. Good morning.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
Representatives. My name is Sara
Goop, and I'm a parent of a
struggling reader, uh, who's now
in 8th grade. And I have to say,
had this legislation been in
place earlier, it would have
saved my child so much struggle
and would have been so valuable
to us as a family to her
self-confidence and to her
skills as a reader. I think this
is incredibly important to have
in place that every teacher
who's in the classroom is ready
to address the needs of
struggling readers. Thank you so
much.
Thank you.
All right, Doctor Costales,
please give up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
I'm, uh, Doctor Jacqueline
Costales. I've been in
elementary teacher, elementary
principal, and a high school
principal where I've seen
students struggling with reading
at all levels of the system. I'd
like to start by going back up
to the airplane, airplane level
and speak very simply about the
importance of this bill without
all the technical aspects that
are sure to be thoroughly
discussed today. The bottom line
is that this bill builds on
Senate Bill 398 that was passed
by this legislature in 2019.
This new bill assures that our
new teachers have the
instruction during their teacher
preparation to be ready on day
one to meet the needs of all
students, but in particular the
needs of our most marginalized
Martinezazi students are native
students are abilities are
multilingual learners and our
students experiencing poverty.
This bill intends to speak to
the importance of teaching,
reading across our state based
on the science of reading and
structured literacy method.
ology This includes
research-based practices and
includes English and
multilingual learners. This bill
is about explicit reading
instruction, which is an
important
Standards and this bill does not
prohibit the use of all the
language arts standards such as
listening, speaking, writing,
research, communication, and
most importantly, this bill does
not prevent any teacher from
capitalizing on the cultural and
linguistic assets of all
students. This bill assures that
when our teacher candidates do
their student teaching clinical
practice, or alternative
licensure coursework that they
learned to utilize the science
of reading and structured
literacy, instructional
practices.
Um
The support of this legislature
in 2019 helped to galvanize the
focus on reading across the
state and your continued support
is needed through this bill to
assure our teacher prep programs
preparing our teachers to teach
reading.
Reading instruction list
literacy methodologies from
their first date.
Thank you.
Um, Donna.
Morning, Dane. 2 minutes.
Donna, Dana Trujillo. Yes, are
you calling on me? I'm Dana
Trujillo.
Can you hear me? Sorry about
that.
No problem. Good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Dana
Trujillo. I'm the principal of
Sunset Elementary in Rosville,
New Mexico, and I'm in support
of SB 242. Our school is one of
the 3 schools that one of the
first speakers highlighted at
the beginning of this
professional discourse today. We
serve a predominantly low
socioeconomic student
population, replete with English
learners and students with
disabilities. Structured
literacy has been a highly
effective mechanism to help us
purposefully target
instructional gaps for all of
our sub.
groups in all language domains.
One of the first speakers there
offered you our data, proof that
the science of reading
transcends economic status and
mitigates learning difficulties.
Our teachers have received
specialized training.
Seasoned teachers comment on the
letters training they receive,
and stressed that their only
regret is that they didn't
receive this training early on
in their careers.
New teachers with letters
training and parallel
professional development
opportunities are better
equipped to begin their teaching
careers with a professional
capacity that sets them and
their students on a positive
trajectory.
Our professionals implement
their new skill sets, and our
students benefit in multifaceted
ways.
Our students now receive
intentional standards-based
instruction rooted in the
science of reading.
Beyond our celebrated data, we
have an impressive number of
students that now refer to
themselves as readers and
writers and teachers who know
how to address learning
challenges.
Our universities are in a prime
position to promote much needed
change. Please help them prepare
prospective teachers to make a
substantial impact. Once they
reach our school systems, we
will continue to build on those
fundamentals.
Together, we will continue to
create learning environments
rich with highly skilled
educators and learners whose
needs are not only being met,
but whose skill sets are being
deepened. Please join us in our
efforts to promote change and
support SB 242. Thank you very
much for your time.
Laverne
Good morning, you have 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Laverne Martinez,
principal of Hurley Elementary
and the Cory Consolidated School
District.
6 years ago, our school was
using the Lucy Caulkins balanced
literacy approach, which focused
on the queuing system and
reading for meaning with very
little focus on the foundational
skills.
We knew this was not good for
our students, especially for our
struggling students. So, um, we
were over the moon when
structured literacy came into
play in our district 3 years
ago. Um, all my teachers have
been trained in letters and
we've adopted a strong uh
curriculum based and the science
of reading, and it has built
such a strong foundation.
Teachers aren't surface
teaching, they're able to go in
depth with the connections of
sounds and letters, decoding
comprehension and what has been
really
amazing is that our kiddos can
speak to that learning like what
diagraphs are voiced and
unvoiced sounds, their word
attack skills are improving
their confidence in reading is
evident. Um, the strategies of,
um, structured literacy are
multisensory.
helps with retention.
Our school has shown great
growth in our scores K through 5
and I Station and IMESA and our
NASA semitive um assessment.
Our subgroups of SET students
and intervention has grown
already by 50% this year.
2 years ago, we were a
traditional school, uh, with the
score of 52% to last year,
growing to a 72%, 20% increase
and now we are spotlight school
in the state of New Mexico. We
know what works and we know what
we're gonna stick with and that
structured literacy. So we are
in full support of Senate Bill
242. Thank you.
Thank you Shiri.
Morning, you have up to 2
minutes.
Thank you for your time. My name
is Heidi Shembry. I'm a
kindergarten teacher at Los
Alamos Public Schools. I've been
teaching in New Mexico for 23
years. I'm also a letters
facilitator for the state of New
Mexico, and I am a participant
in the IEcho PLC program, which
is a learning professional
community that supports teachers
and learning and reinforcing
what we've learned in letters
and solving problems that are
happening in our class. You've
heard lots of good reasons for
support of this bill, um, it's
important that teachers have
that strong foundation before we
begin teaching, um, because it's
easier to learn the right thing
at the beginning, then to go
back and undo what we learned
that is wrong. Um, if we already
start with effective teaching
practices, we can focus our
future professional development
on professional learning
communities that continue to
allow us to have an implement
effective to change
technologies, um,
So I just am in support of this,
and thank you for your time.
Aaron, the morning of 2 minutes.
Thank you, Chair and committee
members.
My name is Sarah Huntton and I
have been an educator in New
Mexico for 19 years. I'm
speaking today in opposition of
SB 242. My first concern is
teacher censorship by
Oops, sorry, Sarah, we're not on
opposition. We're currently on
sport. So we'll come back to
you. Please lower your hand.
We'll get to our position.
Yeah.
Ashley Brook.
Good morning, Brooke. We have up
to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Brooke Beatty. As a
kindergarten teacher in the
Roswell Independent School
District, I fully support SB
242. RISD has implemented the
science of reading and letters
for the past 3 to 5 years. We
have seen an easier and earlier
path to reading proficiency in
our students, closing the gaps
to mastery. I have taught
kindergarten for over 15 years
and have never seen decoding and
fluency as early in the school
year as we have recently.
are less frustrated because of
the repeated structured reading
instruction.
The addition of Science of
reading to university students
and educational degree plans
will benefit future educators,
current educators, and most
importantly, our students. I
encourage you to support SB 242.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Jamie, good morning. You have up
to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee. I am Jamie Henderson
and I am the principal at Brendo
Elementary in Roswell, and I
fully support SB 242 since
implementing the science of
reading in our schools, we have
definitely seen a change in our
teacher's confidence and being
able to address our students'
needs, um, an easier pathway to
determining deficit skills and
being able to provide the
effective strategies to support
those students. We've also seen
an
in our parent involvement and
their interest in learning about
the science of reading because
as they meet with the teachers
and they're able to identify
those deficit skills and be able
to talk to the parents about
this is what we see, but this is
the next step for your student,
the parents are also more on
board of being able to support
their kids at home, and they are
more confident in providing
additional structures and
practices at home to support the
teachers in the classroom.
Um
We are
Seeing a very big increase in
our test scores and um the
confidence in our students and
teachers as well. And again, we
are in full support of the SB
242 and asked that you do the
same. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Victoria. Good
morning, Victoria. You have 2
minutes.
Good morning. Thank you for your
time. I, my name is Victoria
Green. I am a reading specialist
for the Roswell Independent
School District. I'm gonna start
by repeating um what's been said
before already, that literacy is
a human right.
Um, and the need to continue to
do better, to continue our
systems and practices for
students in New Mexico is
urgent. I wholeheartedly support
Senate Bill 242, as we have seen
the transformative power of
structured literacy in my own
classroom within our school
building, and throughout the
Roswell Independent School
District. We've talked a lot
this morning about the letters
training. Letters stands for
languages essentials for
teachers of reading and
spelling. Well, the the language
essentials for teachers of
reading and spelling should not
not wait until teachers are
already in front of students. By
ensuring that all teacher
candidates are trained in the
science of reading in the
pre-service setting, we are
setting up both teachers and
students for success. I urge you
to vote yes for this bill, so
that every teacher in New Mexico
has the tools they need to help
all students become not only
confident and capable readers,
but confident and capable and
successful members of society.
Thank you.
grown
Good morning, you have up to 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dolores Ingram. I'm the
proud principal at Nancy Lopez
Elementary School in Roswell. We
are in support of Senate Bill
242. Our school has transitioned
from balanced literacy to
structured literacy, and we are
beating the COVID slide. English
language learners far exceed
progress in our district and
state as teacher expertise is
increased through letters and
guidance from a certified
academic language therapist.
As a school with high poverty,
EL and sped populations, we are
meeting the expectations of Yazi
Martinez lawsuit by providing
outcomes for students for
providing improving outcomes for
our students. A huge shout out
to the May Center and the New
Mexico Literacy Institute for
providing expert guidance on our
journey. Please vote yes for SB
242. Thank you.
Uh, sharing
Cherokee have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Sherri Ruhorse. I'm a former
board member at the Naval
Preparatory School of
Farmington. I served in my role
for over 10 years. I'm in
support of SB 242, a think the
sponsor, uh, for introducing
this. I think it's an important,
um, avenue for us uh to try to
mitigate some of the challenges
that relate to issues that were
brought up in the Marine Yasi
Martinez, um.
Case
Um, as, as mentioned earlier,
um, in the LESC um FIR.
Um, there is mention that
A
science of breeding is
supportive of, of the efforts uh
mentioned as remedies for
Martinez Yazi, and I think that
this is an important bill to
help our um disadvantage and
those will face those students
with disabilities to
Succeed. Thank you.
Go back to Tara.
morning time. Are you there?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Thank you. My name is Sarah
Hier. I am a certified
structured literacy dyslexia
interventionist at Hurley
Elementary, which is part of the
Cobra Consolidated School
District.
I am in support of SB 242.
I have seen in my 4 years at
early elementary.
The importance of structured
literacy. Um, personally as an
interventionist, 100% of my
students who I taught structured
literacy in the early grades of
1st and 2nd grade.
Our, are now flying high in 4th
and 5th grade. They do not need
my support anymore.
All but one of these students
has tested as on grade level on
target in their eyesa at the
middle of the year.
Mm.
It is very important that all
students receive structured
literacy.
Um, in the classroom.
Um, because it has been shown by
research that it is beneficial
for all students, not just those
that are struggling.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and the committee.
For your support.
All right, thank you.
So, we'll go to opposition, so
folks that are in opposition to
Senate Bill 242 on Zoom, please
indicate by raising your hand.
That populate in the room,
opposition to Senate Bill 242,
please indicate by raising your
hand. All right, if you would
please line up behind our
presenters. You'll have up to 2
minutes.
Thank you all for joining.
All right. Please welcome Ys.
Good morning. My name is
Elizabeth Valenzuela, and I'm
the executive director for the
association of Bilingual
Education in Mexico. I'm also
speaking on behalf of the
bilingual multicultural
Education Act advisory Council.
As of SY 2324, 45,374 kids in
New Mexico are at risk of being
left behind because of our
literacy policies ignored the
realities of how they learn. We
cannot afford to keep pushing
forward frameworks that don't
account for bilingualism and
biliteracy. The law is clear,
and I'm and IE is required to
consult a bilingual
multicultural Education Act
Advisory Council when making
decisions that impact
bilingualism by literacy and
multicultural education.
That's not a suggestion. It's a
mandate. And for years, it's
been ignored since 2020, the BMX
has raised red flags about New
Mexico's extensive use of
structured literacy without real
bilingual education integration
to former New Mexico Pet
secretaries dismissed these
concerns. Now in January 2025,
secretary of the DA finally took
action, requested a review of
the science of reading modules
to ensure they align with what
actually works for a bilingual
students with an agreement that
the review would be completed by
June 2020.
pipe, any changes made in the
and any changes made in the
fall. The science of reading
modules developed by Aed contain
gaps that failed to account for
my literacy, risking the
exclusion of emergent bilingual
learners.
Translate when translanguaging a
research-backed approach that
allows students to leverage
their full linguistic
repertoire. It's largely absent
from the current teaching, uh,
training, failure to address
this gaps in bilingual education
is likely building a bridge
without constructing and
consulting engineering engineers
without the expertise of
bilingual educators, we risk
constructing an educational
framework that will fail the,
the more than 45,000 students
currently enrolled in our
bilingual multicultural
education programs.
We respect, respectfully ask you
to.
tabled this bill to further
study over the interim in order
to ensure that it fully
addresses the needs of bilingual
multicultural students. Thank
you so much.
All right. Please welcome me 2
minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Lorettariquill and I'm the
executive director of Transform
Education in Mexico, or a
statewide coalition that comes
together to advocate on behalf
of the students named in the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit. I stand
before you as a reading endorsed
educator with 20 years of
experience in the classroom. I
also hold a master's degree in
language literacy and
sociocultural studies from the
University of New Mexico.
I'd like to say that um we don't
have to choose between phonics
and effective instruction that
needs the full needs of our
students. I believe we can do
both.
High-performing states improve
literacy with well-planned,
well-funded strategies, not
quick fixes.
This isn't about delay, it's
about getting it right. We urge
you to table this bill for
further study over the interim
because this bill has, has
implications beyond just higher
ed.
We all agree that literacy is
essential, but we also agree
that language and culture are
not add-ons.
Just this Wednesday in this
committee, we celebrated the
need to study bilingual
education, and many of you
voiced your support for the need
to um embrace language and
culture and the identities of
our students. The question isn't
whether students need strong
reading instruction. It's how we
ensure it's effective,
inclusive, and aligned with New
Mexico's diverse classrooms.
Over the last year and a half,
students from across the street
have told Transformation in
Mexico, what they want. Teachers
who see, understand, and value
their language and identity.
These things are not in
conflict.
Research shows that literacy
thrives when students see their
culture and backgrounds
reflected in learning.
Effective reading instructions
not just about phonics. It must
include criticality, meeting
making, and engagement.
No high performing education
system relies on one single
method alone, and New Mexico
shouldn't either.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Ellen Bernstein, and I'm the
president of the Albuquerque
Teachers Federation.
Before I was elected,
President, I was an elementary
teacher who taught children how
to read for 17 years. During
that time, I earned a master's
in special education, and became
a nationally board certified
teacher in early childhood
education.
I'm telling you my resume
because I wanna add credibility
to my testimony today. Sometimes
people think I started as the
union president, but I do have a
lot of experience in teaching.
I understand the value of
structured literacy.
As a teaching strategy.
However, there's not just one
strategy for every child. The
most important skill a teacher
has is the ability to
differentiate for our diverse
learners.
We must have knowledge and
experience with numerous
strategies to address the
individual needs.
As teachers, we are trained in
New Mexico's multi-layered
systems of support.
MLSS tells us that we must use
many different strategies to
address struggling learners, and
it says in the manual that it
empowers teachers to use their
professional judgment and make
decisions about how to intervene
with the students that are
struggling.
It's also my understanding that
colleges of education are
already using structured
literacy as a method for
teaching aspiring teachers.
Outlying specific strategies is
a reach too far.
I asked that
You listen to the previous
speakers, and take some time
during the interim to hear from
colleges of education to study
how the legislation does or does
not support the requirements of
the New Mexico Indian Education
Act and multiculture act. Thank
you.
Please welcome Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Melissa Candelaria here for the
de Mexico marijuana poverty and
uh attorney for the Yazi
plaintiffs and the Yazi Martinez
case. We appreciate the
commitment to improving literacy
for all New Mexico students, and
respectfully oppose Senate Bill
242 in its current form. We
recognize the importance of
structured literacy and reading
development, especially for
students with disabilities.
However, by mandating the
science of reading as the sole
instructional approach for
literacy instruction, and
banning balance literacy. This
bill restricts educators'
ability to use proven
research-based strategies and
support.
The English language learners
and Native American English.
Research from New Mexico's
illiteracy experts, the PED and
the LESC all confirmed that
structured literacy alone is
insufficient for ELLs. Instead,
additional comprehensive
instructional strategies beyond
just phonic space methods are
needed for ELL student success.
This aligns with the 2018 Yazzi
Martinez ruling or the where the
court found that New Mexico is
failing to provide effective.
Language instruction programs
for ELL students violating its
legal obligation under state and
federal law to support English
acquisition. The recent
non-compliance motion filed by
the plaintiffs demonstrates the
state's ongoing.
to address these deficiencies in
the years since the ruling.
By prohibiting effective
instructional methods for ELL
students. This legislation could
actually exacerbate existing
educational inequities, these
students face. We urge this
committee to delay passage of SB
242, and use the interim to
study bilingual education and
comprehensive literacy
initiatives. Thank you.
All right, so we'll go to our
folks on Zoom. Tara.
Please, sir, Thank you, esteemed
chair and committee members. My
name is Sarah Hunton and I have
been an educator in New Mexico
for 19 years, and I'm speaking
today in opposition of SB 232 in
its current form. Structured
literacy has already been
mandated in New Mexico. It is a
non-negotiable.
The concern is teacher
censorship by banning balanced
literacy practices that are
evidence-based according to the
National Reading panel, National
Early Literacy panel, National
Literacy panel for language
minority children or youth and
the US Department of Education's
Institute of Education Sciences.
Even well-known science of
reading researcher Timothy
Shanahan states, these laws and
regulations are more likely to
undermine quality instruction
rather than encourage it.
I work in a district that
utilizes structured literacy and
balanced literacy practices
since 2022, we have increased
early literacy proficiency by 15
points, but the spotlight school
designation and in grades 3
through 11 by 5% points. We are
getting sustained results with a
blended approach to teaching.
Unlike states like Mississippi
who are seeing their grade 8
scores plummet.
Second is high quality
instruction materials being
mandated for student teaching
hours and administrative
internship hours. This is an
unfunded mandate.
Currently, the majority of
Mexico schools already have
HQIM, yet our NAEP scores
continue to take another dip. I
believe that additional
attention on the Mexico literacy
is needed. Thankfully, PED can
currently support districts that
are low performing, though
already funded structure through
already funded structure
literacy programs. However, the
LESE did find that English
language learners decline in
proficiency in these programs.
I've been trying to bounce
literacy and the science of
reading. Every approach has
something to offer literacy
instruction and an appreciation
for both perspectives is key in
moving forward. Thank you for
your time today and dedication
to New Mexico.
Thank you.
Uh, Michelle's iPhone.
Hello, I'm, I'm Michelle
Morrison and I currently teach
6th grade in Portalis. Um, I, as
a teacher, I have taught in
Idaho and New Mexico in a
variety of grades K6 as a
classroom teacher, reading
interventionists and certified
specialists. I've taught
structured literacy, but I found
that when you balance that with
balanced literacy, it's much
more effective. One thing I've
learned in all of the classrooms
I've worked in is that teaching
is much less about the
curriculum and much more about
being a flexible teacher.
Who uses data to support their
students being child centered is
the key to increased literacy
rates.
We should be talking to teachers
about their challenges in the
classroom and studying the most
effective schools in the state
to identify what is working for
New Mexico students. Not a
single teacher would say that
banning instructional practices
that they have in their tool kit
is the solution to increase
literacy in their classroom.
This bill says to me that
teachers are not trusted and
they're not capable of making
effective decisions in their
classrooms, please vote no to SB
242. And let's work on together
rather than pass.
punitive mandates on teachers.
Thank you.
Uh, Sandra.
Learning center, you have at
least 2 minutes.
Uh, thank you. I am Sandra
Rodriguez, an associate
professor and chair of the
Department of Education at
Northern New Mexico College. As
a member of a higher education
institution and a member of a
coalition of higher education
institutions, we are not in a
position of teaching a
structured literacy approach
when we teach our reading
methods courses. I believe most
of us are already doing that
now. I also believe the impact
of the letter's training has had
a positive
impact on the teaching of
reading.
As a private citizen, my
personal opposition to this bill
is the narrow focus of looking
at only one piece of what is
needed to make comprehensive
changes.
It is that there is no
comprehensive plan by PED that
looks at the teaching of reading
as one component of a full
licensure program.
He continued approach of only
addressing one part of what
takes place in a licensure
program will not harness the
outcomes being proposed in this
bill.
We need a fully outlined
comprehensive approach that
includes a shared responsibility
between EPPs, districts, the
state, families and communities
to support our educational
systems. What we have heard here
today is the impact of what
working together can harness.
We are in the early stages of
that positive impact. We need to
continue to work to examine and
look at all approaches when we
want to uh to harness.
Improvement that is going to
last um and make an impact in
New Mexico. It is not a time to
start tearing things apart and
to start over with that process.
Thank you.
Thank you. Barbara. Good
morning, Barbara. You have up to
2 minutes.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, and good morning to members
of the committee. I really
appreciate the work on this
bill, and I am.
Happy to see that there's real
talk going on between
universities and practitioners
in the classroom. However, I
have real concerns about this
spill. I was a classroom
teacher, a reading coach, or
reading intervention teacher for
35 years. And over those years,
um, hopefully our current
teachers will come out knowing
what I knew at the end of my 35
years. The, the goal
is to increase
The tools, the classroom
teachers have, and it's not just
one tool. The most important
thing that I found in my years
of teaching is the relationship
that I had with students and
their trust in me as an
instructor, and my trust in them
is learners, and that took many
different forms and needed many
different tools. I really
appreciate the other comments,
especially for our language
learners and
students who come with a whole
array of different backgrounds
and how we as
As educators meet those needs
and recognize them, and finally,
I have real concern about how we
address the needs of our
youngest children in
kindergarten, how their needs
for social interaction play in
language development in
exploratory ways is needed to
further their learning as they
move on throughout the grades.
So thank you very much for your
consideration, um, and I'll just
end with saying we all want
what's best for children. The
issue is how do we as
professionals approach that.
Thank you very much.
Uh-huh, Michelle,
please you have up to 2 minutes.
Morning, legislators, educators
and community members. I come to
you this morning to urge you to
critically think about additions
to Senate Bill 242.
One that acknowledges and
upholds the linguistic and
cultural diversity of New Mexico
students and communities.
Literacy is an act of
liberation. While this bill aims
to improve literacy through the
science of reading it falls
short in one vital area by
literacy, an act of liberation
in our communities.
New Mexico is home to a rich
multilingual population with
rich diverse speakers of
multiple languages and cultures,
not just monolingual English
speakers. Our approach needs to,
our approach to literacy cannot
be a one size fits all model
based on states with vastly
different demographics.
The research is clear by
literacy is not a barrier to
literacy. It's a strength.
Effected by literacy instruction
is not separate from structured
literacy. It enhances it by
drawing from multiple research
back back designs like
translanguaging, pedagogies and
procedures, integrating both
bilingual and English-based
methods can add value to our
students' home language and
community practices. Think about
our bilingual seals and amazing
assessment of biliteracy that
incorporates the biliteracy
journey of cade 12 students. We
are leaders in this area, yet as
SB 242
has written threatens to erase
bilingualism from the
conversation. By banning
violence literacy outright and
imposing rigid teacher training
requirements, this bill
disregards the expertise of our
educators and limits
instructional flexibility. It
assumes that the same approach
that works in monolingual
English dominant settings will
work in New Mexico's unique
linguistic landscape, a flawed
assumption that could negatively
impact bilingual and indigenous
students. We cannot afford to
past mistakes, New Mexico's own
Yasi Martinez ruling mandates a
multicultural and multilingual
approach to education, one that
values students' home languages
and culture. This bill must be
amended to integrate all of the
acts that support.
Thank
Kimberly's iPhone too.
Please.
Kimberly
Kimberly
Hello, I'm sorry.
This is Kimberly. Thank you. Um.
I'm a teacher from Portalis. I'm
an intervention teacher. I have
38 years of teaching and um I
would just like to say when I
first started teaching, I did,
did not have a
Good background in what I was
gonna do in the classroom, but
after having support from my
school, I learned, but I still
felt like something was missing
after I started learning uh was
trained and balanced literacy.
um, I
Learned the uh the process of
reading. So, um,
I can't imagine teaching reading
without a balance.
Um, and the other thing I'm just
really shocked at is that anyone
would think it was OK to outlaw
a way of teaching reading. We
may disagree on the approach,
however I actually think we have
a lot of, a lot of things in
common.
Um, we do not teach to guess but
give students tools and teach
independency. I teach the
process of reading, um, using
the balanced literacy
methodology. Phonics is a very
strong component, Letters is a
very supportive, um, training,
um, you can, um, can you imagine
though only reading and only
knowing how to sound out words
as an adult and have no other
strategies. This does not help
with comprehension, but it
hinders it.
We use a balanced approach
approach of using strong
phonics, good literature, the
good literature allows us to
teach how to apply that phonics
to reading. Um, we also add the
components of data and writing,
which the data is what science
of reading wants to eliminate. I
can't even imagine.
Doing my job without using the
data that we, um,
That we have. It allows me to
know where my students are, what
they know, and where they need
to go next.
Uh, it also helps me to teach
them how to become independent
problem solvers and um
Thank you.
rights. I don't have anybody
else who come to the first
person on my list to committee
or represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Senator, thank you, um.
And my notes are gonna be
spreading as I was listening and
I apologize for coming in a
little late. I was in another
committee.
presenting
Uh, Mr. Chair, so honestly, I
was kind of a fifty-fifty on
this, but the more I kind of
looked at it, listened to it,
um, and I have some notes on
here.
Um
doing this for a few years, and,
you know, I'm not an educator,
and never been in the classroom
except as a mother.
So why am I here today?
In the legislature of the
helicopter mom.
And
very involved with my children's
academics.
And then I got involved with the
UNM Parent Association said on
their academic.
Uh committee
Such as an advisor, as an
advisor on the board of regions,
and then decided to run for a
rear Rancho school board and
served on there for over 8
years.
So I'm not an educator, but I'm
a real estate broker, and what
does that have to do anything,
and I'll kind of go into that
for a minute when I trust my
questions here.
So send uh Mr. Chair and
Senator, my understanding is
there's 40 states that have
implemented this, is that
correct? Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative.
So there's 42 states that are
either in the process or have
already adopted 8 or 9 that have
a bill like this in statue.
And then the others are either
in the process or are doing
something his chair and senator.
So
Um,
so one thing I'm good at, which
not being an educator, but I'm
good at looking at it and doing
a lot of research. Um, luckily I
came from a school district when
growing up. I had really good
reading comprehension. And so,
I last night was working through
this till midnight, going
through the data, and what are
uh reading proficiency levels
are here in New Mexico.
And I will tell a little story
about when we moved here, my
daughter was uh between 3rd and
4th grade when she came here as
a 4th grader.
From uh Colorado.
And I say that 4th grade was a
wasted year.
She didn't learn anything.
And the reason is, is she was an
excelled.
And the other state.
And
They were trying to catch up in
4th grade here. So she fell
behind in that. So I say it was
a waste of year, why even
I could have kept her home.
Just in seriousness.
And so that's when I really got
involved.
He and in New Mexico and in
We're in one of the better
school districts and I love
rearrange the public schools.
It's just something that we had
seen when we moved there, moved
here.
Fast for a number of years, Mr.
Chair, Senator.
My youngest daughter goes into
kindergarten. She was in an
inclusion class. There were 2
teachers and 2 EA's in that
class.
They could do, they could teach
reading the way that they wanted
to.
So one teacher had a program.
That she used to teach her
kindergartners.
That teacher quit and left.
So that other teacher didn't
have really a great system to
teaching our children in
kindergarten.
Then she ended up leaving, so it
was a real mess in her
kindergarten. That was a
complete waste of year.
So I was lucky that in first
grade, the teacher did use
several different methods to
bring up our children. I don't
know exactly what it is,
fantastic, the best teacher
ever. I still give a shout out
to Mrs. Schellenberger in Rio
Rancho Public Schools.
But, um, my children have the
love of reading.
And I've always appreciated
that. We know that's the
foundation.
The very foundation on what to
build on, to be able to excel in
school, and every other subject.
That is how we learn.
And when we are looking at Mr.
Chair and Senator.
When you look at the schools
across the United States.
There's people that move from
one state to the next.
And they may not, um,
They're not aligned. So again,
like what I saw when I came from
Colorado to what I saw from
here.
They were not aligned.
Instruction.
So
You read to be really far ahead
or somebody's behind.
We are behind.
I've been here since 2002 behind
in so many things, and I'm
frustrated.
Very frustrating. And I was rear
range of public schools is a
school board member, when we
started doing Common Core.
And boy do we get the pushback
from teachers and
administrators, people at the
state, it is hard.
To make things to implement
and this will be hard to
implement.
By having all the stakeholders
say, OK.
So Mr. Chair and senator.
I am
How my real estate plays into
this.
again, I'm not an educator. I'm
a helicopter mom.
That got involved with my
children's schooling from
Earth all the way up.
to college.
And now my grandson, guess what?
I got hooked on phonics because
I will tell you, we're starting
early, he's 2, 2.5. My daughter
said that's what we want for
Christmas, so that's what you
get. We want to start them out.
But in real estate, what do I
see? We want economic
development for the state.
What are companies looking at
when they go to move to a state.
crime
Education infrastructure,
there's a lot, but education is
one of the top ones.
We continuously at the bottom of
the list.
And I will tell you, businesses
do not become here.
Because of crime, because they,
they're worried about their
employees.
And for education for their
children to have good education
for their children.
We are seeing more and more
parents.
But their kids in charter
schools and are more directed
where they have a.
They're able to manage a little
bit different in there.
But we're really seeing people
going online.
And their homeschooling or
putting them in private schools.
Seeing that with a lot of
decrease as well as enrollment.
So, um, but there is a this
chair and um
Senator, I did have a couple of
questions in reference to. So if
a student was struggling and
this program wasn't working for
them in our school system.
Our teachers able to also use
other techniques that might work
with that child.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
this is not a program. It's not
a script.
This works in any language all
over the world. Other countries
look pay attention to our
research and are using
structured literacy in their
countries. Uh, so, it, it's,
it's a way to be systematic,
explicit, comprehensive,
cumulative in teaching the
alphabetic code, and how, how
language works, vocabulary,
comprehension. People think this
is just phonics, that's only 1/5
of the program.
But it doesn't tell a teacher
what to do. It tries letters
tries to change.
Trained teachers in the research
and science around how kids
actually learn to read.
And through that understanding
then.
You know, they start learning uh
ways to do it, uh, in the
curriculum and in their
classroom. This, you know,
people can use all of the
materials from balanced literacy
that they all still have. It's
just that if they don't, if they
don't teach the alphabetic code
and a systematic and explicit
way. The majority of kids aren't
to learn, and that's
One of the reasons we have the
lowest scores that we do. So
we've been struggling for years.
I've been frustrated for many
years. I taught in the classroom
for 25 years. I took 10 summers
to take classes to learn uh
structured literacy.
I didn't become a uh
certified language specialist
because I started doing this
work instead.
Uh, so, it, this is not a
prescription.
Teachers can do whatever they
want, as long as they're trying
to use structured literacy,
depending upon the classroom
they're in, in kindergarten,
it's onlyic awareness, it's
games, it's 15 or 20 minutes a
day of games, so kids start
hearing the sound of the
language, whatever language
they're learning in.
And then you start to break down
that alphabetic code and
syllification, and everything
else that goes along with the
language, so teachers can use
whatever they have in their
classrooms, how they want to do
it. It's, it's not prescriptive
at all.
Um, Mr. Chair.
And uh representative. So it's
uh some of the people mentioned
the differentiation, and that's
where absolutely differentiation
and database decision making
part of MLSS and I think it's
important to mention MT assess,
everybody else calls it MTSS. I
think you're moving towards MTSS
now with MLSS here in New
Mexico.
It, it doesn't work. If they
work together, all of these
things work together. MLSS is
the framework, everything else
is what exists within that
framework. And so
differentiation for academics
and linguistics linguistics and
academic scaffolds and
differentiation for those
students' language proficiency
levels, those are all components
and so when we talk about
restrictive, it's not
restrictive if you follow,
follow the guiding principles of
structured literacy, that's open
to interpretation, obviously,
but the key is the
and systematic instruction. What
has happened historically here
in New Mexico and other places
is that there were learning gaps
because there wasn't a
systematic way and there was too
much implicit instruction and
for English learners, that
creates a lot of guessing,
because we need to take the
guesswork out of it for them and
for students with disabilities
and students with learning
difficulties, and bear in mind
that there's way more students
with learning difficulties than
disabilities. And so taking this
approach supports the needs of
all others. So it's not like you
You can't use other things. What
we would urge is that you stick
to the structured literacy, uh,
principles because they're not
congruent with some of the other
ones, and what ends up happening
is you're piecemealing
instruction, and when that
happens, it results in learning
gaps for students and um
Particularly for English
learners and students that are
struggling, and students would
either language deficits, even
if they're not an English
learner, students that have low
ory, this is gonna happen with
these students. So,
Uh, to answer your question, I
think that it's really important
that, and I appreciate your
perspective honestly cause I
feel like I was a helicopter mom
too once, but I did work for the
Center for Multi-tiered System
Support for many years and
conducted a lot of federally
funded research on MTSS and
English learnners, and I can
tell you it's the best frame
sign of reading fits within it.
Those are the, that's the
approach. There's many other
strategies. Some were mentioned
by the opposite opponents
translanguaging, we promote
that, we promote cultural.
and linguistically responsive
practices. All the things that
have been mentioned, other than
the queuing systems and other
things that have not resulted in
expected outcomes. The the data,
if you look at the data and I
appreciate that you do, cause I
do a lot of data review also and
I can tell you that it's very
telling when you disaggregate it
to the special populations,
you're gonna see some big gaps.
And so to answer your question,
yes, you can use other things as
long as they fit together
nicely, and is it gonna take
something tangentially, cause
that's a waste of instructional
time. Instructional time is so
limited that we need to use it
as effectively, efficiently as
possible.
If, if we could give
more concise questions and
concise answers to specifically
the question, um, if one person
answers, that's probably best.
We're an hour behind on the
floor, um, unless if we want to
continue the conversation, we
can continue it next week as
well.
Kong. OK, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and Senator, um, so I did have a
question. So, will this affect
middle school and high school
teachers, um, are they gonna
have to learn?
um
The
So, Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
You know, the students we have
now.
throughout the rates, many of
them are reading very well.
We want to make sure that even
the middle school and the high
school teachers understand the
science of reading and
understand um how to, how to do
a little teaching or training to
kids that show up in their
classroom now, no matter what
age they are. Um, I, I think
every teacher needs to
understand this. It, it will be
very impactful if we can have
teachers now that are teaching
in the middle and high school
and help help kids learn to
read, so they don't, they don't
have to.
do it for their licensure, but
we are, uh, certainly
encouraging all of them, and
licensure for K through 8 and
special ed will be required to,
um, insurance center. So I will
just say that one thing that I
really do like is the um
The parental notification. I
think that is a huge piece that
um we have been missing as
parents, um, within schools and
being notified in a timely
manner of where our children are
at, uh, specifically in reading,
um, because again, that's
something that um can happen to
us before when we fell behind,
we weren't notified the end of
the school year, and at that
time, it's almost impossible to
catch them up to where they need
to be. So, Mr. Chair and um
uh with that in as well as
dyslexia, we have seen that um
this honestly the state had been
very poor in um screening
students for dyslexia for many,
many years. And so this is a
part that I, I really like about
this and um
Mr. Chair and center, I would
like to see more reading coaches
in schools to help our teachers
along. Um this earlier I was
going hand in hand with um a
bill that I was doing earlier
having making sure professional
work hours for middle school and
high schoolers, uh, teachers. So
we need to make sure that we're
making sure that our teachers
getting professional work time
to be able to to really
understand this and be able to
deliver it to our students like
they need, so I, I have no
further questions. Thank you.
for coming.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, Senator. I've been on
this road with you since I got
elected and um
2012 and began uh
But
As a member I guess of uh
are um interim committees and
Other interactions that we've
had. Um,
And it's been a tough road.
Because we've not been able, Mr.
Chair, to um integrate what we
believe and discussed and, and
when you were uh chairing for
one, I can't remember what year
it was. Our interim committee,
um, the legislative education
Study Committee, I remember you
brought experts from
Other countries, um, so that we
could hear their approaches.
Um, they were primarily European
countries, I believe,
And um different different.
Ways in which we could
incorporate and strengthen the
outcomes, reading, writing
outcomes.
Um, it's been a tough road
because we've not been able to
integrate any one particular
approach.
Um, that has been effective.
Based on what you presented
today a lot of what it is, the
39% reading level that we're at
still.
I, I did want to say one thing,
um, before I ask, I have
Just one question was maybe a a
subcomponent to that question,
Mr. Chair, uh,
Many years ago, you've heard, I
was in special education
teacher, uh, in El Paso.
Many years ago.
And I was given the tough
assignment of
Bringing 9th graders.
Uh, who were at 3rd grade
reading level um.
their 9th grade level.
Otherwise, they were gonna be
held back. These were the days
when students were held back.
And
It was a tough task for somebody
fresh out of college.
Um
I spoke to the students in their
Spanish language. They were all
Spanish speakers.
And
I asked them about their comfort
level.
In Spanish, I would, I wish I
could say it to you and, and how
I approached it, but in their
language, Mr. Speaker, I asked
them what makes you more
comfortable? How do I need to
speak to you.
To teach you
Um
So that we can accomplish this.
My goal, I set the goal and I
told him what the goal was.
Um, Mr. Chair, you have to
learn, you have to be able to
graduate out of 9th grade, I
mean, move out of 9th grade to
10th grade in order for and
They said, speak to us.
So we can understand in our and
I changed the approach.
Um, I took off the material that
was given to us then.
That was all in English.
And I didn't translate it.
Because Mr. Speaker,
Something intuitively told me
translating wasn't gonna do the
job.
I had to communicate converse.
With those students.
In order for them to get to
where I needed to get and make
the relational.
Relationship between reading and
writing.
I had to find the way to do
that.
And they're the ones that taught
me the way to do that.
They sat there in their
language.
And told me
How they were then learning what
better learn in um to read and
write.
I tell you this, because this
was
In the years in the in the late
70s.
When we were at that point
trying to, Mr. Chair and and
senator trying very hard to
incorporate bilingual education.
Um, and, and
And really push that. That was
that era.
Um
But it was real important to
this conversation.
Because
One of the things that I
followed, Mr. Chair.
I
How we take bilingual,
multilingual approaches.
And use those.
In the language.
Of our students.
Coming into the school, you've,
you've heard me address this.
And be able to take them to
those next levels. So,
My question is this.
I studied and I've researched,
why is it that in Mexico, why is
it in Central America, and why
is it in Latin America?
That those students that are
taught.
In their language, but English
being their secondary language.
Why do they remain fluent?
And their native language.
And fluent in their English
language.
I wanted to understand that,
why?
And one of the things that I
researched
And that was just common sense.
Really common sense is
The first thing
I was thinking in the language.
Um
Start from the language, your
native language.
And then think in your native
language and start there, that's
your starting point.
And then
You're gonna follow and make a
whole lot of mistakes, but how
do you take those mistakes?
And then in your own
Language and your own customs in
your old traditions.
Turn those around to your
learning of the reading and
writing in that second language.
Um, in the next point that was
recommended was read as much as
you can in your foreign
language.
So if you're Spanish speaking,
they want you to learn as much
as you can in English, so you're
gonna read a lot of material in
English. You're not gonna
understand it. And finally,
We don't translate, we can't
translate.
Translate in Spanish, there's no
such thing, Mister Speaker. You
have to
Express yourself.
Um
In the way that you're familiar
with.
And so I'd say out of that
because
I know that
Through research, we found a
whole lot of different ways in
which to incorporate those core
approaches.
By littlebery is one of those.
And so I see a lot of
integration of structured, which
we're already doing in our
schools, I think you did a
fabulous job of explaining the
how those are already in there.
There are two areas of concerns
for me.
One in the language of
disallowing.
Disallowing
Any time
Uh
We put in language like that,
Mr. Chair and Senator.
It
It's, it's a
Punitive approach in my view.
It's punitive to disallow. It's
punitive to not give teachers
the autonomy, like I had.
No one stood over me. No one
gave me anything other than
these are the materials, this is
where you have to have them.
This is the beginning of the
school year. This is the end of
the school year, you have to
have them at this level by then.
I looked at the materials and
they were totally nonfective.
So we have to look at who's
publishing.
These materials.
What is the social, cultural,
And political mentality.
Of those that are publishing our
materials.
Because they influence the
classroom.
They influenced the training.
Mr. Chair, the influence
everything that we're taught to
do in the classroom, and I had
to I had to do it, I had to undo
all of that.
It was ineffective.
And I feel that this was the
late 70s, and here we are in
2025.
still struggling.
With
outcomes.
But what I do know,
is what I learned with that
experience.
And how effective it is.
Today, when we take um
A biliteral approach.
Because what we're trying to
find is the most effective way
in which
Um, to incorporate solutions to
address
The mandates in our Martinez
Yazi lawsuit, and they shouldn't
have been mandates.
Senator knows, Mr. Speaker, um,
that I
feel very strongly about the
core elements.
In the Yi Martinez, so one
question to the educators.
An administrators that are here.
Um
Have we
Studied
How many English learners.
In in that we've that we have,
how many of them
are still able to be fluent in
their native language.
When they leave
K through 12.
And using the structured
approach.
How many of those students still
understand or still convey or
still speak, wanna speak.
In their native language as
they're moving from
One grade to another grade to
another grade. That's really
important to me, Mr. Speaker and
Senator.
So I'll begin, Mr. Chairman,
very briefly, um.
It's one of the reasons why
we've passed this out.
Because, um, Roswell, and of
course you heard it from Gadsden
and other school districts as
integrated their understanding
of structured literacy for all
teachers, and it, it's just so
stunning to me.
Uh, to see the games that the
English language schools.
Um, I, I'm fairly firmly believe
in bilingualism, bi literacy, I
mean, I, I'm proud. That's part
of our state.
You know, I studied Spanish in
college. I'm, I don't speak it
well, I understand it better. I
wish I spoke it fluently, and I
wish we would follow the
Constitution and require
everybody in the in the schools
to be bilingual in Spanish and
English, although we certainly
have plenty of Native American
languages, um, also. So I'm
gonna turn over to Doctor
Cavazos for a brief,
um, Mr. Chair and
Representative. So first thing I
just
want to say that the gold
standard is dual language.
A dual language education.
Certainly, we believe that, I
believe that firmly and work in
many contests on that. However,
it has to be contextualized. Do
you have the right materials,
just like you mentioned
curricula. Do you have the right
staff? Do they have expertise?
All of these things that are so
important, but given that
bilingual education, which is
what you mentioned, is also very
important. There's multiple um
language uh programs in New
Mexico, and dual language,
although, you know, we're
Like, as I mentioned, gold
standard, it's very few compared
to English instruction. We would
want biliteracy and
bilingualism, but that doesn't
always happen if there's only
English instruction. So I'm just
gonna be really honest, there's
language loss, and it happens
for a number of reasons. They're
not instructed in it and also
the community. If the community
is speaking English, uh, medias
in English, so it happens for a
lot of reasons, but certainly um
agree that that's the best
approach. Now science of reading
and structured literacy doesn't
take.
the way that teacher taught me
that you described, because we
still have to look at the
cultural, linguistics, the
sociocultural influence on
learning. Learning doesn't
happen in a vacuum. It's, it's
fueled by everything around you,
your language, your culture,
your history, and your families
and community, and so all of
those things are still
important. That doesn't go away
because uh science of reading
and structured literacy is in
place. It's, it's only an
approach. It just, it's not all
encompassing, so I think I hope
that answers your question. I
hope that was briefing enough.
Mister chair.
Mr. Speaker and, and senator and
It did it answers it.
But I'm, I'm still troubled.
And I
wrap up, um, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, um,
With
My fear.
My fear that
We are not as informed. We may
be malinformed in a lot of
areas.
I don't see by literacy as just
an approach, I believe my
literacy is actually the
comprehensive way in which to
save the native language.
Save it. We have to save the
native language.
We have to save the cultural,
social, cultural aspects.
But not aspects but embodiments.
Of our students
We have to recognize that those
are our students' strengths.
So when we recognize that those,
Mr. Chair, are our students'
strengths.
Then they become assets, not at
risk.
And they become um we build on
those assets just like we build
on our economic development
communities and build on their
assets in order to bring in and
devise ways in which to empower
the community. So it's the same
thing and I, I, I fear my last
fear, uh, my last statement is
that we move, we're, we're using
um structured.
To replace standardized, but in
my view,
It is standardization.
Structured means standardization
in my view, and it goes back to
one size does not fit all, and
we have an obligation to start
from the diversity, meaning our
native languages, our native
cultures from that, and then
incorporate.
The rest and give the student uh
the teachers.
The full autonomy to be able to
make those assessments in the
classroom and remove language
like disallow and say aloud.
As much as we can allow and as
much as the teachers feel they
must have in order to be able to
uh protect.
Our native, our students that
have native languages that come
to the classroom, and their
social cultural strengths. Thank
you, Mr. um.
Thank you
we're moving on.
And I'm just going to make an
announcement that applies to
members on the committee as
well, please brief pointed
questions.
So
represent Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you, thank you,
presenters. um, and hearing a
lot of the, the discussion, um,
I have one big question. It's
where's higher ed in this
discussion. Um, there's a lot of
talk about um strategies within
public education, but this falls
on the brunt of higher education
and then preparing our teachers,
especially when we are right
now, it is super difficult to be
recruiting teachers in this time
and escape. There was a mention
briefly about an animate you,
which that's my district
starting to.
letters and there was a huge
concern if they are just now
getting into instruction for our
upcoming teachers.
How does this change that shift
and how are they being supported
in this transition. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I'll be very
brief, then I wanna turn it over
to uh Deputy Bell, so.
So we've been, we've been on
this road for about 6 years.
When we started with the
dyslexia screener and the
requirement for a.
Uh, so,
You know, higher, higher ed uh
all along has been, you know, we
wanna do what we want to do.
Um, they now, after a lot of
work with them.
through PED mainly. Um, I, I
believe are mostly on board.
You know, change his heart and
and some people are not on
board.
But when you look at the fact
that we're not
Making about 60 to 7% of our
students able that to me is just
the overarching issue, means
several of the speakers talked
about being able to read as an
equity issue. I see it very
clearly as an equity issue,
because the students who are not
learning to read are primarily
the Yazi Martina students, and
if you notice on the Roswell,
they're very proud that that's
what they are
focusing on.
So the deans, some of the deans
have actually told the PED that
they want this bill.
Because they can tell their
professors they have to do it,
but they don't always uh do it.
So, uh,
Uh
The future be brief.
The future Bre. Sure, yes, Mr.
Chair and Representative, some
of the work that we have done
with the deans and directors,
um, through the Educator prep
programs since 2023, um, has
been, um, for us to do course
alignment, making sure that as
teachers are moving from um
university to uh university or
college to college that there is
common course alignment for all
of our teachers so that we can
have a guaranteed and viable
curriculum that our teachers are
getting, we are in the next
step.
of that phase right now.
Secondly, um we are um working
on doing structured literacy
reviews, uh, with our educator
prep programs. So, um, in 2023,
a memo was sent to all of the
deans and directors from the PED
asking for them to jump on board
with structured literacy, making
sure that professors were
teaching and and faculty were
teaching structured literacy.
And we also started a cohort of
faculty members from New Mexico,
um, uh, University of New Mexico
and MSU, Highlands, um, Socorro,
um, Silver City, so we have
quite a few faculty members who
are currently in training with
us in alongside of us as we move
toward this, um, and then we are
committed to working with our
deans and directors are, um,
that.
The deans of the educator of the
educator prep programs in rules
so that we can work side by side
to actually make sure that as
this gets rolled out, that we
are making it be a nice fit for
all because even within the
colleges and universities who
are preparing our teachers,
there is a lot of disparity. The
other thing that we are doing is
working with our our alternative
preparation programs so that we
can ensure parity and make sure
that all teachers come into the
classrooms.
prepared to teach reading.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, speakers. Um, you
know, when I'm taking this, I
have a district that is very
diverse. I have districts that
are primarily English.
Language learners, um, and I
also have bilingual program
that's even presenting today
down to, you know, my charter
school that did speak in
testimony today, and I can tell
you that when I did reach out to
some of my teachers, their
results were all over the place,
um, and they react.
Um, and I know we're folks on
the student, and one thing I do
also want to bring into this
conversation as our teachers.
Uh, one thing that was
reiterated was the amount of
time, especially
Just getting up to date with
where they're at with current
requirements, with current
structured literacy that it took
them out of the classroom a lot,
um, and still not sure if those
mixed results make an impact.
Um, so I'm not even touching the
multi.
The language learning part, just
getting into the requirements
that are on our current teachers
right now that they are having a
hard time within their
elementary classrooms retaining
teachers just due to the
constraints that they have.
With what's been placed upon
them to do it fast, to do it
quick, to get caught up to
speed. Um, do you have any
comments on that about what is
your reaction to teacher time
and what that will look like,
um, already burdened teachers.
Yes, sure, Mr. Chair and
Representative Gonzalez, I think
that that's a really great
question. We know that over the
last 6 years, we have asked a
lot of teachers to jump into 18
months of letter training, it is
required a lot of time of them.
So now the approach is to make
sure that our teachers.
coming out of the colleges and
universities and alternative
preparation programs so that
they don't have to do letters.
We can continue adding coaches
into the schools. We currently
have 54 around the state that
the PED funds for schools and
school districts and regions,
and we want to continue to
support them in their
professional development and
growth.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Speaker. It's just, you
know, just one quick brief
closing comment is that, um, no
doubt that this works for a
large cohort of students, um,
but ultimately my concern is
that those learners that this
does not address. Um, I don't
know if this one's singular
approach captures all learners
captures all educators, um, and
I am um
I'm pretty concerned about
disallowing and the prohibitions
in such a short amount of time,
while there is proven results in
some school districts. If this
is a mandate towards all of our
education system, I am concerned
that there are some students
that are going to get lost in
this transition and that those
gaps are gonna become wider,
although there are good results
for some, I am worried about the
rest. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
It was.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much. Um,
I, I, there's parts of this I
really, really love, um, I, I
love that we're getting into the
teacher prep programs. I, I, uh,
when I, I hear the concerns of
brand new teachers that have had
to go through this and their
microcredentials and just
learning to teach. Um, it is
overwhelming and I fear we lost
several because of the uh the
huge burden on it, so them
coming prepared. I, I, I 100%
agree with that. Um, my, um, my
thing is, um,
And I, and I do believe that
elementary teachers should be
Um, trained in this, uh, they,
they should, they should know
this and they should be
proficient in this because
you've seen great results. What
I want you to do is, can you
walk me through the requirements
of this bill has for high school
chair and um representative of
Mirabel Moya. We, um, through
the amendment took out the
secondary language arts teacher
requirement to have the 100
hours of field experience, um,
in their student teaching and
readiness. So
Uh, they will continue on their
language arts endorsement as it
is currently in New Mexico uh
rural.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, and,
um, and, and panel, uh, is there
any requirement for current
teachers right now, uh, high
school teachers, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative Mita Moya
teachers, um, at the middle
school and the high school right
now, can, um,
Voluntarily jump into a content
area literacy, um.
Uh, um.
Um,
group PLC, um, so that they can
continue to focus on helping
students gain comprehension
strategies and to continue to.
um vocabulary.
Thank you.
Yeah, OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, um, and, um, and, and
panel, uh, now I've heard a
couple of times, um, in, in your
answers to other um
Representatives that teachers
can do whatever they want, um,
and this isn't listen and, and
I've heard, I think several of
you said that, oh, you can, the
teachers can do whatever they
want, uh, but
In
Here in statue, um, on page 6,
it's, it's, it's telling me that
um it, it starts talking about
balanced literacy and, and, and
subsection B, and uh and it
talks um that balanced literacy
and explaining it shall not be
used to teach the reading, and I
believe in our, uh, because of
all the amendments, um, that
takes it a little further that
even in our teacher prep
programs that it, that it shall
not be used. Um, so that's,
that's
A mandate, that's not a teachers
can do whatever they want. It
shall not be used. And then, and
then, uh, and then also a little
bit further down when you're
talking about new material, um,
uh, for high quality
instructional material. It talks
about um the the
pre-kindergarten through 12th
grade in public schools and
state agencies shall use high
quality instruction and then,
and then little subsection 2, it
says that do not employ balanced
literacy techniques, so, so in
these sections, they can't do
what they want or they can as
long as it doesn't have anything
to do with balanced literacy.
That's the way I'm reading it.
So, Mr. Chairman, the
You know, balanced literacy has
just been discredited
everywhere, uh, Lucy Calkins
lost her center at Columbia
University.
Um, it's the 3 queuing system,
it teaches kids to guess at
words. Now, there's lots of
materials with balance literacy,
they're, you know, they've got
that they already have all of
that works. You just can't use
the three queuing system because
it doesn't work. That's why
we're last in the nation,
thoroughly laughs in the nation
on our nape scores, but we're
just not teaching very many of
our kids to read, so, you know,
the materials you can do.
What you want, but you've got to
do structured literacy or you're
not gonna teach everybody.
And that's why we have to really
do that because if we just say,
you know, you do boils if you
want, we will continue to have
what we have now, which is a
very low proficiency score, and
a high dropout rate when you get
to high school if you can't
read.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, but
my, my biggest issue is
I would much rather give
teachers all the tools and trust
them to make the best decision
for their students rather than
tell them you can use this, but
you can't use that, uh, and, and
not trust that they would use
what's best for their students.
Uh, I, I pretty much would
rather trust the the teacher to
to do it. And, and, and if, and
if, uh, you know, structured
literacy is, is proven results.
I, I honestly believe that
teachers are going to use
structured literacy. Um.
You know, that they're gonna be
using that but telling them
that, uh, but again, kind of
like how um Representative
Gonzalez said, um, but
Those few that you might have to
employ this. but now, now, now
that they, the, we have teachers
if they're not being even being
taught this in the teacher prep
programs or anything like that,
um, that there are other ways of
learning these things. If I have
a whole tool chest.
I'm gonna use my best tools.
But there's certain things that
that might happen in, in that,
in that context that I might
have to pull this out for that 1
or 2 in order to help them
bridge a gap and then I can go
back to my best tool.
But
Totally banning one and saying
you can only use this one.
I don't, I, I have an issue with
mandating that for one size fits
all for the entire state. I
just, there's just not.
Um, I mean, we're huge with
local control. Um, we're huge
with, with trusting teachers.
That they, um, um.
That um
I mean, I, I even, I even asked
some of my teachers that, that,
uh, you know, is, is it
something that, that, that, that
you're privy to and the ones
that have been trained in
letters letters and, and some
that are, that are, that, that
have not because they're they're
higher, or they're secondary,
they're like, I don't like
anyone telling me I can and
can't do and I can only use this
and I can't even touch that, um,
but we're gonna also, I mean,
that's, that's my issues with
this, um, uh, sorry, um, thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Represent
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Frote for
bringing this forward.
Um,
I agree with many of the
comments that were made so far.
And
I'll be very short and pointed
with my.
questions in my remarks.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Madame Prote.
When we talk about
The balanced literacy.
As an instructional philosophy.
Is there also materials that go
along with that, Mister Charley.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, there are not set specific
materials that go along with the
teaching of balanced li
literacy. It is a methodology
that then you use curriculum and
instructional as well as
supplemental materials.
Madam Deputy Secretary.
With any, with any structure,
then there are suggested or
approved materials that go along
with that.
Mr. Chairman
Madam Proton and Madam
Secretary. So a school district,
we, we, when was the last time
that we had reading adoption,
um.
For, for these, for these
materials
was 2 years ago, and many of
your districts, my district,
have uh purchased high quality
materials. I want to make sure
that this mandate for the high
quality material is on higher
end.
is on uh on teacher uh
preparation.
Yes, we want high quality
materials everywhere and a lot
of districts bought those 2
years ago. We don't have to redo
that.
Um, Mr. Chan, Madame Flute, and
that's when we're saying that
now that this is the one and
only one size fits all.
Approach
And were not as far as funding
of materials would not be funded
again till 2029, the districts
that do not have these materials
that would be seen as a, as an
additional cost. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair,
the bill is not mandating
districts to go out and buy high
quality materials. It's
mandating that the teacher
preparation program used high
quality materials. We've already
purchased these materials
because we worked and work.
on this for 6 years. This is not
a problem in the schools. Many
schools have good quality
materials that they purchased 2
years ago. This is really a
higher ed film.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh Madam
Protem, um.
One of the, one of the
Big concerns actually from
school districts because I,
we've, I've heard, we've, we've
heard.
From some of the schools.
And
We've heard from several uh
folks on both sides of it.
But when we're talking about
School districts.
And the majority to where, where
do they stand on it because
I know it's been communicated to
me.
And so Mr. Chairman and Madame
Protem, um,
Again, one of the concerns from
many school districts.
is the cost of materials.
And the cost of professional
development and training.
Um
Mr. Chair and Representative,
this bill is asking for our
higher education programs to
train pre-service teachers.
Instructured literacy using high
quality instructional materials.
It is also asking for our higher
education and alternative
licensure program, um, programs
to ensure that pre-service
candidates are going into
classrooms to do the 100 hours
of um field experience in a
classroom that is also using
high-quality instructional
materials. Currently 54% of our
LEAs.
have already adopted culturally
and linguistically relevant
language arts materials for
their districts.
Mr. Chairman, and you, you just
said 54%, is that correct? So
then we have 46% that haven't.
And then Mr. Chairman and then
um
Committee. We talked about the
apartments. I, I do appreciate
the clarification of the
voluntary participation in PLCs
in training for 9 through 12,
but Kate through 8 would be
required to take additional
coursework, is that correct?
supporting this bill, Mr. Chair.
Um, Chairman Romero and
Representative Baca, yes, anyone
who has the licensure that would
put them at having the ability
to teach students early literacy
would need to have the 6 hours
of literacy instruction and the
100 hours of field experience.
What we're talking Mr. Chairman
about new teachers and teacher
preparation programs.
Not, not
Current public school teachers.
Teachers and teacher preparation
programs, but the bill has been
misunderstood, and we did
amendments to clear it up, but
I'm not, I'm not sure you have
those or seen them.
Mr. Chairman and Madame Trote.
Um
actually through the testimony
earlier, it was said that
teachers, current teachers, I
think, um.
Represent a bit of Moya had
asked a question and um.
It was said that teachers now,
if you are teaching reading.
Take this additional coursework
in my question, Mister Chairman.
And committee is who pays for
the additional classes college
classes or other.
Mr. Chairman, they're not
current teachers are not
required to go back to school.
We are trying to
teach teachers ourselves for
spending 20 million a year with
the letters program, um, that
now we're offering to college
professors, cohort of them are
doing it.
Um, this is not new requirements
for existing teachers. It's an
attempt to change our teacher
preparation program, so that
they're basically teaching
letters also.
Mr. Chairman and Madam Prete and
and uh.
On page 8 of your of the bill.
wanted to
letter C.
Sufficient funding shall be
provided to support salary and
administrative costs of literacy
coordinator positions.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Madam Brute.
How's that funding going to roll
out?
So Mr. Chairman, some of this
funding is in the current
budget.
Um, but also,
Colleges can use uh employees
that they have. They don't have
to have hire a new person, uh,
several of them, I know that you
and him has hired a professor
from Florida who's been
thoroughly trained in this, and
she could uh be this literacy
coordinator. We just want to
give help to the colleges
they've asked for it, uh, to
ensure that they, uh, do this
correctly and have enough
coursework and understand what
they're doing.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. Uh,
thank you, Senator, um,
Mr. Chairman and committee, when
we talk about it, also the, the
verification of the 100 hours.
Um, uh, of work outside or
through their student teaching.
Mr. Chairman, and um I met him
pro temp.
Would that also be additional
costs as we have folks out there
in the field that are observing
100 hours of instruction and
what constitutes or what counts
towards our ours.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I will say
that we've, we've done the last
few years, we've been paying
student teachers for these
hours. We're currently doing
that. There is currently money
in the budget to pay teachers uh
student teacher hours. So that
would just continue this might
increase, and I certainly would
be advocate.
Mr. Chairman and Madam, I may
not have been very clear with my
question.
But the person who's going to be
collecting the data, the person
who's going to be signing off.
On those 100 hours, OK? Because
we're talking about verification
at the school district which
again refers to the reporting of
it and if a district is found to
be in compliance.
Mad, Madamte and Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Currently there
are 260 hours required for
pre-service teachers now that
are verified through a uh
compilation of a few different
peoples. Someone who is a field
supervisor from the agency, so
the university or college, then
also with a mentor teachers, the
mentor teacher has an obligation
to verify those hours and the
mentor teachers already received
stipends for doing that work. So
it is a
collective effort, so that these
100 hours are part of the
already standard 260.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Be thank you Deputy Secretary,
page 9.
Lines 1 through 3, a reading
specialist or literacy expert
for all elementary approvals.
On all accreditation renewal
review teams.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Madamin.
What is a
A reading spots or literacy
expert.
And is that whose responsibility
is that to fund those.
positions.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the PED
currently has the responsibility
to accredit each of our colleges
and universities that have
teacher preparation programs.
There is a committee that is
formed and they go out, um, and
it should be, uh, every few
years, we are catching up to do
some of that work now. um, they
used to be, um, nationally
accredited, now many of our
colleges and universities are
becoming nationally accredited
and so the PED along with a
committee of folks that come
from around the state, other,
um, colleges and universities
provide faculty very much like a
um high school accreditation,
um, project they go into the
college and university, and they
actually um provide feedback. So
that is not an additional cost,
it is something that is already
done.
I wrap this up and, and I hope
that I'm not being too
Um
kind of wordy here.
But Mr. Chairman and
Madam a pro temp. we, many of
our teachers are actually on
alternative licensure.
I believe it's 40%.
So teachers in the coming
entering the, the, the field.
How would these additional
requirements.
Because they don't go through a
necessarily a teacher prep
program.
How would this impact and what
Um, impact may they have on not
only the
Um, filling of the vacancies,
but also retention.
And Mr. Turmore, we're just
changing alternative a little
bit, saying that they have to
take classes in the 1st 12
months that they've been hired,
so they can do like we do now,
we hire people and then we ask
them to take coursework, this
would be the same. We would ask
them if they were in that K
through 8 to take this
coursework in the first.
They, they already have to do
that.
But we're changing it to say, if
you're in the element field,
then you need to take these two
classes in your first year.
Mr. Chairman and represented and
their $100 would be while they
are teaching cause they already
have a supervisor um for their
their teaching experience.
Mr. Chairman and um Marote.
I like 80% of this bill.
I do.
It's the
Issues that some of my
colleagues have brought up.
When we disallow
And when we limit.
When we talk about, I will say
this, that there is no
curriculum.
Or instructional strategies.
That will address the needs of
our 350,000.
Students in our public schools.
words like differentiation.
You know, works, you know, words
like, you know, as far as being
able to
Um
Meet their unique needs.
are an important part of what
we're doing.
Uh, there is no legislation, no,
no, no curriculum that we can do
here in Santa Fe.
That is going to turn around our
schools.
Mr. Chair and Madame Prete, I
believe.
That these things happen at the
school level, in the classroom
level.
And with the teacher's ability
to connect with our kids and
even more complicated of the
issues that we have 40% of our
students that are currently
absent or chronically absent.
So, um, as I said,
Mr. Chairman and Madame Prote.
Yeah
It, it, it's the, you know, the,
the limiting. I, I've stood
staunch against.
And, you know, against making
mandates, mandates of school
calendars, mandates of
instructional hours.
I, I have very much been about
local control because each
district, each classroom, each
teacher knows what they need to
address the unique needs.
Of those students in a one size
of one size fits all approach is
not something that
I believe is the role of this
committee and the legislature.
In this, we're we're amenable to
taking out that ban. I, I hear
it loud clear from all your
members. So people are saying
80% we like if it's the band
that's the problem, I'm willing
to take it out.
And um, Madam Prote, uh, we
still have members on the list,
which is fine as one issue. I'm
hearing several different issues
with the bill, but we'll
continue on. we finish.
Thank you, um, one of
When I
started this, uh.
I don't know if that school
district is still here.
I wanted to say hi to them and
thank you for coming all the way
here. Today we celebrate
bilingual day here in their own
house, but yeah she kids from
Albuquerque higher playing in
the floor and missing them, so
I'm very sad about it, but I'm
very happy to hear this
discussion, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, and experts here. Thank
you for always your passion to
advocate for student literacy
has been very clear
during my time here, um, I'm a
teacher, a middle school
teacher, and um
Love science, love data, and
when I start teaching and
learning about um biliteracy,
uh, Cummings is the one who
comes to my mind the
transferring of connected
cognitive underlying transfer
and how he talks about
subtracting and added uh
subtracting an additive
bilingualism and, and I see this
in what you actually bring it,
um, with Roswell and with Godson
and with um I, I work with the
schools in Caton and we that's
called.
Clothes and, and even uh we
mentioned during the in our
committee the school Sandoval in
Sabi who have the odds.
And I don't know if you can
answer this question. I have an
idea, but um, do you know which
frame works and teaching models
are they using besides letters?
Um, representative and chair,
can you clarify the question?
I'm not sure that we fully
understand. Yeah, um, this
programs are bilingual programs
who are fully implemented.
So, uh, I'm sure that you've
seen something besides letters.
I know for instance, Gaston they
use Gla and I know um I middle
school that I work with cats and
they just Kagan and the clavis.
So do they have any other models
and frameworks that they are
using besides letters.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
From our observations there,
they, you're right, they do use
the glide strategies, but they
take the uh structured literacy
strategies and apply them to
Spanish. They use a number of um
devices they use electronic
programs and different things,
but they stick to that
systematic explicit instruction.
So that's what I've seen, I
haven't seen curriculum per se,
but I've seen how they go about
teaching the same way, but
you're right, it's not letters,
it's not a companion piece. I
wanna say they use uh Hegarty,
though Hegarty also, that's in
Spanish.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
panel. Um, and it's exactly what
I, I love about these programs
and how successful they are
because they are doing what we
have been talking about, uh,
there is no one size fits all
and
We, we, with all these programs,
we have what we call
subtractive.
Right, the students who are not
receiving the services in both
sides, um, they are gonna be
losing their home language and
we are celebrating bilingual Day
today and we, we were talking
about the whole week about
bilingual education, Mr. Chair,
and, and panel and
This bill doesn't, well, where
the bill exactly have, and I
don't see it, but what
explicitly protectsual language
and create a language programs,
uh, so it prevents reinforcing
um subtracting bilingualism.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Representative.
So I think in the first document
that we shared, the Science of
Reading for English Learners. We
have about literacy framework in
there and it does we want
additive views, we want
asset-based views, and that's
promoted in there because it
doesn't take it away if you're
using systematic explicit
instruction. And so I think it's
really important to note that
that the and I think uh
representative Caballero also
made a similar point that we
want to build and leverage the
home language. To the
extent that you can in the
program you exist in. A lot of
students don't exist in those
programs in New Mexico and so we
just have to be really frank
about that. Certainly, if we can
expand dual language in in
immersion, we're all for that.
But it's just that systematic
explicit and all the the guiding
principles of uh structured
literacy, but I've seen it
across different uh schools
where they're implementing that
approach within other things
that they use that's very
additive to kind of support that
language.
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you expert. Uh, yeah, and
I think it's very clear that we
have that intention, we really
want that. I just don't see
explicitly in the in the bill,
um, I, I, I'm afraid that the
students uh identities and
background, and we are
encouraging only monolingual
narratives, because I don't see
it in the bill and that's my
concern. I, I'm sure Mr. Chair,
and panel that we do want this
and I think this has proved that
bilingual programs actually.
but I don't see it on the bill,
and that's, that's my concern,
um.
How is university in our, in our
state, taking into
accountability believe in this
bill in the bill.
Mr.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I believe
that beginning in 2019 with
Senate Bill 298 that much of
that question has been thought
about and working in
partnerships with um teachers
who volunteer time, um,
principals who have volunteered
time, many professors who have
volunteered time to help us to
uh create the list of high
quality instructional materials
for language arts specifically
for our state.
So our process for choosing high
quality instructional material
because of the uniqueness of our
state go.
And undergo even additional um
examination and a rigorous
review in order for them to be a
part of the list, because we
know we have such rich cultural
and linguistic diversity and I
think this bill is not saying
anything about dual language
programs. It's not negating
that, um, in fact, it is
actually saying let's make sure
that our teachers have high
qualities skills coming out of
the college.
and universities so that they
can jump into the classroom and
and meet the diverse needs of
our kids. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, panel. Um,
I think it's very clear for all
of us that we are really
interested in that diversity.
It's just that we have talk in
this committee for a several
times. How are bilingual
programs are going down, how uh
we talk, Mr. Chair, during the
in our committee committee also
how we have seen growth in many
uh specific groups.
And I remember asking the data
for our multilinguish learners
because we don't have the data
unless they are part of the
successful programs, we don't
have data for students who are
not there, so, um, my fear is
that uh this bilingual programs
are being sacrificed, um,
because initiatives who are
really good, but it's just not
uh in the style we don't have
any law, it's not something that
we are promoting and that's my
concern, that's a strong concern
that I have when
Um, my, uh, experience as an
educator has seen that this
actually work, um, and I wanna
make sure that we promote these
programs, uh, Mr. Chair, so, um,
language is different in, in
different, in different um
Spanish is different than native
language than English, so I
could repeat that word many
times and maybe I should improve
my accent. I don't know, but,
uh, but I know that it still
doesn't have the contextualized
approach, he's gonna repeat
whatever he's been taught.
and when they see that the
meaning, they are not gonna be
able to to identify what they're
talking about and that's what I
call subtractive model and I'm
focusing on English only only
and uh one size fits all and I
know it's not your intention,
it's really, really clear, but
I'm really concerned on that.
Thank you, Mr. Sharon Panel.
Mr. Chair, I just want to
clarify because I stem from
special education, multicultural
special education, and that's
what we use one size fits all.
This is not a one size fits all.
There's still a lot of autonomy
of the practices that you bring
in that you know work, those
evidence-based practices for
dual language instruction,
evidence-based practices for
English instruction and
evidence-based practices for ES
instructed in English. So it's
the threefold and so I think
that it's really important to
make that clarification. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
care.
So that one.
That's Korean for thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And I say that because
I could teach everybody in this
room how to write and read, not,
you wouldn't be able to know
what it meant. Crean in 2 hours
because it's a phonetically
clear language, and I was
looking at Noah Webster in the
1780s and 1990s, wanted to
standardize English letters and
sounds and my husband says it's
a big shame that he never did it
because we wouldn't be having
this conversation.
So a couple, a couple of points.
First of all, uh, Senator,
The whole, I thank you for
driving the science of reading
and the structure of literature.
I can't even say it now.
Literacy.
It's great. It's hard and you've
been relentless in doing it. And
I, as a representative Baucus
said 80% of the bill is about
that. So I have a few questions.
Um
First of all, what we're really
talking about and haven't said
it explicitly, we're talking
about the science of
understanding how kids read and
the art and science of effective
methods of teaching kids how to
read. There's two parts, and I
think when Representative Grola
talked about Kagan and Abbott
and um
What else do we have?
Uh, glad strategies, all those
things, when you put them
together, you get success.
Yesterday, I met with 9 people
from the Project Echo, who are
in the cohort, they're already
trained letters, but now they're
training how to teach in their
troubleshooting incredible, but
that's what makes it work.
It's not just insisting that
people learn it, but it is those
hours with an expert teacher and
all these programs that coach
people and teach them and
without that, the scient of
reading can't really go
anyplace. So I just want to
point that out.
Um
My first question is,
We've heard that you and him,
Mr. Chair, has hired a literacy
coordinator. I'm very confused.
There's these 13 programs, 13
coordiners.
did they report to? Are they
reporting to the institution
that hires them, it's PED hiring
them. It's just muddy to me. Can
that be clarified?
And Mr. Chairman, I, I'm, I
apologize for
Not saying that correctly. What
I meant was that they hired a
professor from Florida who's
been thoroughly trained in it as
part of their education.
Not hired her for literacy
coordinator. She's on that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Thanks for
clarifying that. So what I'd
like to know is these 13 people
that are monitoring, and I hate
the word unfortune that makes
you think of police enforcing
the law, who's hiring them and
who are they accountable to,
because it's like, are they
helping the program? Are they to
PET? It's a, it's muddy to me,
please clarify that part of the
legislation, yes, Mr. Chair and
representative, so.
Some of this will be um fleshed
out through the rulemaking
process, but the idea is that
the colleges and universities
will select their coordinators
and those coordinators will work
very closely with our educator
pathway program because we do
oversee the teacher preparation
programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, uh, deputy secretary,
cause we had a bill yesterday
about the charter school and the
PED and it's like, who's
reporting to what he's in
charge. So it does need room.
making.
Um, my second thing is, Mr.
Chair, if I do a read aloud,
Is that structure of literacy,
or is that balance literacy.
Yes, Mr. Chair, and
representative Garrett. So, um,
I think some of this is being
muddled because many of us
associate.
Um, structured literacy with
only phonics. So what I think
it's really important for this
body, especially to know is that
it is perfectly appropriate for
students to be read aloud to, to
do guided reading, to do shared
reading, to develop
comprehension skills to actually
study vocabulary, you can even
have a spelling test at all of
those things are a part of.
structured literacy, the
components that we have in the
bill to take away from the
teaching method is one
methodology called the 3 queuing
method. That method is what has
been debunked many times over,
where students have an
overemphasis in guessing what a
word means or is, period. So you
might have a PS word and so kids
just say, oh, it's.
Psychology for everything.
inconsistent word recognition
because you are constantly
asking students to look on the
page for context clues. You're
asking them what does it look
like? Things like that. It
allows for weak phonic skills
because it does not always
address phonics instruction
explicitly and lastly,
struggling readers who have very
limited English or low
vocabularyry to begin with,
struggle when they are never
explicitly um taught.
The sounds of language, and that
is any language that is shared
alphabet.
Mr. Chair and and deputy
secretary, but that's my issue
because when you disallow
Balanced literacy as a teaching
method, as you've just said.
Balance literacy has many, many
of the same strategies as
structured literacy. So when we
disallow it, and I looked up.
Um
prohibit kill repudiate,
exclude, um,
I don't think that that belongs
in here. I would like to see a
positive bill stressing the
importance of making structured
literacy in the science of
reading, the core of what we do,
but not
Uh, and, and as you've said on
page two, well, I, I have the
amendments in context version.
Section 2, as used in advancing
the science of reading, balanced
literacy means an instructional
philosophy using strategies such
as 3 queuing system, which
actually I've never used, so
this was new information for me,
for word identification, it
emphasizes whole language
approaches over systematiconics.
I just feel like when we say
everything.
That's balanced literary, which
in many times it's that um Zen
diagram overlap.
I feel it's a disservice and
other people have talked about
it, but I had a, a problem.
With that, see, I just had a
couple of other questions.
The data collection and analysis
of teachers after they complete
the preparation program, uh,
Mr. Chair, who does that? Does
that require more employees at
PED or who's responsible?
Because that's a pretty massive
thing.
That's 13 programs are the
programs analyzing it.
Who does what?
Um
Chairman Romero and uh vice
chair Garrett. So some of this
work is already done through our
accreditation process. So it
will just be clarifying some of
that work that when we go to the
colleges and we're doing their
accreditation, just really
honing in on those, on those
structured literacy components
at each of the colleges and
universities. Once a month, we
meet with the deans and
directors, and it is oftentimes
work session, the alternative
programs are often represented.
in that same meeting, so it will
be a continual and collaborative
effort as we move forward.
Because Mr. Taran and um
Deputy Secretary.
It means looking at their urine
tests, possibly they're
beginning, middle, and your
intense. It's just, there's a
lot of data.
There's a lot of data, but thank
you for that. And then, um,
Let's see. The other thing, Mr.
Chair, and for all three of you
is
We really have to visit how we
evaluate reading.
Because we have this dyslexia
screener, um, I'm personally a
Devils fan. If you give me the
dibble stuff and give me some
kids and I can pretty
accurately.
Predict because remember, some
kids are, I tested a guy
wonderful decoder, beautiful
reader.
didn't know a thing you read.
So dibbles is great. I station,
we won't go into that, but you
have to use two other tests at
least to accurately measure. So
I think we have to review.
What's our dyslexia screener? Is
that contained in other things.
It's just a.
Important thing that we can't
ignore in the process of doing
this.
Uh, let's see if I had any other
questions. Oh.
Foundations, is that considered
a balanced literacy.
A tool, Mr. Chair and team.
Foundations is all about
monarch's morphology structured
literacy program.
A 12345, and it's fantastic.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to
hear that cause my school used
it for years. And then I guess,
uh, Orton Gillingham is also
special ed, structure literacy,
good. We're using some good
materials.
And I think that that
I
Um, everybody else is that,
that's my other questions, but
again, the core of what we're
trying to do here.
I agree with
I do believe some things need to
be worked on in the actual bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, anybody I represent
Torres Velasquez.
Let me turn that on, Mr. Chair.
I have a lot of questions, um.
And, and I know we're we were
expected on the floor 2 hours
ago.
And I'm getting calls that were
expected in the next 5 to 10
minutes. Yeah.
don't we just
go away, I need to go on the
floor also and work on
amendments that you all brought
up rather than continuing to.
I mean, I, I, I, I think we've
heard it all. I, I could have a
personal conversation. I would
love that.
Yeah, I'm happy to go and talk
with her and I have too, and
we've already taken
2.5 hours of time, I think
members do have questions like
now that may not wait. I respect
that represent Torres Velasquez,
if you would want to ask your
questions so that I'd like to
make a quick statement for
Torres Vasquez, we just want to
pick down a couple of your most
important questions I'll try to,
OK, so.
I, I'm afraid it requires a
story, Mr. Chair.
I'll try to keep it short for a
story, please just with the
Question
Well
Um, I, I'm a representative
Stewart many years ago when I
just returned from San Jose
State and introduced you to my
friend Marsha Henry, and, and I
have to say I'm really excited
to see all the work you've done
around teaching reading. I do
have some questions I would love
to discuss with you later. I do
understand we need to get on the
floor. And so I would say, um,
I, I'm seeing some confusing
pieces.
Around academic freedom.
And that is something that is
spelled out in our university
contracts and in our faculty
handbook and so I would suggest
that that be part of the
discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Senator Stewart.
Thank you.
Um.
I mean, I think obviously you've
you've heard the criticisms of
the committee, um.
We have a very short time left,
especially in this committee,
um, we have a number of Senate
bills that have crossed a couple
more house bills that we would
like to to send on their way.
Um, so if you would like to go
off and make amendments um to
this, um, I can't guarantee that
we will schedule the bill again,
um, but I'd certainly like to
have this conversation, because
my one question is, is
Why didn't this go through LESC?
You all mentioned in the
beginning about we've studied it
through LESC, but we didn't have
the bill.
And in December I had asked the
secretary, and secretary about
bills and assured me we'd have a
bill to look at, I would have a
bill to look at in December.
I got an outline.
That outline and bullet points.
Fine. And then when we had
discussions, the discussion was,
oh well, we've changed that.
We've changed this.
That's not there anymore.
And that's part of my
frustration with this process is
that if we have built it, don't
go through LC.
We have a very short amount of
time to vet the bills here.
And honestly, you can probably
feel the tension in this room
and the consternation amongst
members because members are
torn, lots of things that we may
support, other things we have
deep reservations about, and I
will say too, the pressure
that's been put on members and
the tactics that have been
employed on members is to me
unacceptable.
Hauling around, getting
different folks to call
triangulate have side
conversations is very, very
troubling to me. So if we agree
to go on with amendments that
this is to go on in good faith
with Madam Secretary, I would
ask you to lead those
discussions with all of us here
as members and you, Madam protem
ass the sponsor of the bill,
solely.
If we're to do that, because it
really concerns me about the
types of pressure being put on
members.
And to me as a chair, it's
unacceptable.
So if I could have that, I would
appreciate it. I have some
concerns that I'm
Willing to share, um, but again,
principally, it's that we have
an interim process.
Here I recently chaired it, and
I expect major legislation as
such, to go through that
process.
So if you wish that we roll the
bell, again, I'm not making any
commitment as to how soon or if
hearing it at all, hopefully we
can get to something and if not,
look at it in the interim.
Does that sound fair, Madam
Proin? It does. Thank you. All
right, so we, we'll head to the
floor. Thank you, folks. That
concludes our business. We'll
see you on Monday.
