Just for the committee today
mark hello is not here today
date that is going to be
covering.
for us so yeah yeah he does
we've done this since session
started so he's pretty adept at
everything that it's going on
but it'll be made then instead
of our tell us and we'll out
thank you have a nice will send
offer more cal on Wednesday but
she is leaving us she's got a
great new jobs starting it will
be leaving us and so.
Very nice lady Mexico Kirk uh is
going to be starting so I think
Wednesday is Martel as last day
with us.
Senator we're ready to go
whenever you're we are being
webcast now and so just for the
public Senate Education
Committee are we will be
stopping we do not have a floor
session today is so we can go
clear up until new so we've got
a full schedule of things we
first are going to be doing one
thirty by the opportunity
scholarship that was pulled off
the table on Friday then
followed by Senator Padilla the
dropout prevention three thirty
Senator Lopez twenty nine is
over the rules with the
confirmation so she is requested
to wait on hers until she's able
to get back over here and that
will try and put her on as the
next order of business
after we finish whatever bill we
are on at that point
As I look down through the rest
of the schedule I don't see any
other particular bills that need
to get changed over today
anything that gets completed
today or Wednesday will get read
out at the same time on
Wednesday so nothing gets slow
down if we don't get it done
today and instead get it done on
Wednesday more.
Out for the public during public
comment we limit the public to
two minutes of our webmaster
times that very carefully so
make sure that you up additional
your comments down into short
two minute time period for
things.
Anything else many of my
committee senators.
Questions concerns.
And if not is Senator Neil here
I think we have well jurors off
the table and so we're gonna do
Senate bill one thirty five the
opportunity scholarship act is
the girl you with us.
Senator o'neill is not with us
yet.
Well read let's go move on and
we'll do Senate bill three
thirty I think we picked up we
did all of the public comment
when you're back to questions by
the Canadian center yes if you
want to give us just a very
brief recap also we know where
we are and then you Madam You
might have before we go to
questions from the committee
thank you Mr chairman again I'm
wearing the mask that employees
working in my office with me so
just trying to protect them
thank you all very much we did
have this discussion on Friday
two hundred thousand dollars
appropriation to rapper drop out
prevention Public Education
Department we've seen great
results with this particular
programming that's taking place
at Rio Grande High School and
multiple other high schools in
New Mexico this is going to
continue to keep them growing
that in the case that they're
asking and I just.
Share my screen just very
briefly Mister chairman.
I don't have access to share
just wanted to show one little
thing real quick.
Yes please do and we have
somebody it sounds like is not
muted if somebody could please
make sure that your buttons are
on you your call on.
So yes Senator thank you just
wanted to demonstrate one of the
programs that is done very well
in this area with regard to the
strong prevention
Rating in my computer's acting
really kind of weird this
morning but you will see
something that says Jake New
Mexico in the spring.
Yes so this is the jobs for
America's graduates it's a
program that is done very very
well in the high schools where
it's been but I wanted to just
draw your attention to this
particular slide here.
in the graduation rates that are
seen here
so from two thousand fifteen to
two thousand nineteen the
program is actually seen a
significant increase from an
already impressive ninety three
dot seven percent to a peak of
ninety seven dot six and I.
ninety six percent as of two
thousand nineteen but if you
take a look at all New Mexico
graduates here I'm not sure you
can see the error of the as I
mean you see the error as I move
around okay I don't know if that
was just for me Mr chairman or
how that works work learn a lot
about technology but New Mexico
economically disadvantaged
students all the way through to
the students that are very
targeted with this particular
program we see almost a thirty
percent increase in their
graduation rates and then just
take a look at New Mexico's
complete average overall
national all students graduation
rates I mean we're we we we
can't not do things like this
for for this particular group
I'm just wanted to make make
that mentions for so I'll take
questions or comments at this
point.
Okay we're not going to
questions from the committee so
I'm watching for hands raised.
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Padilla
you know I think these these
programs are really important
you the ladies out you show the
data and show how the graduation
rates are improving under these
programs I guess a little
concern of mine and I just want
to clarify when we were in
committee on Friday a lot of the
discussion was focused on jag
and then later it became that
this will be open to
other programs to do this type
of work I I guess I just want to
confirm that that's the case
because I just want to make sure
that we're not just targeting
the best to just Jagger to just
one type of program to do this
work.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr vice
chairman and and you know you
that's an excellent point and
that's really with anything that
we do here in the legislature we
don't call out a company name we
don't call our organization in
profit or not for property
whatever but I I I mention in
and draw your attention to check
because it's been in operation
in New Mexico for many years now
and we have seen the results of
the same but PED will have to
put this out to you during our
peer an agreement there are
requests for whatever it is that
they do their and our final pick
the best possible provider based
on the stipulations that they
have but I called out Jake
simply because it's a program
that's been very successful and
is already in the state.
Great and and and thank you Mr
chairman Senator India and and I
agree and I I think they're
probably doing a great job this
is no slight on them just coming
from the military world and
stuff we staff to kind of watch
out for that sometimes you would
write the requirements you're
almost like tailoring
the best you know tailoring the
money going to one company or
one source and I just wanna make
sure we're not doing that and
once again it's not a slight on
jets or anything you're doing
but I just wanted to confirm
that so thank god that's what Mr
chair I appreciate that Mr
chairman Mr Westerman really
which you'll find is you know
we.
Go out and and and and decide we
want something done you know
people like you and I go get the
money and then we just get out
of the way and let the
professionals Madam and that's
what I've done in the nine years
that I've been in another
program it's done very well in
New Mexico if you could open a
corporate why do I in the sense
of New Mexico and are the New
Mexico region I was a board
member there for twenty two
years since I was seventeen and
the year before I joined the
Senate I I I I resign from the
board of that December before
because I just you know I don't
want there to be any conflicts
or anytime that's another
example of a program that does
what Jack does similar to the
tech thank you.
As news got their hands up it
doesn't always let me on it
right away doing all of that
there any other questions from
the committee I don't see other
hands up.
I have a couple questions and
similar to Senator pope and this
might be for Rachel.
Rachel got it back to us so I
don't know she's going to be
helpful
thank you our OB.
Are there other.
How much is in the budget does
the PED's your does the
education budget have money put
aside for drop out prevention.
Mr Chairman question for me I'm
sorry yes and I apologize I
thought that you are turned
around.
What is in the budget below the
line or other programs
prevention now are there other
is there money in the budget
already or is this that.
Prevention Mr chairman HSC has
not approved their budget yet
so right now I am not so I was
just talking to the disrupted
copied off.
I don't think they have specific
dollars for drop out prevention
I need to post.
There's lots of money that could
be used for this so there's
college and career readiness
some steam.
Other parts of money that we do
Regions specifically in the
language of this appropriation
has not worked in two hospitals
to.
Okay.
And I think you'll like.
Two hundred.
Propped up prevention.
Minuscule in the the scope of
the.
If you look at it FTEs that at
most for at.
How what what what what for
programs like that what is this
money used for how many people
does it what I would do the the
supplies for and is it open for
all districts in my district
down in Los crucis could easily
follow up two hundred thousand
heartbeat nothing for the others
how does this rollout state what
it is actually available
statewide for districts Mr
chairman that want to adopted
and that want to utilize it what
I'm gonna ask up with more
specifics I have cable well back
with this this morning Hey can
you just dig in a little bit
there on on what with the the
two hundred thousand dollar
appropriation would be used for
please also.
Yes thank you Senator Padilla Mr
chairman members of the
committee the a two hundred
thousand and and yes Senator
Padilla is correct that is open
to any district that would like
to to have jag and the two
hundred thousand would allow
To expand right now we're in
five districts are I schools and
it would allow us to expand to.
At least five more schools it is
minimum amount of money to each
district by but it does up the
districts pay for the F. T. E.
R. partial FTE and the money
would be paid for training and
us student student conferences
the Jack model.
After Dick articles.
Localizations.
For student participate.
And also training for the.
A jag specialists.
Thank you
it back again I'm like this is
money that money for drug
prevention.
Yes that are by no means of a
flight on jacket wonderful
program but are there other drop
out prevention programs that
could get the money and the in a
brief distance my district Los
crucis they talked to with they
have a great drop out prevention
programs that have access to
this money.
Well good excellent questions
and I think Mr Chairman and Mr
vice chairman had a very good
point there's well and I called
out today because and I'll just
say one more time because it is
it is already in successful
operation within within our our
school districts that's one
reason that so that you have
something to point to you can
see what works for the
physically actually talking
about but there are other
programs like youth development
incorporated if you know the
central New Mexico we are
whatever program Mr chairman is
in your school district for the
I know you have Google school
districts but in your school
district would be able to apply
to this funding through the V.
P. the path if they you know
when they put it out there for
you know never can provide the
services is at the moment you
know that the the money is going
to generate because they're the
ones that have been doing is
very successful and you heard
from this probe all that this is
going to expand this and this is
something that like any other
great program we have here in
New Mexico that the that
produces dividends and results I
would envision a growing over
time I think the initial
appropriation was significantly
smaller than what we're asking
for right now and so they're
just basically doing it in the
interests to make sure that
they're being as efficient as
possible with the monies that
are available.
So Senator out V. appropriate
money to this last year how much
did we appropriate know how is
it being funded out of the five
or six districts that are
currently doing this yeah can I
ask Katie would respond to that
one as well I know that it is
being funded I know that it is
operating at a high school in my
district and several high
schools but that one is
definitely Rio Grande High
School it's going very well you
heard some of that yesterday or
I'm sorry I can't can you speak
to that these yes R. Mr chairman
members of the committee and
Senator Padilla the
I'm sorry I just went blank here
the funding sources I did want
to say to that we have been in
conversations with the public
education department and and
secretary W. secretary caught
the Santa for other you know
other programs and possibilities
for drop out prevention so we
have been in conversation with
her yes last year we did receive
an appropriation of wealth under
the direction of the governor's
office from department of
workforce solutions and the
public education department and
it went through region nine for
those funds currently the school
districts do pick up the
FTP order.
The from department of workforce
solutions again is to provide
student support services
supportive services and training
for the teachers so whatever the
program would be that would be
included in the in the money so
currently it's funded by the the
school districts and some.
Through that appropriation.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Padilla members of the
committee.
You Mr chair one.
Thank you I'm trying not very
and then I was trying not to
step on other people's I
apologize everyone up.
Senator.
Thank you
Is John stand on and this two
hundred thousand that would be
as I just had.
Who would make the decision that
to get somebody how much to go
to school with a guy go to
multiple schools using what
criteria.
Of.
Mr chair good morning yes I am.
Rob they might look a little bit
so you're your question
is these kinds of appropriations
we would have to.
With a request for it is not a a
request for anyone to apply for
this kind of funding.
generally we have some sort of
selection area workers like that
we.
The best the best programs and
that meet the requirements of
the RFA.
What is.
Other organizations out.
That background noise out of
your your group it's very
difficult to understand what it
I see myself on mute Mr Chairman
I've been I've been on mute the
whole time and madam speaker.
Mr chair your little better now
yes that's better thank you.
Okay sure I'm sorry about that
so Senator
The path would would it would
issue a request for applications
and would take applications from
anyone who felt they might be
able to meet the meet the
requirements of the of the
requests and we would have a a
group of folks probably using
rubric other selection criteria
to pick the organization that
that met the requirements best.
Thank you Mr so that would just
be one grant or could district
common request forty two
thousand dollars of this.
That's a good question Mr chair
I I have to follow up we we you
know it depends on who who came
and how much money was available
obviously for twenty thousand
dollars if someone had a
proposal for the entire amount
it's possible that we would fund
of one organization depending on
you know if there are other
organizations that felt they
could use less of it it's it's
it has happened in the past
where we've broken up these
appropriations to fund multiple
organizations.
Thank you at the back to Senator
but the act is there a timeline
for when the requests have to
come here and in order to get
the money out the door I don't
recall seeing that in the bill
anywhere.
Mr chairman it would be
appropriated for expenditure in
the fiscal year twenty twenty
two and with would would develop
there are a issues you just
heard from Mister Santa and and
then they would follow through
on that I don't want to I don't
want to be is I don't I try
never to be prescriptive that
way legislation that I write
that I introduced like I said I
my goal was to identify you know
something that's a need
Try to get it done try to get it
funded and then just get back
out of the way I look the part
the professionals who knows what
they're actually doing get it
done.
Thank you I guess I understand
it just seems like we're drop
out prevention two hundred
thousand yeah with this really
is a statewide brought program
is.
Not not even close the peanuts
or for what the need might be
and yes certainly other district
schools across the state if this
is a good program we ought to be
funding it fully and completely
rather than just a little bit
for for a small program here
there let me check and see I
still don't I don't see other
hands up and so I guess go to
pleasure the committee please.
I will do pass.
Have a motion for a two passed
etcetera but the other ones.
Second.
Seconded by Senator hope that if
you'll call the roll Senator.
With that are that yeah right.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
No.
Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator souls.
Yes.
Hi and so.
Mr Mr chair.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Is it just a kind of finance Mr
chair.
Yes.
The finance consideration off of
yes.
Senator Kernan you are changing
your vote to a to a do pass.
The finance just making sure
because there thank you yes yes.
With that then we have a I agree
to pass
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you to
Senator Kernan as well thank
you.
Thank you our next and I think
we have Representative Garrett
who was one of the sponsors on
if the one thirty five
opportunity scholarships Act it
was taken off of the table we've
got all the public comment we've
got all the discussion I will
open it up at any members have
any.
Comments or questions they would
like to make before we go to a
doctor on Senate bill one thirty
five the opportunity scholarship
act.
I'm not seeing any hands go up
last call.
If not then not open promotion.
Mr chair like to make a motion
for to pass Senate bill one
thirty five.
Second thank you set Center pope
motions for to pass seconded by
Senator Padilla right if you
will call the roll please.
The grant.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Kernan.
No.
Yes explain member.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes.
And senator Neville to explain
its vote but we do have a due
pass.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman
I'm a little concerned about
this bill would be real honest
that about the concept because
of finances and keeping these
things going for ever
and our potential future
situations.
Thank you sure that we per
dollar ship.
So forth the lottery is the tool
we had used historically and I
would like to see us work on
that Avenue in reference to a
new program but possibly we can
discuss that as we move on down
the road this bill thank you Mr.
Thank you senator bill we do
have a to pass on Senate bill
one thirty I thank you for the
public you are.
Thank you Representative for
being here so we can get that
done quickly for you and thank
you education of what we will
see you for later thank.
Up for the public to the Senate
Education Committee we just had
a do pass on Senate bill one
thirty five the opportunity
scholarship that we also have a
due pass on the finance for
Senate bill three thirty the
dropout prevention program is
Senator Lopez with this I think
she still stuck in rules.
We will skip over Senate bill
two eighty nine at this point
and move on to Senate bill three
oh to the educational employee
PTSD is Senator said the a Lopez
with us.
Yes yes Mr chair I'm here.
Thank you senator if you will
please take us through the
Senate bill.
Three oh eight is that yeah my
eyes are not working well today
the.
Educational play PTSD and then
after that we will be doing a
charter school changes with the
parties you can also Senator
please.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
this is an important bill for
educators because of the
increase in violence of the
school's over that over the
years
it's
One of the things we know is
that when somebody is suffering
from PED PTSD earlier treatment
is better and so what this bill
does is it provides a
presumption of PTS a presumption
in favor of TTC PTSD.
which is which is which is not
exactly it's a it's a cluster of
of symptoms that relate to with
that occur when somebody is X.
been exposed to an incredible
traumatic event of actual or
threatened death serious injury
or sexual violence and the it's
it's governed by the fifth
edition of dis diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental
disorders and so what this bill
does is that presumption kicks
in and
The thing about this presumption
in favor of budget is treatment
will occur right away until the
presumption is overcome or if
the presumption is is proven and
that will get of educators the
treatment they need after such a
after serious from automatic and
that.
I have with me Mr chair staying
out of who is an expert witness
for the will for the bill he has
background information relating
to PTSD for educators and what
other states have done regarding
this issue and he's also
familiar with the efforts of
first responders in New Mexico
seeking the same the same at
treatment so I with that I'll
turn it over to my experts.
I'm
very.
Thank you senator good morning
chair souls members of the
committee my name is Shane you I
am employment labor lawyer and
have been practicing in that
respect for twenty five years
here in New Mexico I will make
my comments brief essentially
the current workers comp or comp
framework incorporates more
antiquated attitudes towards
injuries which you can't see the
current law carries with it sort
of an implicit skepticism of
workplace injuries which are
psychological in nature I as
Senator Sedillo Lopez explained
our understanding of the
devastating nature of PTSD has
all and included a PTSD injury
is everybody as damaging
insignificant as other types of
injuries in the workplace that
you can see yes yes is it an
uncommon injury in the school
setting but we're encouraged
eighties profoundly can be
devastating for New Mexico's
educators are our educators
deserve a legal level playing
field in that respect in this
legislature's already approved
in the governor's already signed
similar qualifications for first
responders here in New Mexico
because of the type of work
performed by our educators in
New Mexico when this type of
injury first this sort of
presumption needs to exist in a
state law to protect our
educators in exactly the same
way that first responders
are protected in New Mexico and
with that I I'm that I'll stand
for questions defer to senator
this.
Thank you Mr chair I have Gino
said that such Riana
we will also discuss this bill.
And importance for teachers.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Gina Satriano I'm with
the Rio Rancho school employees
you we're doing all local so we
are represented by AFGE New
Mexico and NEA New Mexico as
well I am speaking on behalf of
in support of this bill as you
know it's been an unfortunate
reality that New Mexico's had
experience three shootings I
think in the last ten years
large school district was one of
those two years ago to the month
I think this month this two
years and with that being said
we still have a lot of our
educators who still have this
fact that has happened in Rio
Rancho we still get the
questions we still get they ask
for support so this bill would
actually help out a lot with all
educators around the state not
just Rio Rancho but it was
highly effective in Rio Rancho
during that time and still is
has its effect so we would ask
for your support in this bill
and passing this bill.
And I'll stand for questions as
well.
I
think you're right now it's
definitely.
Are you with us.
Mr chair maybe I don't has
definitely
with that I will stand for
questions.
Thank you senator
that with that will go out to
the public and they've been if
you would if you take a Mr
public comment please.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
At it looks we it looks like
we've received now indication
request to speak in opposition
to this bill.
and I do not believe that we
have anyone on the zoom call
with us to speak in support at
this L..
I am wrong could somebody please
use the raise your hand function
now.
I believe that is it for public
comment on this bill.
Okay thank you Senator I don't
think I need to go back to you
to respond to any of the public
comment will not go to the
questions from the committee any
questions from the committee
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
I do have some questions and and
some comments
Mr chair and senator can you
tell me what other profession in
New Mexico
follows this presumption whether
the presumption for workman's
comp.
Mr chair Senator and the first
responders have this past last
year I'll defer to my expertise
to explain that bill for that
law in more detail.
Thank you senator at maybe Mr
chair at Senator Kernan that's
exactly right the first
responders in New Mexico or
firefighters that includes
officers have this presumption
protection it is worth
mentioning that this presumption
and this protection exists for
first responders and all
employees in many other states
around the United States but
specifically that is who's
covered in New Mexico so Mr
chair and senator in the
analysis it indicates that
Profession and is firefighters
so I don't know if the term
firefighter we talk about first
responders I don't think
policemen are included in
statute with regard to this am I
Am I correct.
The analysis on page number two
paragraphs.
It basically under substantive
issues paragraph to just for our
projects and I remember when
that law was passed a number of
years ago and it was very
controversy at the time and
actually I did not vote for the
bill and then later on had
second thoughts about it because
I truly believe that
firefighters specifically when
they are exposed to the amount
of smoke they are I think you
could percent that down the road
if they develop cancer that yes
you could you can say that but
it's very specific to certain
diseases it's not just a flat
you know just because you're
firefighters and you have some
issue that you can claim.
Presumption there so I believe
it's just firefighters and if
I'm mistaken if there's anyone
that can can tell me otherwise
I'll be happy to listen but
that's a concern I have that was
a very difficult bill to get
through it was very controversy
but at the end of the day.
Probably what's the right thing
to do for firefighters in so
looking at this with regard to
our educators and frankly I
taught school for many years.
And I have a lot of that
wonderful years teaching and
but they're about the things
that happen on along the way
their their challenges and but I
I I think you present that that
I have an illness to work
some specific issue that would.
Determine PTS the I think that's
that's just really a stretch I'm
really not supported this bill
and and I think that we have to
be very careful we have teachers
who have not even been in the
classroom for over a year and
we're we're doing this the
timing on this is could be worse
so frankly I don't support this
bill I think we have to be very
careful going down this road
with regard to a presumption
that that this is occurred at
school and I think the cost is
another issue stated in the
analysis that that there is
great concern with regard to
costing this bill as senator and
Mr chair go to finance.
With the appropriation attached.
Mr chair Matt a.
Senator Kernan no I believe it's
Judiciary where goes next the
thing that I would like to
respond
this presumption just doesn't
happen because you're in the
school and so and and just
teaching this presumption would
kick in if you've been exposed
to actual or threatened death
serious injury or sexual
violence.
So it is so those are the those
are the.
Those are the.
Definition definitional pieces
of PTSD PTSD isn't
Isn't a very easy thing to prove
and so what this bill does is it
just makes it easier on our
teachers I also know from
personal experience with several
teachers in the family that
teachers are tough and they
don't even want to speak to you
know that the worst thing can
happen in the classroom.
And they tested out
but in order to have this this.
PTSD diagnosed there has to be
something really really
significant like a put like
issued shooting in the classroom
like someone getting seriously
hurt
I remember I had when I was in
school
My hand but got burned in
Chemistry class is kind of a
weird story but it really
there was a fire and it was
really traumatic for everyone
and everyone just toughed it out
nobody nobody really dealt with
it and now we know a lot more
about what can
what can happen when you have
that kind of serious thing
happen classroom
Mr my my teacher actually
retired very soon after and he
felt horrible every time he saw
me that's the only thing you
could talk about and he never
got any counseling or anything
and this is this is the kind of
bills that would
Not to do away with the stigma
of having something really
traumatic happen in the
classroom or in the school that
somebody observes and then they
have the opportunity to get
immediate counseling and
treatment and that is going to
help them earlier and help them
get back into the classroom
because if they don't deal with
that early it's just going to
get worse and worse.
We has anything to add to that.
Members of the committee I just
wanted to respond to Senator
Kernan at recollection of the
state of the law Senator Kernan
I think you're on the right
track what you were referencing
no was the occupational exposure
legislation and asked if you
years ago and that you are
correct did just apply to
firefighters there was a
separate law acts last year
which address the PTSD issue for
our first responders so at I
think there were two different
laws it play and this extends
only the PTSD posttraumatic
stress disorder coverage not the
occupational exposure and I
think that you may have been
remembered.
Well thank you very much for
clarifying that I still believe
that as we go down this road and
talk about different things that
could cost
could cause this I think it's
You could be expanded and it
looks to me like that there are
many professions out there right
now that.
Certainly you could get with all
of the first responders and all
the people in that the medical
field that are taking care of
the COVID patients right now to
me if we're gonna expand that's
where we need to expand not not
our educators at this point so
that's all I have I just I do
think it needs to go to finance
I think it does have a fiscal
impact when you talk about
coverage through Nicosia and I'm
I'm just wondering why this was
not referred house and finance
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Representative Brett.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator help me understand on
the our presumption side.
my.
What I'm looking at it is saying
that.
If you go to your doctor says
you have PTSD if it was after
you started working for district
it's presume to have come from
your work is that is that right.
first.
Mr Mr of Mr chair Senator Brandt
first there has to be a
diagnosis of PTSD.
And then there has to be
employment and then that
presumption kicks in.
The best way that's absolutely
correct but the presumption can
be overcome that they
educational that the activities
outside of employment posed a
significant risk of developing
PTSD so the way presumptions
work is that there's the initial
presumption and and that kicks
in the treatment that that
presumption can be overcome with
evidence and then then that the
in this case probably the
workers comp judge would make
the decision about what was the
source what was improper the
because of the PTSD
and the reason that that is so
broad is because we want people
to get treatment if they are
being if they have PTSD and
they're exposed to with our kids
so they will get initial
treatment if it turns out that
they have there was some out of
school activity that because
their PTSD it will end very
quickly once that evidence is
submitted to the judge.
And I'll defer to my expert I I
sometimes forget I have an
expert
I'll defer to my experts and
employment employment law
specialists he can correct or
expand on what I just sent.
At chair souls Senator SCAVELLO
basin Senator Brandt I I think
as Senator Sedillo Lopez got it
exactly right the there has to
be a dramatic event first if
there is a traumatic event and
there is a diagnosis of
posttraumatic stress disorder
the presumption is that it
wasn't cost by another source
and coverage would go ahead and
taking the employer may at any
time in this process rebut that
presumption establish that for
example the person seeking
coverage was had posttraumatic
stress disorder from an event
which occurred outside of the
school and occurred prior to the
event which occurred in schools
and with that evidence the
presumption is rebutted.
Mr Chairman maybe X. risk
sharing can answer as far as.
This so there would have to be a
document to dramatic event
without employee at the school.
Yes you're going I'll defer to
my experts Mr chairman.
Senator souls at Senator Brandt
the short answer your question
is yes there has to be an event
in the classroom which is an R.
as school shooting or you know
educators across the state have
been attacked by students at
educational assistance get
attacked Education the New it
will be something that everybody
knows about it we have to be a
traumatic event to trigger any
kind of coverage.
It is that somewhere in the bill
or is that just the way the
presumption works in law Mr
chair it goes into the
definition of PTSD PTSD is not
is not diagnosed unless there
was an experience of a traumatic
if you don't get a diagnosis of
PTSD I'm like people joke and
say oh I'm having PTSD from the
last of the last special session
I've heard that said you know of
because of whatever and just
joking that's not a serious
diagnosis the diagnosis need to
be made by a professional and
that diagnosis will not be made
unless there's a dramatic event
that the individual experience
and I'll defer to my experts as
well.
Thank you Senator Lopez at chair
souls at Senator Brandt is also
by operation of the existing
workers compensation there has
to be a workplace injury there
has to be a workplace that that
and at so there could be no
potential for coverage unless
there's some sort of substantial
event in the workplace without
that there's no coverage under
the law under the workers
compensation all.
Okay so so there has to be
approved in Mr Chairman Jamie
SB approving even at.
The work place that involve that
particular employee.
The understanding.
Yes yes Mr chair yes Senator.
Thank you because Mr chairman so
what we're really just doing in
the bill is taking the burden of
proof which is normally on the
employee.
I'm putting that burden of proof
on the employer to prove that it
didn't happen is is that
correct.
Mr chair you Senator Brandt I
know people get annoyed when I
get real law professor right but
there is there's actually the
burden of of the truth bears the
burden of persuasion and the
department of pleading what this
does is first you make has very
first burden that a plaintiff
has is a burden of pleading so
they have to plead of those
facts and so that once those
facts are pled then the burden
of pleading is on the employer
they have to respond so the poor
has to say no that's not what
happened then the burden shifts
to the plaintiff to meet the
burden of proof and put evidence
forward that's where the
employer can put their evidence
forward and says and and say no
this person was actually engaged
in combat in
In the military before they
joined of the lot of the this
call and they have had PTSD for
years and and and the the
traumatic event.
Was the cause of the PTSD then
it goes to the burden of
persuasion which means that then
the employee has to come in and
say maybe I had an and a
diagnosis earlier but in fact
watching the shooting in the
school
triggered a reoccurrence and
then then that goes back and
forth the burden of persuasion
is what the judge has to
determine.
Succeeded so that the judge
looks at all of the evidence and
then the judge determines well.
This was I'm going to say that
was because Asian from the
school or I'm not depending on
what the evidence shows and the
evidence will include medical
testimony it's not just people's
words and so there's a lot of
medical testimony that the judge
has to go over to determine
whether or not this is going to
actually be continue to be
reimbursed by the workers comp
insurance system or not I did
want to just briefly say that
there's not a direct financial
impact on the state's budget it
if any financial impact would be
on the workers comp system which
is separately financed.
And I will defer to my experts
if of I used to teach this in
also when I talk to the
procedure so I apologize for
being.
Boring.
Mister chairman Senator
renewable energy that I think
you explained it very well
I I understand what you're
saying on the workman's comp
that is paid by the employer
which would increase the cost
the employer which would have a
direct effect on the budget so
that's one thing we have to look
at
hi I understand what's happening
our schools my wife when she was
a substitute for she actually
became a full time teacher was
attacked by student
and so I understand very well
what happens in the classroom
if she had any issues from that
then she would have been able to
go in and show that it came from
that.
But we don't know what's
happening a lot of times and
individuals home wives or their
we used to call so civilian time
when I was in the military
when they're not at work
and the anything could have
happened.
Outside of work that they could
have received or gotten PTSD
from and then try to blame it on
work because that's where the
insurances
I think that the way it sits now
is probably the safest way they
do have a way of showing that.
It doesn't seem like a high
burden but all continue to
listen for shape the bill thank
you.
Mr chair Senator
they can prove that now with the
difference this makes is they
will get treatment immediately
without having to wait to see
whether the judge is okay with
it and we really would cause
PTSD can have an impact on our
kids we think it's really
important that or these I think
it's really important that
somebody who is suffering
symptoms get treatment soon.
Mister chairman Senator when
that just then change who's
paying for the treatment though
because if if you.
Have any kind of illness whether
it be mental or physical the
insurance through the school
district Garcia is one of the
best in the nation
would already cover that so they
would be able to get treatment
is just a matter of whether
we're going to workmen's comp or
whether we're going to your
personal are not personal but
your your work insurance.
Mr chair Senator Brandt that
depends on what kind of
insurance you have insurance
varies around around the state
and some people get insured
through their employer their
husbands or their wives employee
it it's a very come are are as
you know are the copayments are
different the a complicated
system of workers comp there are
no no coal plant at copayments
and it's it's just an easier
system to get you have to get
reimbursed you know it it's just
an easier system to to deal with
and I can I will defer to my
experts about the funding.
Senator Lopez thank you chair
souls and at Senator rack eight
the other thing I do what what
you're saying the you make a
point but I think the other
there are other benefits
associated with workers
compensation with the cover
claims day Katie and obviously
for for employees PTSD can be so
debilitating that employees
can't work for time in the
workers compensation system
provides compensation for that
time that they have to be at and
if it doesn't go through the
compensation system it's it's
it's a tough road for that
employee so we would look at all
of the benefits associated with
the workers compensation system
in that respect.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
Mayfield.
Thank you senator Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez and the city of Lopez and
others I think their number
points of clarification
medically that need to be
brought up here
number ones are all insurance
has to cover essential health
benefits essential health
benefits include mental health
so if an individual we're just
saying.
that seeing a fight in the
classroom because the.
For that individual some
difficulty and perhaps it was
related to something previous
and live
you know that might be hard
pressed to be called PTSD
under the under the criteria for
diagnosis yet that individual
would have access under his or
her insurance no matter who is
caring it because we do not
allow skinny plans in the state
that is plans that don't cover
the ten essential health benefit
so so they're going to get some
help to start with
secondly
then I would think that the
burden of proof as to whether or
not a strict I workers comp
would go into a formal diagnosis
that has to be carried out I I I
I believe does not just anyone
in nurse practitioner family
practitioner by themselves and
their someone having PTSD there
is a set of criteria that go
into that and that has to be
proved and and and maintenance
diagnosis and it is a real
diagnosis we're discovering more
certainly adverse chance adverse
events of of adverse childhood
events can become classified as
is the TSB so I would like it
just to be clear that that to
get that diagnosis ands I would
assume is a pleasant smell
that and a a work up as with
workers comp would proceed with
the appropriation the disconnect
that diagnosis and then if
appropriate pass that on to the
school
that last point I'd like to make
isn't going to make a it just
doesn't go to this committee per
se I have a bill that is
currently waiting its turn in
front of health and public
affairs that would eliminate all
copays costsharing drive balls
or anything behavioral health or
substance abuse.
Use Jerry I'm talking to you
hoping it will come up soon and
I think I even have some of the
other insurers going along with
that bill so the issue of a
copay
or co insurance or any financial
barrier to getting access to
therapy inpatient outpatient and
medication
would not be an issue for an
individual particular lesson
PTSD they just needed help so
they would have
would have that access and yes
the PS at the bottom of that
bill on the comorbidities of the
chronicle morbidities experience
with behavioral health substance
abuse disorders are.
Their cost yes right right actor
of two to three so the
stabilized behavioral health you
more than pay yourself back as
an insurer like giving that the
copays away free you most of the
and you actually it's a win win
win patiently and insure our
lands
and of course to provide so that
that's a slow pitch for a little
bit down the line but I do want
to say that people can get
access to the there so I think
it is more in the definitions
come in here I think this bill
will flow into the current
process sees these have set up
in behavioral health enhance if
my bill gets passed this year
and and definitely will be
covered by workers in the
appropriate Agnes thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I look
forward to seeing it the in the
in the staff and I'm happy that
they're more than one way to
address this problem the problem
does it does still exist for
time off paid time off that this
bill would cover if we had
universal healthcare and paid
time off
the grant is bill would be
necessary but that is not what
teachers have right now and so
this is a way to really get get
relief with four teachers who
experience traumatic events and
again I I told you these
dramatic events are serious
serious events.
And Dr Hickey very explained
this is not something that
people just a eight in workers
comp there's the very detailed
system of having
Experts doctors physicians
testified and also provide
present reports.
Thank you Senator Hickey I don't
see other ones up I've got a
couple of questions
First Senator how many cases of
this sort yeah we're in New
Mexico last year.
Mr chair I don't know the answer
to that question I'll defer to
you my expert to see if you he
does.
Senator Sedillo Lopez that Here
souls I don't have an accurate
number for you I I can provide
you with an anecdotal estimates
in I I think based on my
representation of educators
around the state I would put it
in the you know ten to fifty.
It per year of educators who
separate from a which would
potentially qualify
for coverage under this bill.
And thank you and you indicate
potentially covered the DSM five
is very specific on the
requirement for PTSD anybody can
claim that the GST how many of
them actually had a diagnosis of
PTSD.
That for to my experts.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
that is dear souls I don't have
an answer to that question and
if we don't have that kind of
data on on members educators we
represent I will say that the
bill incorporates the notions
you just identify it requires a
diagnosis by quote of physician
or psychologist.
Thank you I know what to people
and particularly teachers of
other professions as well many
of our health care professionals
deal with secondary problem
your around children that have
been traumatized around patients
who have been traumatized I I
know within the psychological
field that there is discussion
about that secondary trauma
could be classified as PTSD with
that qualify under this bill.
I'm Mr chair my understanding
under this bill is no
I'll defer to my experts.
Thank you Senator Sedillo Lopez
at chair souls that is frankly
outside money will have if the
position or psychologist.
It is that secondary trauma
diagnosis as PTSD it would be
covered but that would require
that diagnosis date get is
identified in statute.
Mr chair I'll just explain why I
said no I ran a domestic
violence agency for three years
and we had employees who
Had some issues of hearing these
horrible stories day after day
secondary trauma has you
described and we were unable to
get a diagnosis of PTSD ever so
they had to go through the
insurance system and are paid
time off system that we offered
we did not they were unable to
go to workers comp.
Thank you as I look through this
I mean that be on page two yeah
kind of talks about opposition
or a psychologist can diagnose
it
Position is a pretty broad
category and that they are not
qualified to diagnose yes I
think but opposition includes
the urologist of the urologist
came with a diagnosis of PTSD
this would allow that to be
allow.
Chair I would like to defer to a
to a.
To Senator Hickey I would be
very very surprised if urologist
decided to come out with a PTSD
diagnosis but I
I would just be surprised and
certainly a firing Attorney I
would not seek such a diagnosis
from a urologist because I would
be left out of the courthouse
but I will defer to Senator
Hickey he probably would be in a
better position to know whether
urologist would be in the
business of getting that kind of
diagnosis.
Senator Sedillo Lopez Mr
chairman I I will say that the
chairman is correct in this
physicians went once you want
to.
basically past year boards
outpatient physicians and this
is a real problem in the state
for another year and I will be
coming out this
since physicians have very much
left hospitals there is no
oversight
of individual physicians nurse
practitioners in their practices
and that's something we have to
deal with in the state but
technically even though I get I
have a New York license I could
make that diagnosis now
I agree that as it goes into
workers comp or what have you
they're going to challenge that
and I think would challenge it
back to a psychologist or a
psychiatrist being able to make
that diagnosis I don't know that
I would leave that I don't know
that the VA believes that at the
discretion of a physician's
assistant or midlevel providers
so that at least at the moment
would be a way once it may make
its way through in in terms of
the.
Getting an inappropriate
diagnostician to make that
diagnosis.
Second I just want to point out
to Senator Brandt and two others
the costs
workers comp insurance is going
to go up or down based on the
basically the number of events
and then actuarial analysis so
you can't just ask how many.
Diagnoses are there for people
just be it's really what what
goes across the spectrum every
year and that's what's really
needs to be analyzed as to
whether or not this will drive
up or or
well health care costs don't get
driven down unfortunately but at
least maintain stable so
hopefully we're not thinking
that this in of itself is going
to significantly raise the cost
of workers comp and us across
the state thank you I hope
that's been a little bit
clarifying and one day we will
come back to regenerating peer
review and oversight of.
Diagnostic capabilities that's
done in the hospital for
procedures but it's not done now
for Gallegos for someone like me
is just hanging out by himself
thank you.
And I think that's kind of my
point we are writing law and
willing to walk get challenged
in the courts they look at what
the words that and this doesn't
indicate lower level
Practitioners of the for a
position that a position is
anybody and it doesn't say that
they have to have any expertise
now.
Certainly scrupulous doctors
would not be doing this but we
all know that there are
unscrupulous doctors we've seen
it where they
Distributed more pain
medications for the money when
people really don't need it
because they are I mean there's
quite a number of places where
there are Ben and scrupulous
positions this is a physician
can diagnose it it doesn't fix
like high interest and underside
COVID just it doesn't indicate a
licensed psychologist I have a
PhD in psychology and in some
matter I could be called a
psychologist I am not licensed
as a psychologist or a counselor
or other types of things so I
think that's a concern and
gender what we get to see your
talked about presumption created
this they've been read by a
preponderance of the edit the
evidence in a court.
Of competent jurisdiction then
so effectively it says that.
If opposite you kept by the
physician or psychologist to do
this you can still go to court
and a judge who doesn't have any
background in this area could
say that yes that is yes the I'm
I'm not understanding or
overrides the that there was not
a diagnosis of PTSD as indicated
in the state and the.
Thank you thank you Mr chair for
those questions and addressing
this physician and psychologist
I mean that perhaps that
something you can look at but
basically if you trust the
workers comp system you would
trust that if a urologist gave a
diagnosis of PTSD and for some
reason that turning was out of
their mind and and try to use
that in the court room you can
if they have a lot of workers
comp judges have a lot of
experience with the with these
kinds of cases and so it's
possible that the that the judge
would even accept the report it
would be something that the
judge would say this is not
you're not submitting one of the
requirements is that the
individual of of accepting a
report is that the individual be
qualified to give it.
And they're very there are the
that bar is very sophisticated
in understanding what needs to
be proven so if you try I don't
think it needs clarification
only because this would be
submitted to a process that has
a lot of experience dealing with
physicians and psychologists
and
if you and I would just say if
they if they frankly if if you
wrote a report trying to
diagnose PTSD it's very unlikely
that that would be accepted if
you don't if you don't have the
qualifications to make that
diagnosis in the first place and
so that's the check on it with
regard to the court of competent
jurisdiction that's just a
shorthand way of saying
The court like if we're in right
now it's the workers comp system
that deals with it and that's
the court of competent
jurisdiction so that's just the
legalese for for describing the
workers comp court and it should
the workers comp just sent
sometimes workers comp might be
called something else
occupational judges or or
something else but in the court
of competent jurisdiction is the
court where the issue is being
litigated and the judge in that
system has a for you to mitigate
it.
That's a competent jurisdiction
needs.
Okay and Senator up but it
continues it seems like down the
date Representative created this
section does not apply shall not
preclude educational point from
demonstrating a causal
connection of employment.
For posttraumatic stress
disorder who is making that
jurisdiction now what is I don't
understand what he does.
And and then any medical
treatment based on presumption
created the section shall be
provided by the employer or job
related illness.
The yeah but again if I'm
entire bill it's looking at
there was a provided to that.
lot accumulation of dramatic
events which is more secondary
type of problem.
And I think that you know as a
principal I've been threatened
there was a teacher I I've been
threatened yeah so I it didn't
impair my ability to continue to
function more than a day or two
but you know I certainly
contacted the police and and add
security around as a result of
that.
What yeah we have it impaired my
ability to come to work for a
week is that something that I
could have qualified for PTSD
coverage under workman's comp.
If a of physician or
psychologist with the proper
credentials concluded and only
if you order treatment I mean if
you toughed it out and so many
of our educational employees
tough it out but if you sought
treatment and you got a
diagnosis and you decided you
wanted to have workers comp pay
for your treatment as well as
the time off or the reimbursed
not.
It's not full reimbursements but
the benefits you would get for
not working only then would
would that be triggered if I
understood your question
correctly.
Thank you senator I'm trying to
understand kind of the process
here who's paying for the
treatment while this goes
through the courts the courts
are notorious for being very
slow.
The presumption that's one of
the great things about this is
workers comp will pay for it
until it's ultimately did
decided workers comp cases go
much more quickly than then
that's one of the reasons for
the creation of the system is to
ensure that benefits are
instituted quickly and if
they're not appropriated that
the if they're not appropriate
to their ended very quickly.
Our our.
More quickly than the than the
court system.
And senator others goes
through my insurance your
workers comp paid for my problem
IPS the
it's going through the courts
the insurance system.
Workers comp is covering the of
there's a challenge by the
insurance company that this is
not of their judges.
No court often pay their what
their cost being paid paying for
all of us.
Well in the workers comp system
the
The plaintiffs attorneys get I I
I don't remember now if it's ten
thousand dollars at the cap on
what any plaintiff's attorney
would you would get and that cap
it is actually one of the
reasons people have a hard time
finding workers comp attorneys
because it's a very low cap and
the workers the in the school
district has attorneys on their
staff that handle workers comp
claims or they have contracted
treason handle work on Kate
James claims I will defer to my
experts because the last time I
was familiar with that cap was a
while back it was ten thousand
dollars I don't know if it's
been raised I'll defer to my
experts.
Thank you centers the other as
at chair so that the cap I
believe is approximately fifty
thousand dollars but it is still
very low in the this is a very
well the system the workers
compensation litigation system
is eight rigorous Act funding
process and that we right now
for example urologist could
diagnose at thirty eighty days
but that doesn't happen in the
system because the systems
rigorous fact finding process
prevents what would you know
what are legitimate issues
raised by you but I I think that
process itself guarantees that
this new addition will be
handled in in that in a very
fair way both to the police and
the orders.
Thank thank you.
I I I.
It just seems like yeah this
oughta be something that is this
forecast in the interim through
the health committee and some
other things
It seems like it's a relatively
small within the yeah from what
that mystery out indicated
relatively small within the
public schools
seem like it's triggered and
certainly we've had up an aspect
we had a shooting up there I
know Rio Rancho has other than
other districts where they're a
band near misses so to speak
whether with something but
nobody actually got got injured
that could trigger some of these
it's relatively small and I
wonder how many of them that
work with top is saying we don't
have any jurisdiction over this
because W. third.
Situations that are clearly
triggered by an event where
instance yeah let me ask you
this did and I As staff as the
system is currently indicated is
work my constant us to cut out
your own insurance.
Mr Mr chair
I'm not sure if any and then
these are also confidential
there's a I have no idea of
whether anyone in as tech tried
to get coverage to the workers
comp they would have a rougher
time of it in the absence of
this bill.
And that's what we're trying to
address
it's exactly that problem we're
trying to ensure that those
teachers who experienced an
event like what happened in Rio
Rancho like what happened in
Aztec
get quick treatment and don't
have a really rough time I I
know because I've worked with a
lot of.
A lot of plaintiffs going to the
systems.
It's been a while but how
dramatic it is even to go
through the system and so when
you have to of a and people
don't like trying to have to
prove mental health cases
because they want they have an
instinct to say I'm fine I'm
fine everything's fine and so
these are these are really rough
basis and with this act will do
will hopefully take away some of
the stigma and also encourage
early treatment and make it
easier because they they it and
I wouldn't say easy because
workers comp system is not an
easy system to get through but a
little bit easier and one of the
reasons is difficult to get
through is because there aren't
a whole lot of attorneys there
is definitely a shortage of
attorneys
but what I understand is if
you're dealing with them with
that emotional health issue in
trying to go to workers comp you
do not want to go through it
alone you really need an
attorney and so that's what this
act trying to address is
precisely the problem that you
describe.
So Senator in the are there in
the workman's comp legislation
that's currently there are their
exclusions from the help or for
people where PTSD is excluded.
No no not not to my knowledge
I'll defer to my expectativa was
caused by their work.
Doesn't that trigger that
they're automatically into the
working all.
I would defer to my experts it's
more complicated than that you
just don't have to say if there
has there has to be evidence but
I will defer to my experts would
sure have.
We have a couple of positions
thank so this happened yeah this
person you know has a mental
health issue as a result of
work.
Does that not trigger already
the work with.
All right now.
If they if they pursue that to
the workers comp but they are
there it burden of their burden
of pleading and persuasion of
the burden of pleading will be
exactly the same that's we're
talking about the for their LA's
that is that all they have to do
is make that allegation that's
just getting you into the
courthouse door.
Then you need to have a burden
of proof that was met and that's
what this second burden this
this statute deals with this
second burden but ultimately the
burden of persuasion is the same
that is the judge will have to
be convinced that there is a
proper diagnosis of PTSD and
that there are it was caused by
an event of dealing with the
school those will have to be met
with an ultimate burden of
persuasion which is the same the
only burden were affecting is
the middle burden the burden of
proof which goes to the dance
back and forth between the
evidence that is submitted and
the evidence that is used in
rebuttal.
Again I apologize if that
well
I'm trying to understand but it
seems like the expert here is
the competent physician or
psychologist.
Okay.
Value as better information that
that if they say yes it is or no
it is.
Well if that if that evidence is
the only evidence then it's
likely that the person will
we'll get we'll go for with the
budget so the initial so the way
burdens of of proof at the the
way the burden of pleading goes
is you please you make your
allegations and then if nobody
rebuts those allegations in a
pleading so you you say okay
there
I have PTSD and this was caused
by this event that occurred at
the school boom if the employer
does not respond to that that
completing that by pleading I
mean the documentation that they
file I I I you know the the
piece of paper that they file if
there is no nothing that we
budgets that pleading then the
plaintiff wins but the plaintiff
would win because employers
again we're not going to we're
not going to contest that that
that's what happened but if the
employer disagrees with that in
the employer files of pleading
eight that document the the and
and then that's what's called
the issue is joins that's called
joint or tissue so that's what
triggers the issue that is
litigated in the court.
Yeah of competent jurisdiction
which in this case is workers
comp then in the workers comp
court the issues are identified
so so some of the issues will be
contested and some of them will
not then once you figure out
what the issues are then there
is the burden of of proof that
is the the the level of proof
that has to be entered to
survive a motion to dismiss and
so there
There is where you have the
evidence that's where they
testimony by the doctor that's
where the reports by the doctor
that that's where other evidence
maybe evidence it may be that
the employer will deny that that
that the event even occurred but
if it's a public shooting a like
we described the employers
probably not going to contest
that there was a shooting and so
they will not be a big but big
evidentiary fight about whether
there was a shooting the fight
will be whether the shooting
because of PTSD and so if the
physician is testifying that it
didn't then the then the
employer has to have evidence
that.
That there was not a connection
and then the burden of
persuasion is that the judge
then it looks all of the
evidence and determines based on
all of the evidence.
And as understanding what the
burden of proof lies or her
understanding with the burden of
proof lies whether the plaintiff
wins or the defendant wins and
that's when you have conflicting
evidence and that's sometimes
you'll have one doctor saying
it's very very clear I see this
I've talked to the I've I'm
treating the the individual and
I believe that was caused by
this event and then you'll have
another doctor saying well in my
experience that kind of event is
not serious enough to cause PTSD
or whatever I mean I'm making
this all up in terms of what the
evidence might be but that's
what you have that's the joinder
of issue and that's the
litigation that we're talking
about but if.
Isn't that what happens now.
No.
What happens now and and why
this is different is the of that
second that second stage right
now that burden is is very
heavily on the employee to make
that connection.
And this will help that that
second piece the burden of proof
it'll help the employee with
that second piece.
Because it's presumed that the
connection is made so the burden
of responding is on the employer
and you said that before the
burden shifts and I apologize
because I I wanted to make clear
we're talking about three
different burdens and I I just
wanted absolute clarity about
what we're talking about.
Does that make sense.
It seems that we've got a system
you know and I haven't heard
anything where the system isn't
working in this case
yeah why we're talking about
what yes and it appears that
this just lowered the bar is far
as the burden of proof as to
whether there with PTSD or not
yes the where it seems again
that the person is the physician
or psychologist that determined
there was the VSD
there's another position that
they say no that doesn't count
as PTSD.
And then the court is
determining which one is more
credible
I think we're Mr chairman chair
for point of clarification Mr
chair we're missing a whole year
Senator I will and I will I'll
just I'll just respond it would
you be persuaded if I brought
people here whose claims were
denied and they told you their
story.
Because we could do that I think
it's an invasion of their
privacy but it happens in
workers comp.
And that's that's what we're
trying to make the litigation a
little bit easier and also to
reduce the number of of the what
I would call unfortunate
denials.
Does that make sense we're we're
making the litigation a little
bit easier for the Attorney.
And we're we're reducing the
number of denials that I think
if I had people here telling you
their story and how they were
denied would make you of
concerned about this.
Yeah I don't doubt that there
are your problems and in the
workman's comp their job is to
the not process claims if they
can ship the burden that someone
else I understand all of that.
I'm not sure that that I I fully
understand where this changes
Senator Hickey we have you have
something to add.
Yes.
If I could we we we've kind of
danced around it but we really
haven't well on.
In the event happens it could be
PTSD the individual may seek out
of position urologists the
family practitioner.
A form has to be filled out for
the workman's comp organization
they are an insurance company
if you if if there is an injury
such as I had day that disk in
my back I had to go through an
insurance company to get the
prior authorization to be able
to have an MRI and that is a
stop one if the if the worker's
comp company and they and they
are almost always have a
physician who specializes in
workers comp metal physical what
happened who will say yes this
qualifies yes this does not that
is really the the gold star
anything going forward now the
if it is denied that the
individual could go to the court
and say we disagree with the
insurance company and then you
would bring in experts that you
have recruited R. P. T. S. the
experts in recognizes such as
often happens in malpractice
trials the state the company did
not pay attention to this and
this and that and we advocate
and favor of the employee but
there is I'm having been in this
business for the last eight
years you've got whether he gets
paid is up to the workman's
compensation company if they
deny that I believe is that
where the case yes but.
I hope that clarifies the some
different I've I guess I'm still
not understanding where the
problem is or this is just
trying to lower the burden for
something being indicated as
PTSD because there is yeah with
the one that the state companies
have denied more often than
others and therefore we need to
make it easier to get a
diagnosis at a payment for PTSD.
Yeah and I'm not sure where that
comes so let me drop my
questions centered the bill you
have your hand up Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman just from
the perspective of a public
employee lawyer
The county up here with us on
commission for eight years after
we had claims made them more may
not qualified under PTSD with
the for the detention center in
those kind of facilities.
one thing that.
Seem to me to a doctor or Mr
Hickey Senator think that the.
know more about it but it seems
to me like there were
settlements pretty much
routinely.
In favor of the employee even
though it was pretty obvious to
everyone there was not a major
problem the costs to defend
sometimes was far greater than
it was to just pay the claim two
thousand Bucks or whatever it
was
we we paid lots of players are
insurance companies and I think
it's a good half of we're not
we're.
Possibly fraudulent but
certainly that's the other side
of the coin I think we're gonna
look at is that you have a.
State.
County and local governments are
are very much in schools to
force.
Are very much a target for a.
Employees who want to take
advantage of the system and
that's an unfortunate thing I
don't think it's a it's by far
the majority of the most
employees and they get hurt or
sick or whatever on the job of
there are honest in their
approach and what they want to
accomplish that there is a great
deal of fraud and and the
distortion and so forth I I know
a number of cases which I think
if if we would have.
Stood up to the insurance
company and gone to court with
probably won the case.
And they they may or may not
have been under the PTSD round
but they were certainly that
kind of thing.
it's it's unfortunate situation
but it is in fact I think we've
got to recognize that that
happens I I don't know that I
see the need for this
legislation I think the current
to workers comp situation takes
care of it thank the most the
time you can file a claim and
you can you can get covered if
if you've got a legitimate
because that's my comments Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Padilla.
Mr chairman.
Trying to run this one also very
piece of legislation but it took
probably three sections I fast
twice in the current governor.
Yes.
Mr chair I'm sorry I cannot hear
that there will be a very
difficult time understanding you
there's background noise we
can't hear your voice coming
through.
Yes that's better thank you okay
so that what the senators and
the state category for work
installed a couple of years ago
took three passages with two
different governors of this
current governor I'm excited.
So that was very difficult to do
center city open I don't know
why I really don't.
Staff identified that as I was
going through that process is
the type of.
That employers and employees.
That because the difficult
process to get all that.
But I sit here and I.
Everything that I've been sent
here and someone please Mr gal
thank you for being here.
Trying to figure this is not
already covered I think senator
bill says that if you Mr
chairman you said that.
Give me the right reasons why
this is already covered and I'm
probably gonna vote for your
bills but I'm trying to figure
that out.
I saw on the.
Mr chair what I believe that he
that Senator Padilla wanted it
is
why the system isn't working
which I believe is the same
thing and I apologize I gave you
like a little dissertation on
the way evidence works in the
workers comp system which is
probably not not an appropriate
response I needed defer to my
experts who litigate these cases
everyday and knows what the
problems are thank you.
Thank you senator Steele Lopez
at chair souls Senator Padilla
the system as I mentioned at the
in my opening statement it is a
better our system is a bit of an
antiquated system it is designed
to remedy injuries that we can
see workplace injuries that are
this and so it doesn't
specifically identified PTSD is
a covered expense but it nor
does it exclude PTSD is it
covered but the way the law
works now is there is a
essentially a presumption
against non physical injuries
and when an employee says I have
PTSD he has an affirmative
burden and the way that our
system works implicit bias
against mental injuries as
opposed to physical injuries and
the presumption effectively in
in the system with the workers
comp insurance carriers as
Senator Hickey mentioned is that
the presumption is that claims
which are not of a physical
nature you know I I broke my leg
on the front end loader if
they're not that type of the
claim insurers generally denied
those types of claims in this
lawsuit remedies and addresses
that situation and tells
insurance carriers eight this is
a presumed injuries and as long
as there is a traumatic event
and that traumatic event has led
to disorder as diagnosed by a
physician you need to presume
coverage under the act many
other states have explicitly
adopted PTSD as a covered injury
under the workers compensation
system we in New Mexico have not
but I would say thank you
Senator Padilla for moving for
that sort of presumption and
coverage for firefighters
because we didn't have it before
any it was party to a long time
but they have these injuries and
insurance carriers typically
deny those injuries when they
what this does is it creates a
presumption so that employee
doesn't have to prove that for
the previous fifty years they
didn't sustain any.
Trauma.
They don't have that affirmative
burden to prove that it wasn't
caused by something else you
have a problem in the workplace
and you have a disorder cost by
that trauma is recognized by a
physician it is that cover just
as it was a lady got broken
while working on the lower end
and that right now is what we
don't have in our constitution
and I would agree with some of
the comments other Senators
maybe that we should extend this
to all workers I don't think
there's the traction for that at
this time but there is a
definite need for educators this
legislature saw that need for
firefighters and change the law
and I think the law should be
changed for educators who suffer
similar debilitating injuries as
a consequence of school
shootings are being attacked in
the school those kinds of things
because timing those are the
reasons we need to change the
law.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me better now.
Okay I had selected the wrong
microphone I'm going ahead set I
didn't realize you were I was.
I was trying to talk to you on
the computer you sound a lot
better okay thank you well I
appreciate the the description I
don't know why we don't just do
this for you know for everybody
I I'm still trying to figure
that one out it was really
unusual in the process we did
with the firefighters what what
is something I don't know who
can comment on this part but
then what does this do to the
rates for the employers I'm just
curious what happens to the the
rates for the employer.
For the unemployment server the
workman's comp of policies.
Mr chair I understand in a
general way that at I. ninety
I'm sure Dr Hickey would have a
lot more detail but in a general
way all of the claims are paid
the.
Insurance companies do actuary
based on past history and so if
there is a whole lot more claims
it might have an impact but I
believe that if you get
treatment for this thing early
it will ultimately save
insurance companies money in the
long run
but I I would be happy to defer
to Senator Hickey who I'm so
glad is part of our body now who
has a lot more detail.
Thank you Senator Lopez and
Mister chair if I'm my office
and beautification around that
point
one I was not aware that there
is not in our.
The.
Thank compensation workers
compensation fund
and and I would be happy to sit
down and look at the law with
you the expressive
Gallegos of PTSD it is that
recognize Gallegos and has
become much more so director of
the in the last ten years since
the wars in the Middle East
finally sent into our heads it's
just been around for a long time
secondly so I think that I think
that we do need to bring a bill
that covers the covers of as a
category no matter what industry
you are in are to answer the
question
I believe that both the the.
Workers compensation company and
the employers will as a knee
jerk response say this will
raise rates and as an insurer in
the category in which we the
least here have not been
particularly looking at this
diagnosis to see what it might
actually you would defensively
rates the rates so I just that
that will be a a difficult fight
to win it is a fight that should
be one and then the they also
can look at other states of the
staff at this and see what is
done in terms of percentage of
increase in the rates but as a
clinician finally I would like
to comment that.
The I did not cover this this is
those in the behavioral health
category and I believe that
senator sincere love has is
correct I have a stack of
articles about four feet high
that demonstrate if behavioral
conditions are taken care of and
stabilized the costs of the
morbid chronic diseases which
are almost always there are if
they are taken care of they
plummet so that in the long run
it may be a savings to the
insurance companies and so on
that will be something that will
need to bring in to as we pursue
a bill for everyone for every
employer in the state around
this diagnosis we'll have to
bring the evidence and I believe
that the evidence is there I've
I've worked early on Hey your
health and substance abuse I
haven't worked collected
articles on the GST but I'm
happy to do so in Oregon of the
bill so I I again that's the
side committee this sounds given
the structure of the our workers
compensation bill that this goes
into the area of the fireman and
that covering teachers at this
point
and I I don't know Senator
Sedillo Lopez and mystery out if
we do need to put in in the US
the cover them some definition
of a professional
I I can work out words with you
but basically a a hi hi the
certified psychiatrists
psychologists to make the
diagnosis because again you do
not want to leave this to people
who are not very specialized in
the field.
So again I hope I'm not created
more confusion and Senator Ortiz
you know I want to ask you for
forgiveness I called you by your
first name in this form that's
inappropriate New Mexico are you
Senator thank you.
So I've been Mr Chairman thank
you Senator Hickey in thank you
senator Steele Lopez and Mr
doubts so so today I find myself
in this I'm I'm working in this
field and I find myself in this
condition today.
Do I have no no remedy available
to me right now or do I have a
remedy available to me right
now.
In fact if
you're working with it is an
educator is that what you're
saying let's say I'm working as
an educator I wake up tomorrow
morning this for woke up this
morning I've got PTSD I'm gonna
go room to talk to someone about
it they're gonna validate that.
Do I have no remedy whatsoever
to go to my workman's comp that
are meant my benefit office and.
Is there anything I can do right
now what I believe would happen
what it would be that you would
file the claim it would be
denied.
And then you have to hire an
attorney and then you have to go
to court and try to make your
case after this is past you
would file your claim and it
would be granted and if the
employer disagreed with it they
would have to go to court and in
present their evidence I
apologize I sometimes when you
know too much about a subject
you can confuse people.
I went into way too much detail
about burdens of proof so I
totally apologize that but
that's basically the bottom line
of how this would work.
Shape that I'm I'm trying to get
my hands around do we is so this
would make it just incredibly
even more dramatic in my opinion
the person dealing with this
amendment is now suddenly they
don't have a remedy so they're
gonna have to go and we we've
and navigate their way through
this whole other burdensome
process to get this benefit
maybe avail to them.
now I I see what you're where
you're coming from at least I
think I do I'm still trying to
figure out
In in not that this should be
important necessarily but but
you know rates and cost and what
have you because suddenly you're
gonna have more claims more
settlements for more more pay
out more more of you know
benefiting rate here which is
perfectly fine and what have you
but at the end of the day this
is you know this is something we
have to do for these workers and
I'm I'm just still surprised
that we're and and again I'm
just as guilty abroad for
firefighters here bring it for
educators we need this for
everybody so thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Senator Kernan
I think for a second time please
shortly.
Thank you know the I'll be quick
you know at school teachers in
Albuquerque are covered under
different insurance plan then
they spend the rest of the state
thank you thank cover themselves
that the rest of us and all
across the state now districts
are covered by Nipsey up.
And I guess I'm a little
disappointed that we don't have
a response in don't have an
answer as to whether
educators when they they haven't
and illness whether it's
physical or mental our coverage
and I wonder if I don't know I
guess this goes to Judiciary
should get out of this committee
I think it should go to finance
because I do think it's going to
have an impact on Nipsey here
and so I wish we had someone
from the Insurance Authority
that covers the majority of the
state or even someone from APS
to explain exactly how the
teacher would receive services
under the circumstances.
But I'm just saying we don't and
and I don't know if the PED
would be able to answer that or
if anyone on on the.
I'm the same way that that is
concern with regard to.
Whether there would be coverage
I I don't think that in has been
answered appropriately are
completely in my P. thank you.
Thank you Senator any.
Comments about that.
To be honest I'm not familiar
with Nicosia
this is just a bill dealing with
the workers comp system.
and employ and yeah so I'm not
familiar so thank you Mr Senator
Kernan that's something to look
into.
Well I think it's very Mister
chair and senator I think it's
very critical to this bill and I
think that's information we need
to know before we decide whether
these teachers are covered or
not under the current insurance
and so before we step into the
workman's comp issue it would
certainly be helpful to know
what these teachers have
coverage under the circumstances
so I'm I guess I don't know if
you want to roll it over and
let's get it an opinion from
NMPSIA or from the Albuquerque
public schools because they
cover the teachers there it's it
covers all of the teachers I
just need to know that's going
to be here something that
they're gonna have to figure out
how to deal with so thank you
that's all I have that so you
chair so that would be saving
them money because workers comp
would cover it so soon set and
that's is that what you're
asking how much money would be
saved to them because I would
like a response Mr chair and
senator from the question was I
think Senator Padilla asked is
currently today right now if the
teacher was suffering from a
mental illness or physical
illness particularly what Nipsey
cover that with the APS
insurance cover that that was
the question in I don't know the
answer and I think it's very
important for us to know that
answer going forward before we
move into the workman's comp.
Bill so that was my question
thank thank you Mr chair Senator
Kernan yes of course they would
be covered under their insurance
the private insurance well I
mean not the private their
employee insurance policies
that's that's required under the
affordable Care Act I'm sorry I
misunderstood the question yes
they would be covered.
Thank you.
Your hand up you have a short
comment or question.
I know NMPSIA APS inside and out
the whole life that they're all
covered exactly the same our
budget and they will be covered
universally in the state under
the workmen's comp laws with all
of its deficiencies.
Thank you I think we're to where
the committee.
I'm moving to pass.
W. secretary etcetera but if
seconded by Senator so very
agile call the roll please.
Brandt no.
Hickey pass.
Senator Kernan.
No Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes.
And back to Senator Hickey.
Yes for that explanation I mean
excuse me.
Do pass yes with explanation.
Senator souls so.
Also we have a four four.
I know I left somebody makes
different motion I would move a
no Representative.
Mr chair I move or no wreck on
Senate bill three oh two second.
Well I thought I was motioning
but I I really
we've got a we've got a motion
and a second so Senator po
present.
All my transportation my
apologies Mr chair.
Right we have a with.
Without recommendation to Senate
Judiciary a motion was made by
Senator souls and seconded by
Senator pulp Senator Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan no Senate Bill.
No Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls.
Yes.
We.
Senator Sedillo Lopez you have
about a bill that moves on
without recommendation I think
you've heard lots of concerns
about different areas where
things are not
At least clear to many of us how
that would work or how it
changes what things currently
are and certainly all the people
of judiciary probably go deep
into those as well Senator
Hickey I think you had a limited
explained.
Yes the the explanation is.
There's more here but it's
convoluted and if you get tied
up in legal battles of the
committee on the review
so I I hope that Judiciary
Committee does that work those
next yes I believe that even
though that's not their
bailiwick they do look at some
of the financial implications of
the how it rolls both ways in
the potential savings as well as
expense and there are major
issues with Nancy and how they
apply some of the things that
needs to be examined and mostly
a bill needs to be brought
forward to cover PTSD for any
any work situation within the
state and I hope that that would
be recorded in forward to the
Fisher Committee thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator sabi
of office thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and I
apologize I think I made it more
complicated than it needed to be
and this was a very helpful dive
by log thank you.
Thank you senator
and we're gonna move on the
Senator Ortiz you know who's
been very patiently waiting I
think just chair of the interim
health committee of the this
lady some that you all want to
look at that and and pick up on
as well as some of the questions
and concerns and things of that
sort of just for the public we
added Senate bill one thirty
five K. dollars ship Act that
you pass on SB three thirty the
dropout prevention program we
just had a long discussion and
they no recommendations to the
judiciary on Senate bill three
oh two educational employees
yesterday we will now have
Senate bill three eighteen
charter school changes with as
senator Ortiz Pinto and Senate
bill three forty eight
employment yep training with
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino following
that we will move back if she's
able to come over and I think
she is we'll go back to just the
two eighty nine with Senator
Lopez specially Division of the
edge Department so Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino thank you for being with
us and being patient with us
with all of our questioning
would you like to do them in
order words which is not.
Yes in order Mr chairman and
members of the committee so
starting the Senate bill three
eighteen.
This is a bill that actually
reflects three years and work is
done on to try to come up with a
way of dealing with some of the
challenges the charter schools
have experienced in securing
adequate facilities.
Bill in front of you today was
first introduced in twenty
nineteen.
With the assistance of the
Senate Education Committee
public school facilities already
The New Mexico finances
Authority and the L. E. S. C..
We hope this year we can get
this bill all the way through.
It does three things.
Increases revolving loan fund
dedicated to financing charter
schools this will allow the
finance authority to grant loans
some risk to any other projects
funded through the public
project revolving fund to
charter schools for the
purchase.
For the renovation of
facilities.
Thank you creates an enforcement
mechanism for the current law
requires school districts to
offer charter schools underuse
lander facilities.
This simply allows the Public
School Celanese.
To be in.
On the process and ensure is the
right.
First right of refusal to give
in to charter schools and
charter schools exist in
industry has taken land or
facilities.
Calculation for lease assistance
payments away from square
footage and instead bases it on
the actual enrollment.
Currently lease assistance is
reward is awarded using a
formula that ties money to the
square footage of the facility
use from the school this is
creating problems in the past
we're schools we're not funding
for spaces like bathrooms or
hallways by changing lease
assistance to be based on
enrollment at the school we
simplify the lease of course.
And incentivize the right size
solely for the student
population is service.
With insurance there is a shared
responsibility also between
charter schools and district
leaders when they're figuring
out whether or not a charter
schools can be included in a
little pond during the living
election.
And with me Mr chairman is as my
ex for witness is the executive
director of the public charter
schools of New Mexico.
Mr Matt Paul you can find more
details and be available to
answer questions.
Thank you senator and and thank
you.
Chair members of the committee
charter schools are in a
challenging position when it
comes to their facilities
charter school see short term
risk and few viable long term
options for funding their
facilities in the recent past
charter schools face threats
that they're least assistance
funding cuts and a recent
changing calculation means only
a certain square footage just
counted on for facility funding
this bill would create a more
predictable foundation for
charter schools the plan with hi
in their future for their
there's no viable state
mechanism.
schools build facility
facilities are secure a
permanent facility the schools
are eligible for capital works
from TSCO State but they rarely
qualify for them it's an example
of a program that has benefited
the state greatly but doesn't
quite fit the charter school
model as a result charter
schools must consult with
private banks many of which are
out of the state to finance a
facility for purchase.
Bill would allow for borrowing
mechanisms that are rooted in
state institutions meaning
interest is paid back to the
states and later leverage for
public benefit our schools are
public schools issue of public
financing for their facilities
this bill creates a mechanism
for the.
The budget charter schools
greatly on but it's also good
for state finances when we're
able to buy a lease purchase
agreement and eliminates the
need for expanded lease
assistance for charter schools
which is a long term liability
for PSSA NPS you'll see when
fully operational the results of
this bill we.
Increase in demand for leases.
We just want to know that a
couple senators and ask
questions during the hearing on
Senate bill fifty one about
schools with large meeting they
were asking why charter schools
weren't serving more students on
and and facilities is really the
issue at hand here why some of
our most successful charter
schools are unable to serve more
students it's it's hard for them
to acquire new space to be able
to serve those families this
bill and serve as a solution to
our problems well so thank you
Mister chair and committee and
thank you senator Ortiz.
Mr Chairman will will stand for
questions.
And Senator I know you have an
amendment for this bill did you
want to do the amendment now.
Yes yes.
Senator you do know you have to
rely on my witness.
I just realized my expert
witness to and to explain the
amendment please okay well first
we need a motion to.
Review the amendment for
discussion purposes.
You're my go to man for this Mr
chairman I move the amendment
number one for Senate bill three
eighteen for purposes of
discussion on.
Thank you.
Okay this to Paul if you would
what is this ammendment do I
think Senator Ortiz you know ask
you to explain yes Mr chair
members of the committee on this
ammendment takes care of some
technical issues that were
brought up through the analysis
from PSSA it's really doing two
things first it is eliminating
the requirement for a facility
master plan many charters don't
have a facility master plan and
is not required of them and so
what PS that they had said is
this will increase costs for
charter schools by having to do
that and created ministry of
conflicts for yes just a so
you'll see that in the amendment
and elimination of that
requirement within the language
then suddenly we've aligned the
language between the roll
balding loan fund from an estate
and the PSSA charter facilities
fund to provide the flexibility
for those organizations to
engage with charters and solving
their facility problems in each
of those those listing criteria
there so those are just
technical issues that were
brought up from the analysis
from the organization and we
clean them up in this ammendment
here.
Okay we're on the amendment
committee questions about the
amendment.
I don't see any hands going up
and I don't think so upon
sometimes any questions on the
amendment the committee move
adoption of the amendment Mr
Chairman.
The motion to adopt the
amendment is there a second.
Thank you bye New Mexico raising
her hand how are you ma'am.
we have a second from Santo
Pinto if you'll call the roll
please on the amendment.
Brandt yes.
Okay yes Senator Kernan yes.
A bill yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes the pope yes Intersil's yes
you have a at amended bill.
Of with very anything else
Senator can you know before we
go out to.
The public.
Mmhm.
Okay thank you if you'll take as
the public comment the.
Mr chair members of the
committee at we had at no
request to speak in opposition
well.
With us to speak in support of
this L. your first we have JD
Bollington Katie go ahead you've
got two minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee also build a team.
Our.
Is an important bill
creates loan fund to improve
access to construct.
Great idea for charter schools.
Well you going well I will be.
I thank you for signing.
They should be able to attend
great secure facility and
senator RTZ pain now clearly if.
There needs to be more equity
between how traditional public
school facilities and public
charter school facilities are
funded Senator all all public
schools Senate committee if you
ask any charter school leader
most of them will say the
hardest part of launching their
school was provide an acceptable
facility if you ask them what is
the biggest ongoing challenge
after the schools open most of
them will say it's facility
issues and costs this bill will
make facility funding for all
public schools more equitable
with the student's best interest
as the top priority thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and next we have
Amanda are gone.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee my name is Amanda
upon I'm the executive director
of New Mexico kids can a
statewide education advocacy
organization one of our for
guiding stars and New Mexico
kids can is options basically
meaning we believe that every
student in New Mexico should
have access to a school that
works for them and our charter
schools are a key part of that I
can take up my hours of your
time telling you about.
Your is in trials and
tribulations of charter school
facilities that I've heard from
charter school leaders but also
very and just say that this bill
is an incredibly need that sex
for a charter school landscape
to make sure that every child
can access the school that works
best for them thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have Robert
bait.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee Robert Beatty with
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
I thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill Senate bill three
eighteen forward charter schools
are public schools currently
private sector investors are
making a fortune as public
dollars bill private bank
accounts Robert F. Kennedy
charter school appreciated
strong relationship with
Albuquerque public schools and
that has benefited along with a
number of other charter schools
in being included in the
Albuquerque public school master
plan and in the bond election.
RFK is still in portable
classrooms the work is not done
and needs to be part of a
statewide solution charter
schools are public schools I
support public dollars into
public buildings this bill does
that thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have just it
estimate on.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and senator Ortiz Y.
Pino yes of us compete with
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in support of this bill
and we have invested sixty
million dollars for six charter
school facilities in our
community we appreciate the
continued forward thinking on
ensuring that all of our
students and our community have
access to quality facilities
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee I believe that is it
for public comment on this bill.
Okay that last call is there
anyone else for public comment.
Yes if I could go hi
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Monica
Gilad executive director New
marker me have academy located
in the southwest part of
Albuquerque I am in favor of
Senate bill three eighteen this
will help provide stable funding
for charter school facilities
which will help ensure continued
involvement and allow for more
funding to go directly into the
classrooms thank you for your
time today.
Thank you is there anyone else
in public comment.
Yes this is merry to wrangle
good morning chairman and
distinguished.
Yes go ahead.
My name is merry Durango I am
the head administrator twenty
percent Republican county
charter school located in
Albuquerque New Mexico I stand
in support of senator Jerry or
DC Pino in Senate bill three
eighteen twenty first century is
celebrating our twenty first
year service to students and
families quite a milestone in
continue to outperform most
middle schools in the state we
pursued what turned out to be an
eighteen year journey to secure
facility three PD approve lease
purchase agreement we now occupy
a beautiful space that we feel
is equal to what is provided to
other students in New Mexico and
we are growing enrollment as a
result we appreciate and support
any efforts to find a more
direct path to providing
equitable facilities for charter
schools who I made a huge impact
impact on learning in New Mexico
thank you for all of your
service to New Mexico and more
directly to our students and
families we are grateful for
your leadership during these
most difficult of times please
be safe.
Thank you is there anyone else
public comment.
Mr Chairman just one more hello
members of the committee and Mr
chairman my name is Kerry robin
brown I am the registered this
for the Naka inspired schools
network and I just send supports
leaders in indigenous
communities to develop a network
of schools that provide rigorous
academic curriculum for college
prep but also permits indigenous
culture identity and community
involved investment I'm we do
support Senate bill three
eighteen we believe it is an
innovative and efficient way to
support small and rural schools
with facility needs small in
rural charters have minimal
financing options and I just and
has some expertise in this area
as we are leading a US
department of education
financing project for rural and
indigenous schools across the
country our tools manage
creative we but many of them are
still operating in portables we
believe a small loan fund they
can use for things like
medications combined with some
enforcement for facility space
sharing allows the state to
better utilized exists existing
public infrastructure to support
students and provide more
options for local schools we
also believe the certainty that
Senate bill three eighteen would
create around budgeting
processes knowing that our lease
assistance will be based on our
students and rather than our
square footage is an important
step forward in reaching
everyone schools to ensure
schools have more public
financing options and lease
assistance may become something
we are less reliant on as we are
securing public facilities using
public dollars thank you so much
Mr chairman and members the
committee.
Thank you is there anyone else
in public comment.
Yes please my name is Rachel
stewards and I am the school
leader and eight of sparkly
charter school and also a parent
and I am here in support of
Senate bill three eighteen as a
parent I do an advocate
recognize that school about what
happens in the building of the
building that the school is in
that said I do drop off my
children to a charter school in
a strip mall Mexico marcato in a
dollar general store each day
very happy to do so because of
the great school up but do you
want to as a parent would love
to see my kids have an
opportunity and any are any
better and better building
situation as a school leader we
hi friends likely to charter
school which is one of our
newest charter schools in the
state of New Mexico we did
extensive research on location
of our charter school and
identified Albuquerque southwest
mesa as an area of high demand
for a new middle school option
however once we were approved to
quickly discover that there was
not infrastructure available for
a charter school option our
charter school building and
ultimately had to build our own
building
the first three quarters of the
school year we were in fact
busting our kids across town to
one of the few fee occupancy
buildings stated in the City of
Albuquerque.
Because we didn't have any
facility options we went through
the arduous.
Process of developing raw land
at a huge significant cost Sir
of securing financial alone
through our schools foundation
with an out of state CDFI and
ultimately it ended up as a new
school leader being quite as
significant amount of time
dedicated to to the development
of our facility I do an ad that
the number one reason slightly
just families opted into
attending our school is because
of our location something that
has been consistent with our
families in surveys they want to
be in a school that is in their
home in a second place thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Seeing no other that'll in
public comment of Senator
disability comments where we go
to questions from the committee
no Mr chairman thank you very
much for forgiving the
publications to express
themselves on this issue.
Thank you we'll go to questions
from the committee and first by
Senator Padilla well I just and
don't know if you're ready for
it but I'd like to make a do
pass motion I know it's very
early but I wanted to make the
to pass on this one.
Thank you senator we're still
under rebel will keep that there
on the table is there any
questions for the committee.
I'm not saying hands go up but
Senator this has a one million
dollars appropriation
under the PS that they lease
purchase agreements they're
approximately fifty million
dollars of of this is out there
are to be paid off how does one
million that much of a dent in
fifty million of the.
Question Mr chairman I'm gonna
let my expert witness explain
how we hope to parlay that
million into sufficient
facilities for the Chargers.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
for your question
for for NMSA funding they are
you they are able to leverage
that funding to to create two to
three times the amount in loans
so that one million really
representative between two and
three million we had brought
this bill to this committee
that the for with much higher
dollar amounts on the lower ones
really are recognition of the
current of the budget realities
as we understood and in the late
fall and early winter and and by
creating and establishing these
funds we can continue to put
money into those in the future
but wanted to highlight the fact
that the NMFA funding turns into
loans that are between two and
three times the amount of money
we put in there and just the
knowledge that creating a fund
allows us to fund that in the
future.
Mr chairman I would I would just
do it precisely the.
As time goes on in future years
will help to expand the the
availability of money in that
fund so that the schools could
actually do more with the.
Thank you but even leveraging
that we might be four five
million for a fifty million
dollar need it seems like that's
on the low side of that up
please explain to me how the
public school facilities
authority please into this or
the public schools our capital
outlay commission where do they
fit in as far as funding any of
the school buildings and that
ensuring that any of the
buildings that are funded
continue to be the the adequacy
of the the standards for our
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman again and
Mr Boller are referred to you.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
on the PSSA NPS you'll see do
have oversight over those public
facilities and so maintaining E.
occupancy and any other
requirements that would be
necessary in the rules that they
promulgate would fall under the
purview of PSCS C. and their
staff at PSSA.
So L. as the the the PS that
they look set things in the.
With the charter schools be able
to apply to the public school
facilities authority for
upgrades of four new buildings
as public schools are now and
what would be the criteria for
what the local state matches as
it is for for the we're
traditional public schools.
One sorry
Senator and and Mr chair that
would be subject to the to the
rules that are promulgated by
PSSA that the the fact that I
charter schools did not have
access to those those similar
bond funds in it on a normal
basis on means that the local
match is very difficult.
This is one of the main reasons
why our schools don't get
funding under the traditional
system there would likely be
some local match that we need to
to take place we believe that so
the expertise of the folks that
USFA and more and more on and
your CSC in this bill.
So Senator and and that.
There is a mechanism or process
under those now for charter
schools for what the local
matches other than the local
backed with in the district
where the district is located I
know that's been a point of
contention but there is a
mechanism or process now if
money is spent in this mechanism
of that takes away eventually
money that might be available
for other projects for more
traditional public schools
through that state local maps
process am I not understanding
properly.
Mr chairman and and that's
that's exactly what Mr Beattie
was talking about the the local
district in the case of
Albuquerque public schools as
recognized and charter schools
and community.
Are also public schools they
also serve students they also
should have access to the money
money and so the included as
best they can they they're
certainly not all the charter
schools have been able to
participate in those women
charted by the district R. and
Q. and as their needs come up
there included in the in the
upcoming bond issues and and so
I think at this point something
like.
Dozen of them have received
money from the local bond
issues.
This is an effort and making
sure that
The standing.
The citizens who are enrolled in
these schools have the usual
opportunity to access the
facilities and the and the
one money that would make
facilities possible as to
students and in mainstream
schools but also you know those
that are state charter kind of
on the outside right now and so
this is a way of dealing with
their concerns as well.
And thank you and I I understand
and Albuquerque where they're
the district charter charter
schools that they are within
that system because they are
part of that.
District but with some less
oversight or their own oversight
their particular charter I think
my concern is the vast majority
of our charter schools our state
charter charter schools some of
which are in very property
wealthy districts.
But are under that particular
districts state local match and
how are we going to go about
determining what their state
local mapped out of the for for
the building of any buildings so
I I just need more work concerns
and problems moving forward that
yes certainly need this provides
at least a little bit of a
mechanism for dealing with some
of the problem but it by no
means always what I see is a
much larger concern as to who's
responsible for which amounts as
we build schools we don't have
enough money to take care of all
of the needs across the state.
If you like to respond if not I
still don't see any other hands
in which case we do have a
motion from Senator Padilla.
German second.
Second by Senator Brandt and if
you'll call the roll please.
Brandt yes.
Yes.
Help you yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope.
Yes center soul full.
Senator did you have a new path.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee members.
I will go to the Senate bill
three eighty four employment
training add to that we will go
back to Senator Lopez I'll let
her know that she may be up in
the minutes half an hour so we
might not be able to compete.
Senate bill two eighty nine but
we might be able get through at
least some of the basic parts to
that role the rest over so
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if you
would Senate bill three forty
eight.
Three three forty eight Mr
chairman.
And members of the committee is
in bill that came out of some
incredibly exciting
conversations that.
The number of us have had with
C. N. M..
And with some the instructors in
C. N. M. and the some local
economic development people in
the City of Albuquerque and and
become.
Right advocates for something
that our calls clothing new
camps.
These are short term highly
intensive training programs that
contain people with relatively
small or relatively
meter educational backgrounds
and move them in a period of ten
to eighteen ten twelve weeks
sometimes through a whole
curriculum and prepare them to
become coders and to immediately
find employment and salaries in
excess of forty sometimes even
more than fifty thousand dollars
a year.
CNM is currently doing this.
There are there are there are a
number any number of employers
out there local employers local
companies who have national
contracts.
Linden your that they hire can
work here in New Mexico.
And service employer in certain
contractors all over the
country.
There is virtually in the sky
Hey meeting the limit on the on
on the opportunity for these
camps.
The dilemma is that.
People getting into these into
these intensive programming
courses.
Have no way of living off of
the.
You know the.
In these courses and so they
don't have any way of paying
their rent feeding their kids
paying their transportation or
other expenses while they're in
these camps so this is an effort
and and coming up with some
state money.
For C. N. M..
To build on a network today
already begun creating with
other.
Community colleges and branch
colleges around the state I
think they have six or eight
branches that are eager to
participate in this.
And this is the way to pay the
the educational studies and for
those students enrolling in
these coding camps no I'm saying
coding camps been actually there
there are a number of variations
and and my expert witness can
explain the full spectrum of
opportunities it would be made
available to students by this
initiative.
My expert witness Mr chairman
and committee members is Dr
Stewart was Tracey Heisler the
president of C. N. M. and she's
been very eager to work on this
and and terrific ally.
Senator Laughlin please if you
would put.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
thank you members of the
committee and certainly thank
you senator Ortiz Y. Pino for
his
supported these efforts as the
senator has described seeing Ms
been offering of boot camps we
currently have about eight.
In the field and we and that
educated as is you can read the
fiscal impact report with
educated about six hundred
graduates are program complete
or these efforts as the senator
noted individuals often who
start these programs are not
individuals who are who think of
themselves as college bound and
so they come in they want to ten
to twelve week experience that's
intense it's forty plus hours a
week other working cohorts it's
hands on learning by experts who
often then number of our experts
are retired lab of Sandia lab
and other
employees and then also number
who have grown up in the in the
industry in the IT industry but
they will come to ten to twelve
weeks complete their earnings
have on average double I so and
we have started seventeen I
think what to twenty
entrepreneurs so individuals who
have completed the boot camps on
to become their own business
owners and employees frankly
their fellow of the camp
colleagues so we're incredibly
proud of this story but what
what I would say is most
important why this bill is so
critical and has such broad
support by the business industry
is that we are able to replicate
this model we are we seeing now
has undertaken the development
costs for these different boot
camps we are proud to work with
Dona ana community colleges are
first in state licensee us so
Dona Ana has signed up with C.
CNM for fifty thousand dollars a
year.
By our curriculum fire materials
I have a two weeks of on site
training which are in part while
also virtual training but to be
able to help instructors provide
these losses to their local
community this saves Dona ana
community college costs and
developing their own boot camp
and and they've bought into a
curriculum that will continue to
be updated that's why licensing
is so important that's why
helping of this bill does three
things Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
described the scholarship or the
tuition payments that we and the
living stipend that individuals
throughout the state where these
other licensee or these other
college kids colleges can can
basically buyer curriculum
implemented in their own
backyards but and if there are
to serve their own localities.
We have scholarships for
individuals who would be able to
attend other colleges by taking
on a buying this curriculum
there are some development costs
to last seen in to expand our
coding boot camp opportunities
were particularly looking at
another one and cybersecurity
and another one developing
operations and then systems
quality assurance these are what
are business partners like are
just twenty one here in
Albuquerque is is saying that
they need they need these skills
and they need individuals with
the skill set so we're looking
for some development costs and
we want to be able to find a
stipends basically or I'm sorry
licensing amounts or
scholarships institutions to
basically join us and by these
curriculums so they can find it
in their in their communities
we're incredibly proud of the
work that of our instructors are
teammate and I would say what's
most important is that we are
doing what our business
community needs and we're doing
what you've asked us to do which
is use our research project
entity to develop curriculum
that meets a business need that
puts people to work in
critically valuable industry
boot camps we have are all part
of the department of workforce
solutions priority list on
on areas for employment that are
in in great need so we're
incredibly proud of the work
we're doing and we certainly
look forward to your support I'd
be glad to answer any questions
you might have.
Thank you Senate panel.
Thank you Mr chairman I just a
couple of quick things to add to
to to and president Hartzler
said.
You know San Juan community
college is one of the or San
Juan college is one of the.
Reuters and this is a way for
people who are.
Losing their jobs for example in
the coal coal industry and then
four corners area to be
retrained into the field and
with even a high school
education is they're interested
in this field they can move into
this training program and
provide jobs comparable in
salaries when they were making
in the coal fields.
The the other thing that she
mentioned that I just want to
come back to emphasize again
isn't workforce solutions is a
very strong partner in this as
well and and a lot of their
workforce training money.
Is helping underwriting the
costs of people who are
qualified for that but not
everybody who's entering this.
These camps are eligible for
workforce solutions programming
some of them are are have never
worked before this is going to
be their first job others have
not been laid off and they
simply or or or under employed
for the skill levels and to
dictate the tempo just cause us
and so they're not eligible for
workforce to pay this is a way
for them to further their their
And impossibilities in ambitions
will stand for questions.
Thank you senator our late that
if you'll take us through public
comment please.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
That we receive never request to
speak in opposition to this bill
is there anyone on the zoom call
who would like to speak in
opposition.
Not moving to support for
support we have the Jason
Espinoza.
Chairman and members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council we
stand to transport of the the
legislation is both the sponsor.
And Miss Hartzler talked about
seeing him is done a terrific
job in developing these programs
really meeting the needs of the
employers and and the Senator
mention the coding boot camps
and others and so we do stand in
strong support legislation thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have Robert
Beatty.
Yes I Mr chairman members of the
committee Robert Beatty with the
southwest educational partners
for training but I think that
senator Ortiz Pino for bringing
Senate bill three forty eight
forward and I want to thank god
president Hartzler for her
leadership in the development of
these boot camps our clients
have already benefited from the
boot camps that are in place
this is an innovative and
creative approach CNM is the
appropriate partner and
community colleges across the
state could well serve this
population statewide thank you
for your consideration.
Mr chair members of the
committee next we have levy
Irvin Vitela.
Chairman school committee
members and R. Sanchez my name
is lily Irvin Vitela and the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first New Mexico
First and strong support because
this boot camp is aligned with
the town hall that we had
couple years back on higher
education and economic
development it's just this kind
of innovative opportunity that
leans into the secretary for
wisdom but partners with what
higher ed does best it can make
a real difference in the lives
of New Mexicans who are looking
for more economic opportunity so
we urge strong support.
Mr chair members of the
committee I believe that's all
that we have as speaking in
support of the bill is there
anybody else on the zoom call
who would like to speak in
support of this bill.
Mr chair I believe that
concludes at public comment for
this bill.
Thank you for reading us through
all of that we are now to
questions from the committee and
so I'm waiting to see if there
any hands up from any of my
committee members.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Good I'm just how long was this
bill cap going are when did it
start.
Mr chairman I'll a legend and
president Heisler say something
about.
The C. N. M. experience I I
would also point in there a
couple of other the sight seeing
them a couple of other
organizations into these
programs.
This is specifically through the
CNN network of other community
colleges that we're proposing
this so president harshly would
have the answer for your
question Senator Pinto.
Sure members the committee and
Senator Pinto thank you for your
question CNN has had food camps
on we started that in two
thousand seventeen we've had
them for at least four years we
have developed we started with
one which is initial coding boot
camp we now have up to seven or
eight again they are ten to
twelve weeks in length they
require intensive hands on
experience with our students and
instructors a result in
demonstrations certainly those
students projects have been
featured in a certain area local
news stories and again with
local and strong partnerships
with local employers so our
graduates are the program
graduates are picked up pretty
quickly so.
And Mr chair members of the
committee how can you ensure
that this boot camp will be held
to its highest level from the
colors come out.
Members of the committee and
Senator Pinto that's an
excellent question we make sure
that because of our close
relationships with employers and
because of our continuous
improvement process for boot
camps just like many of our
classes after every covert goes
through our instructors your
curriculum revised as needed
based on employer support and
also based on the number of the
technologies we use and that our
students use to code for web
design or digital media and
digital marketing and and sort
of down the line our instructors
always make sure that they are
updating their not only
technology equipment but also
their lesson plans to again make
sure that our graduates are
relevant initially we were
sponsored and our efforts were
sponsored by hello Grant Park to
five million dollars the reports
and the student this is my our.
I don't want to describe the
quality programming we find and
what that those experiences have
been not only for the students
our local economy and our
employers in terms of employing
diverse workforce so because we
are public entity and we are
supported by our local tax our
tax base and certainly you in
the state we are very aware of
making sure that our students
whether they are a credit
program and getting a degree or
they're in this training program
are making sure they complete
with a relevant.
Certificate or credential that
helps them not only guarantee
I'd say a little wage at the end
of this program but as they
continue to pursue other
certificates and credentials
because that's the other part of
the story most individuals once
they get one have raised their
employment state have seen value
in that training and then help
frankly go back to school and
their employer pay for the rest
of these boot camps or more
degrees so I think that's what
tells you both the quality that
we have built into our
programming and also what are
employers and that repeat
business frankly tells us that
it's successful and that it's a
relevant and to a high standard.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your response and members of
the committee and I think one of
the issues I have that's when
our students and this is where I
think we're trying to address
this gap is when they start to
enter into the higher level
don't whether it be the public
and just to send our one of the
colleges throughout the state
it's the guidance that they
received to the program into a
program in which they don't
finish because the guidance was
miscalculated ours there was not
there might have been an
initial.
Interview done but to follow up
on it so the child or the
student finishes and doesn't
incur all this debt at the end
and then they end up going into
a whole different profession
even going into the military
because the school did not
really hello through to helping
them
stir them into the statement to
the right direction
and I understand with the coding
there where stood support actor
how he doesn't support them
after specially when we know
that this build
is very tense there are lot of
codes there are a lot of things
that they have to meet in those
credentials within the company.
Will there be continued support
after.
Mr chairman president Heisler
respond to that.
Sure
Mr chair members the committee
Senator Pinto.
R. so what's really special and
important that these boot camps
is that they are really a cohort
model so we have students who
are completing their program in
a class of maybe thirty students
but often times it's your
particles are twenty four they
work in close knit teams to
complete this intense training
and they have ongoing support
during this intense period of
ten to twelve weeks so we have
coaches who are in there all the
time making sure that students
are showing up to court I mean
they're showing up to class
there's incredible connection
both among the cohort and by our
instructors and our coaches
what's incredible is that when
our students complete and they
go into the work force one their
employers value CNM.
and and by the way any of our
partners who whether San Juan or
Dona Ana.
All the employers know that
their local community college
provides and is respond to the
needs so we so what does ongoing
relationships we absolutely
continue to support the
employers employers will
continue to send there's there
are now employees back to the
college or back to I city one M.
or New Mexico tech or wherever
it may be for further training
so there so the student isn't
dropped and I think what's most
important that these are
students as you pointed out
really need additional
assistance they're not
necessarily I was originally
college bound is more back
that's why these programs are so
critical they are people they're
helping people who never thought
they were.
I would say college material
most often not college material
that have achieved a sound skill
that's marketable they've
demonstrated resilience they
rely on a cohort of people who
frankly are either gonna be
there please or their employers
or their colleagues when they go
into their next job so those
levels of support or built in
and it's in particularly
important I would say as you've
noted that they're close to
their communities so even though
they may be working remotely for
a company in California they're
still often located at least in
this environment and with these
boot camps are still located
here in New Mexico serving their
community so there's there are a
number of ways that connections
are built in to help continue
individuals grow and thrive in
in in often in industries that
they never envisioned when I
started there program.
And Mister chair members of the
committee at the end of the boot
camp in order to be a code or
don't you have to pass a test.
All right members the committee
and senator it depends on the
program.
They do a so some of the
programs do require licensing
and testing but not all of them
they do require competencies and
so our students are able to show
your the skills and competencies
they've learned but not every
not everybody can't requires a a
certification.
Or like or as.
Sure mmhm so Mr chair members of
the committee this particular
boot camp will they receive a
certification at the end.
So for the eight bit camps
different types of the camps we
offer whether it's web
development digital media
productions data science they
receive a certification in that
from C. N. M. they receive a
certificate of completion most
importantly they have a list of
Krita of competencies that
they've been able to demonstrate
based on up presentations
materials and in some cases I
take a contest or peer and other
instructor vetted projects and
proposals level to say they've
earned something from C. N. M.
you're the competencies and
skills they've gained and then
the employer that will well that
those as well.
Mr chair and members of the
committee do you have any number
state how many of the people
that completed your bills can
actually really became
certified.
Are licensed.
Sure I'd be glad to get that
information we have over six
hundred students who have
completed our boot camps will be
glad to show that and and show
where they've landed so and
their credentials absolutely.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
So next Senator Padilla.
I thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino president
Hartzler so yeah I'm a huge fan
a huge supporter of this
initiative I I will tell you
that right out of the gate I
think the average salary winds
up being somewhere or take or
not take on the side the salary
can be upwards of sixty four to
ninety thousand dollars
somewhere in there
So the question I have is I
thank you what you're doing is a
really great movie I want to
remind the committee to that
these are economic based jobs
typically these are dollars
coming in to pay these folks
from all around the world and
it's a great economic based job
for our state that expands our
economy in a big way which is
really great it's not at all
Minimum wage or even just above
minimum wage it's typically
significantly above minimum wage
depending on the more more skill
sets and certifications that
these individuals receive so
Mister president I'm sorry Mr
chairman okay Mister president
to
and senator Ortiz Pino and I
don't know if doctor Harzer
wants to present hunter wants to
respond to this one but are we
spending and president heart
survivor gave a presentation we
give an award to a did a
business in my district the
other day together.
That was you know just doing
remarkable things with their
business but are we spending any
amount of time with these
individuals that are going
through the certifications and
and these receiving the
certificates of completion or
whatever that on how to start
their own business because in a
lot of ways these individuals
can become a virtual business in
and of themselves by recruiting
others as they're coming out of
the certification programs maybe
they're a senior coders senior
person in this field and can
certainly build a little
business at its virtual in
nature do we have we spending
any amount of time but these
folks on that.
Mr chairman and and senator I
think the answer is definitely
yes felt all'interno president
R. slur explained.
Of course thank you Mister chair
members the committee and.
as you as many of you know small
business development centers are
co located with community
colleges seen as a small
business development center that
is located the wet at the
workforce training center we
make sure that any of our
individuals to purchase
particularly those training
programs have access to when we
reach out access to our small
business development center
resources which include
everything from business
planning
Business plans accounts finances
etcetera.
And like I said up to twenty I
think we're approaching twenty
individuals who have gone on and
started their own business and
our hiring individual so there's
no question that we partner and
we build on the resources that
you support in our community
support and making sure to grow
small businesses we know that it
is where we know how important
small businesses are not only to
support County but because they
they are they are employing
their peers and our colleagues
it particularly in the coding
world so we actually connect
those dots and then of course we
also help them in those
individuals want to go on and
and develop their business and
want to get a degree an
associate's degree we certainly
have pathways to do that as well
so we we have a number of
resources that we use to make
sure that our that individuals
who show that interesting
capacity we try to leverage all
the resources we have to to grow
as many small businesses as we
can.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to to hear that because
it's just it's probably one of
the lowest cost capital
businesses to get off the ground
and then you have a ready stream
and pipeline of of employees
what a great you know but I want
to make sure that we're capstone
in all of this with the
development and and the exposure
to open their own businesses
because this is not a field
that's going to slow down
anytime soon and and what a
great way to expand our economy
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Ortiz P. no present
parts for.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
president Hartzler
I have a couple of questions
about the bill and and that.
An observation
that this bill would cost us is
this a one time cost of three
million dollars is that correct.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Hickey no I think I think the
anticipation is this would
become particularly as it
demonstrates his success.
A blue line item within the C.
N. M. budget.
For years to come hopefully you
know India and and as the
network expands each of those
institutions they're partnering
with C. N. M. around the state
would would be able to share in
that in that same in that same I
funding streams.
Very good
my next question is again FY are
pretty straight and simple
but at least in my own money and
I'm sure that all this
conceptually or understanding
this the return on investment is
probably something that a
private equity person would go
nuts over because it probably
you know usually you say we're
really successful one is ten
acts in this I can see is a
hundred Bucks with the
phenomenal pay back and then you
go in and put the taxes along
the way the come out of the
salaries as well as the
investments and economic
development the flow of the
state our corporate taxes but
I'm I'm I I don't see it and I I
don't see that we do this as a
as a pattern as they do in
Congress and have an R. O. Y. on
these types of bills because
they are so significant to the
state
and I'm not asking for it for
the moment but at some point it
would be good to do a
disciplined CBO
return on an investment like
this because I'm hoping we're
going to see multiple bills like
this come before us and we begin
to we we transform our thinking
and this is a cost in the
fighting over a strap on the
table rather than we are putting
the roast on the table for
distribution everyone in the
state yeah.
Secondly I've I want to be sure
that I I know
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and
present Hartzler that this
program is in five colleges but
the other day we heard of bill
about having
the Hobbs community college
become independent and I would
hope and and and and see if I
have this correct
the and I'm sorry
Senator Kernan shaking your head
I I got some phraseology Law.
At.
Robert thank my apologies no
it's it's it's like people who
live in the east coast no the
drug addict you're in the hands
of the west Mississippi.
The southern part.
My apologies but I would but I'm
assuming that if they were the
Carlsbad community colleges to
make a fifty thousand dollar
investment they get all the
curriculum and the support and
they get this kind of money as
well with that be correct going
forward.
Mr chairman and and senator I
think you're absolutely correct
and a Linda and Dr are slower
explain how many other
institution she's already
negotiating with.
Sure thank you for that question
I think what's what's so
compelling I'm sorry members the
committee chairman and senator
Hickey I think what's most
compelling about this bill is
that this is really about
reaching being able to help
institutions serve their
localities up much bigger than
Central New Mexico and that's
what's so important I think and
so currently we have a great
agreement that sign was Dona ana
community college we are working
with San Juan with a
conversations with Santa Fe
community college we have
conversations with some
institutions that are outside
the state of New Mexico because
they've seen the track record of
this curriculum and just like
any of us would buy a curriculum
from oracle or Intel on on
certain designing we have
developed one that has a strong
success record and that we
guaranteed we will continue to
update as as that a license and
that program is still relevant
so there is a continuing
development cost and updating
that we as CNN would continue
and that the institution the
partner institution would seek
to pay because again they're
hiring instructor to teach
something that they purchased
that's that's vetted that is a
has a track record and it will
continue to be updated and so
then they can provide that with
again this important financial
assistance to help individuals
participate in the in the
program so.
And we have at least or I think
agreements in process One
certainly sign in one again is
signed out with somebody outside
the state.
As a follow up questions Mister
chairman Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
and resin Hartzler
as these other colleges develop
their curriculum I'm assuming
that they're probably gonna
develop insight.
And activities that you're gonna
want to buy back prevent.
Absolutely.
Okay thank you
I'm I'm getting there my
understanding is that there are
three thousand private equity no
not private wrong number that
there are three thousand
technological start ups with the
seated with private equity
something in the state that
that's what I'm told by the
council of entrepreneurs and
that they are stymied in getting
into become medium size
businesses are just twenty one
is a perfect example because
they don't have the ten.
This talent is developed in
other states are very.
There are higher wages and it's
tough to bring that talent to
New Mexico but this is home
alone with in the state my
understanding is that they have
literally almost a thousand jobs
they're empty today as they
don't have the trained
individuals so the question is
is there a place for these
people that go this isn't my GM
shutting down in Janesville and
then know what that people have
nowhere to go is that people
have a place to go today and so
I'm assuming you're have dances
and assumed that they're moving
that that this would serve those
needs those businesses that grow
as you said the options
so I I would conclude my
comments by saying that the
checker relief since coming on
to the Senate we have always
kind of been aware of it living
the state that you know we have
a cycle of poverty we we have a
power of the all state.
And you know there are there are
a number of coaches that can
help it but I would say this is
the Fizer vaccine to cure that
poverty along with a number of
others and as such I was there I
stand in strong support of the
bill thank you very much Mr
chairman Senator Ortiz you know
president hearts are for
bringing this to us and the
knowledge about it today.
Thank you Senator pope
thank you Mr chair thank you St
RTZ Pino drive our start I'm in
support of this bill and I
understand there's an
appropriation we kind of look at
the priorities are what you know
we're gonna fund in the state
but being at a retired Air Force
officer for current when there's
just so much need for folks with
the skills and we talk about our
military installations are labs
it's not only the work force to
get folks out of poverty into
these higher paying jobs that
also provide more revenue to our
state you know in the with with
taxes but it also gives an
opportunity to start their own
companies their own businesses
and also the skills that are
going to be able to support some
of the future military missions
but also us investing in things
like you know the space industry
that's going to be here in our
state and I think if we're able
to do that and show that we have
a workforce not only will be be
creating jobs for folks getting
them out of poverty but will be
supporting the companies here
that start what also bringing in
other companies that are out
actually support contractors for
these installations on our lap
so thanks for doing this and
just want to say that I I
support thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman appreciate
the the bill actually thank you
so one of those the bills will
be able to support today so.
Mr chairman workers have you
identified the money anywhere is
it in H. is in house bill two
or have we put together some
junior money for worst the money
gonna come from three million.
Mr chairman and senator rand to
I mean I think we're you know
we're hoping that the the
revised economic forecast.
When she generating some
additional the possibility of
some additional.
Money being added to have still
to might include money for this
program.
Even if it doesn't Senator
Stallman in myself and put some
of our junior money into this.
So there is a tiny piece of the
three million that we're asking
for in this bill but the hope is
that it didn't the the finance
committee will go in House
Appropriations hasn't already Ms
president are Sir may be able to
give us an update on that.
But the Senate finance committee
could add the additional money
needed there there would not be
a better investment of our money
that I can imagine is Senator
Hickey pointed out the return on
investment is incredible the
support for local entrepreneurs
is incredible and integrated
cutting edge technology boom in
the state that we we could
really further and see dividends
paid for years and years to come
so this would be I would think
something that we might your own
finance committee to add some
money in for it's just not in
one house bill two comes across
the president towards there
might have.
The feedback for us on going
with the status is of this.
Absolutely thank you for your
thank you the chairman and and
and Senator for your question we
are seeking additional support
both in junior House Bill but
also with the Senate
honestly the financial situation
has changed so quickly this was
not on our this is not the
highest priority for seeing them
to request funding for back in
September when we were pulling
this information together what
our priorities are it does not
mean that it's not a priority it
absolutely is I would just note
we just didn't know what the we
we're just watching a revenue
estimates like all of you so I
hope at this time because of the
strong track record I appreciate
the Senator sponsored that
sponsorship of this bill I
Representative I appreciate
representative Dixon's support
for this bill in the house I
think what's so critical as we
know that this is something that
works that's demonstrative that
is demonstrated successes grown
businesses and that's why at
this late moment we have
actually asked for solicit and
we've we've solicited support at
there's no question we are
fiscally sound and we're really
conservative I'd say the college
level of how we seek additional
funds because we know how
important support is and how.
She's our financial resources
are we take it very seriously
but I would be asking for this
money if it wasn't so important
and it didn't have such a clear
benefit to our community and our
price a particular program
students and that in our
industry so.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I agree with the the
program thank purpose good
program actually one of probably
one of the only our allies all
probably agree with for the next
twenty years or so so I I think
doctors working for for that I
think we're we're right on track
I was trying to figure out where
the where the money is whether
you've got it identified yet we
should talk to me about this
earlier this week I probably
would put some of my last week
this is early as this week you
get but last week I probably
would with some of my junior
money and also
that that's how much I think
it's a good program this is the
area that we need to be trying
to help people move into I. T.
is is continuing to grow and
will continue to grow so
everything.
Dealing with computers is is
just going to get bigger and and
just going to continue and and
this is a really good way of
getting your foot in the door
you don't have to have a
bachelor's degree to work on
computers
So I I really like the program
like the idea of structure where
the funding was coming from I'd
be glad to support.
It going forward I will say that
yes we have a budget revenue it
just meant that went up but we
also have some massive needs in
the unemployment insurance area.
that's gonna be four hundred
fifty million dollars in the red
and the budget only has about
three hundred million to.
Account for that so it's one of
those areas that we're gonna
have to deal with so thank you
and good luck in finance sure
sure.
Thank you senator.
Senator I have a couple of
questions on things and the data
chairman I have another
question.
Senator give the I I'm gonna go
first for my first time before
your second if you will
apologize I just know you always
like to go after all of us are
thank you thank you all went.
The data unemployment you
indicate that fifty four percent
of graduates are employed full
time after this program thirty
two for part time and freelance.
Where are the other fourteen
percent what are they doing and
kind of the combined so I don't
go to questions and also the
average salary of fifty thousand
a year.
Is that the median or that the
average salary is an average of
water to go starting an
entrepreneur two hundred
thousand greatly excuse.
This is our.
Average.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I'll let president harshly
responded she has a report on
the graduates of the program and
how many of them employed which
is very high how many and what
they're earning and so on but
I'll let her respond to your
question.
I thank you Mr chairman I am
unclear where the fourteen
percent have gone so I will go
in I will go and find that
Another position they could
certainly be in school they
could have gone on to college
and not working in that sense so
glad to provide that information
to bring it back to.
Shortly then the other question
is the average this is a meeting
Valerie fifty so that there are
individuals as center or Ortiz
Pino described I thank you
Secretary cheesy Pino had
described their individual to
complete our coding boot camp
our boot camp for data analytics
where their salaries are often
in the eighties and nineties and
higher but our our basic our
entry level of the camp their
average wages are approaching
fifty thousand dollars which as
you may know in central New
Mexico that ever our average
wages forty seven so forty seven
thousand so we're we're we know
that this is a solid wage.
Thank you go ahead and get and I
don't like appears average and
median because an average issue
but we buy a few very high ones
is it an average wage of fifty
or a median wages the median I'm
sorry thank you median.
Okay.
Thank you Adam and again this
indicates that the overall fifty
four percent of graduates are
employed full time paid
technology thirty two percent
part time freelancer work indoor
continuing education.
Fourteen percent are unaccounted
for no and so I'd be curious
where that fourteen percent is
up.
As we look at it you know talk
about this seems like it's a
huge benefit to employers who
are hiring these graduates.
Do employers have any financial
investment in this program are
we just preparing workers for
them doing all of their training
for free and then just tend to
do that with no financial
skin in the game so to speak.
President.
A letter respond Mr chairman.
Our so Mister chair members of
the committee years so
individuals are often one can be
paid for by their employers some
players may be paying for some
of their employees to continue
credentials we know that happens
we also have employers who
receive an example would be the
Jobs training Albuquerque
program that has funding from a
locality with that form the City
of Albuquerque that will support
L. a small business or local
employer to give a stipend to an
individual who seeks of coding
boot camp so their number those
are a couple of ways that
employers can support
individuals who take these
programs again we have workforce
dollars the policy some students
who take we take our programs
But and there are a number so
their number of ways employers
will can will pay or benefit
from our from students to
complete our programs.
Yes why would an employer if
this is going to be covered by
the state why would employer Hey
and what is the cost for tuition
for this program.
First so employers often will
pay for education whether it's
in the credit side of the in our
creditor degree programs as part
of tuition assistance as part of
other educational benefits that
they provided this is similar I
see them itself we we ourselves
find this kind of opportunity
for all employees of both the
credit in our college or degree
side of the house but also
noncredit training side so it's
in our best interest as an
employer to have an educated
workforce and and a trained
workforce so we do that
ourselves the cost to provide
the education the average boot
camp costs I'm sorry Costa
student about nine thousand
dollars in tuition that's for
ten to twelve week intensive
exit forty hour week course
program it costs the college
cost ingenuity our provider
about eighty seven hundred
dollars.
So we really are charging about
what it costs to provide this
training there isn't a
substantial markup for this we
are again we are nonprofit we're
nonprofit entity where public
institution so we believe in
providing high value
programming for our for our
students are community.
Okay I.
The cost per student for a boot
camp certificate is nine
thousand dollars.
I hear that correctly yes breast
was extremely poor at a
community college for a
certificate program compared to
what we even charge at our four
year institutions for a full
year of education what are my
district.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of when we undergo a
cost analysis cost benefit
analysis for a student who comes
into this program up for nine
thousand dollars for one
semester they're able to earn an
median salary of about fifty
thousand dollars if that and
they will often take that
learning a credential and then
go on and continue their
education.
For a student to enroll in a
four year institution.
I it will cost it'll have an
opportunity cost for that
student to not only pay and I
won't actually I I'm not aware
of my four year college partners
a university partners tuition
but if you calculate the four
years plus of tuition and a lost
opportunity cost we absolutely
believe that for those
individuals taking that ten to
twelve week intensive program
gives them the Akon the economic
benefit of earning.
Quickly and as the right
opportunity cost for that
student.
So and again it's at our cost
it's it's it's replicate this
eighty seven hundred dollars to
provide it we don't charge that
much more.
Intuition I guess
Senator and at the president.
Do we have other programs that
are ninety thousand dollar cost
for a one semester tuition at
the school I mean that seems
outrageous to me when community
colleges are listed as the
cheaper alternative to getting
credentials and other things for
us to Mr comes in doesn't what
state paying for this for the
state doesn't cover this and
want to come in you tell them up
front this is gonna cost you
nine thousand dollars.
For for this short program.
The return on investment for
them is absolutely worth the
cost and the time it is I will
say this is not a high dollar
program across the country of
there are many institutions that
charge more than this
we have been able to subsidize
the cost to produce because we
had generous sponsorships and
support
and students are willing to
undertake one there's a research
at receive a grant or
scholarship to attend and
complete the program again the
more they generally double their
household income that's
compelling to our to the
students to complete these
programs and the cost of it all
again I don't disagree with any
of that yeah what university or
a bachelor's degree yup greatly
increases your overall earnings
we all know that that just seems
for a twelve week program nine
thousand dollars she's
incredibly expensive to me for
for things I mean that's on the
order of what medical schools
cost as far as tuitions and
other kinds of things but.
Just yeah okay at four but
compared to regular four year
degree levels that.
Hi my last question and then
we'll we'll get to a vote on
this because we're past time
already.
Hi is there a charge for
curriculum that was publicly
funded to other you publicly
funded entities we typically
don't do that.
Chair Mister chairman members of
the committee these programs are
not publicly funded to be
developed
CNM ingenuity our research
project in state uses its own
resources to develop these
programs it is not subsidized by
public funds they are we have
received grant funding to
develop our programs and to be
able to offer scholarships for
individuals to attend those
programs
and as a way and there are
constant updating costs for
breast maintain a relevant and
Current curriculum Senator Pinto
described earlier so we have
ongoing costs to make sure that
we
Hi to relevant curriculum so
there are it is and if if we
didn't share this to recover our
costs for development with other
institutions they would be
undertaking those costs
themselves and that's a much
more expensive undertaking of
for those institutions so it's a
way for us to recover some of
our cost it's a way for us to
develop new coding boot camps
that we know are in demand and
it actually saves institutions
other institutions costs in
developing those curriculum.
Mr chairman.
In mind one thing as well these
programs are not funded I mean
C. and M. as a public
institution but nothing in the
state appropriation to see an
amendment.
Or in the local school districts
appropriations UNM includes
these costs this is over and
above their ordinary operating
budget these are special
programs that are developed
outside of the state and locally
funded budget for C. N. M. so
that's why the cost is a
reflection of what the market
will bear and and what the
actual cost of providing the
instructors aren't C. N. M. the
rate.
Eight employees these are
special unique to this program.
Okay it just seems this is very
different than anything we see
that public institutions before
as far as cost or anything of
that sort of which yep with
concerning if we start to where
universities are charging each
other for for things that were
developed and again that seems
like a an incredibly high cost
for for a twelve week boot camp
that gets people up to about the
median salary of within the
state of New Mexico so with that
you know in center for the it
quickly or did you have a
motion.
Right now I I will have a motion
I had some questions and I think
they've all been pretty much
answered all moved to pass.
Thank you we have a motion for a
do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you I think that was
Brandt who jumped in for just a
million and if you will call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yes.
Nation.
Yes.
Neville.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes send to explain more about.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes.
And we just a new path etcetera
if you enter the explained
about.
Thank you just for clarity
medical school cost about a
hundred thousand dollars here is
highly technical about half of
that is paid by the students
secondly these courses are
highly technical and for a three
month period is a bargain when
all of the the technical pieces
have to be brought in and is
significantly cheaper than other
states lastly why aren't the of
businesses paying for it because
many of these businesses are
started and they are watching
their pennies and if they don't
get this help to get off the
ground national investment that
goes down the thing thank you.
Out.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I think we're
behind the curve I think we're
already five years down from
having a program like this that
was.
The coding was already a big
thing that could have came in
but I think we're doubling stuff
up wouldn't when we talk about
workforce solutions already has
something that in are in process
that they go that route just to
share what we do something this
quick I hope the does that
finish don't jeopardize their
job experience background in
which they received a negative
negative impact if they do not
have the high the
hi call type experience to do it
thank you.
Thank you anything else in the
committee out sorry we're
running up the we had a few
minutes late today I know I
tried this on time we don't have
a committee coming up.
Senate bill three thirty well
first we will do Senator Lopez
to eighty nine provided she
doesn't get stuck over the rules
Senate bill three thirty seven
Senate bill three forty one
Senate bill three fifty three
and I think we've got two or
three house bill that will be on
our Wednesday agenda
Senator Neville do you know is
there going to be a caucus
meeting.
On Wednesday.
Yes.
Okay
we'll have and that's going to
be at ten thirty I present
center Brandt.
Okay so we're going to be a
little bit I think we will start
at eight thirty then on
Wednesday so we try to get a
little extra hi David and will
stop at ten twenty on Wednesday
trying to think anything else
the body on the committee.
And I might just if I could with
my committee members I don't
have a problem explaining the
vote please use these by the
pope the explain why you voted
for it not to get trying to one
laughs at a comment about the
bill on their it takes up extra
time were falling behind on
other things so certainly if you
want to explain your vote that's
fine but you know let's try not
to use yeah just extra time the.
But that's not what what is is
actually the purpose of the
COVID so with that we will close
for today thank you everyone.
