The.
Yeah.
Appear.
Also for committee mem.
Thirty we are very fortunate we
will have some.
Will be here to talk about their
mission and how it supports
legislator.
So someone from.
And so they're a number.
Government as you.
With you and so we're going to
jump down to the.
Student.
Anyone who would like to s.
Yeah.
The.
Others would like it you're.
Chairman dolls and members of
the committee
I am laurence robert from the
university of new mexico health
science a center of the
privilege of serving with
doctors the adones and doctor
romero leg it i'm also part of
the last state white
collaborative so many of you
have been supportive of our
efforts over many many years and
i've had the privilege of being
involved in government
leadership training programs.
For numerous years in fact in
nineteen eighty eight when we
held the first version of this
initiative senator padea was
elected lieutenant governor.
He is one example
participants from new mexico who
have gone on to a variety of
important roles.
Who are positively impacting new
mexico.
We have supported hundreds of
students across new mexico
because of your generous support
and we stand with senator padia
to advance senate bill one
eighty it is a privilege to be
with all of you we thank you for
your ongoing support and we
thank you mostly for supporting
students and families and
communities across the mexic.
As we're getting to that the
next bill that we're going to
hear is senator himphill's bill.
That's why i've taken.
Others who would like to speak.
Chair members the committee this
is miles token deputy director
of all they speaking in support
of speed fifty three we think
the
sponsor for caring this
important piece of legislation
as we know the need for our are
youngest and next generation is
great and being able to access
more funds to provide for those
young ones I have to myself is
deeply important so we think you
and urgent do pass thank you.
Yeah.
If you would like to go and
present them will be back up to
the top of the list the senate
bill seventy four the UNM
department of health.
Yeah.
And I believe we have a
committee substitute so we're
gonna have some hand out.
Okay senator if you would kind
of explain them
if people had already looked
what are the changes in the
committee sub if people have
looked at it what was online
prior.
I think
the very directional mags you
don't have to get real close to
him and he missed a chair
and thank you committee
the up.
A school of public health and
and now.
Get to that later
we started.
College of.
And the funding to build it into
a false school of public house
with the number of faculty and
scope and so forth
requires continuing funding that
had been requested through the
appropriate channels and so
forth and
sparing it.
Dropped into a crack didn't get
out so the original bill was to
assure that the school could
continue to grow and five point
seven million was requested and
a f.
And will get into that a little
bit later
since then we've gone back and
looked very carefully at the
budget and
at moneys that currently have
not been spent and knowing that
the university will be having an
ing review that is to get
something.
Funding will eventually end up
to continue the score but to
assure the fact of the the
students.
Not just.
May take to get the funding
formulas completely worked out.
We are now offering the
substitute which has a total of
eleven point
three million dollars from
twenty two point two million
dollars we've cut it in half and
it funds the first year I heard
fiscal year twenty five thirty
the remnant that needs to the
patch there and then two years
following and grant money will
come in to pick that up so we've
have the request and we are now
bringing it through the process
starting in the senate and.
Reduces the amo.
The.
Thank you and I believe the
process we need to.
Have I do not pass on the one.
We're discussion.
Thank you
discussing.
Then.
The new bill anything else.
A and the new bill just to
perspective originally the idea
of the school of public health
doctors and done to sit started
one of the university of san
diego is don't extremely well
the college of population health
under former secretary and.
Collins.
And the arpa money came in and
the question was and we were
right in the middle of covered
you know it shouldn't be really
half the school of public
healthier that is training the
people that we need the next
time of pandemic comes as well
as to reduce the cost of care in
the state because if you do good
public health you don't pay for
a lot of accu.
And so the sentiment was yes
let's start it and in twenty two
ten million
was allocated
actually
it is kind of complex ten
million to unam five because it
was kind of a jo.
So here you are
day and then.
But we're at the point now we're
a doctor counts and I just like
to have her say a few words as
success she's had in bringing
the number of faculty and to
address the public health issues
that played new mexico
and i'll just briefly.
Increase the faculty in the
impact of the half of our goal
here is to assure them they've
got a solid future and.
Given up ten year tracks and and
and who brought their grant
money and all the sudden there
is no funding are we need to
assure them that we we've got it
covered.
Thank you for being here yes
mister sharing committee members
and thank you senator hickey so
as part of the ten million one
time do.
I was asked to recruit thirteen
two years we were fortunate to
recruit twenty one in one year
and they bring expertise and
bios.
And other credit conditions and
so with this faculty we are
positioned to do better for the
state of new mexico but we were
recruited them here they've
uproad at their lives to conduct
new mexico and.
Grant funding so I have met my
requirement by recruiting these
faculty and we want to recruit
more but I need to support to
keep going to make sure that we
can transition from the college
of population health into an
accredited school of public
health which requires at least
twenty one full time faculty and
a date for graduating our first
phd and we launched the first
phd and helped equally sciences
in the country just in the
spring.
No share thank you very much
thank you after the audience
those who would like to speak in
favor if you would come up to
the mike
it's here and you have two
minutes.
Disaused support thank you chair
thank you legislators
you know my role ceo with the
unam health and executive vice
president for health science
which includes the college
populat.
Many of you know i'm also in
addiction sick by my training
and i'm also public health
specialist and as
senator hicky mentioned i've
developed schools of public
health in the past you can
mention your name again the
secretary was unable to catch
her dug said illness I e.
So I
we want to make a difference in
new mexico.
Public health is a critical part
of making a difference.
If we're going to reduce
diabetes rates
you can't wait till they get to
the clinic and they have
diabetes and they have clinical
problems you're trying to manage
you want to prevent these
problems that's one of the
things we've lived through
covered there'll be something
else that comes and so public
health is the early added of
buyers who get into the
community and make a difference
I want to thank you all for the
ten million you gave us you also
gave a six deliverables we
knocked it out the part because
of having such a wonderful team
who really made a difference I
recruit these people from all
over
a number twenty five is the bear
minimal.
Most school schools are public
health have a hundred facultier
higher some day will grow into
there already four point four
million new dollars federal
dollars have come into the state
because of the recruits that we
had so i'm tremendously
supportive I know this is going
to not only
help the ding and all those
faculty change their life but
it's gonna make a huge
difference in this state and
it's going to help us in the
continue to do more prevention
so I thank you for your
consideration on this we're
grateful for your pass apport
and we really want to make a
difference and work together.
Thank you other please come up
if you're want to speak so that
we know who's here
thank you jd good morning mister
chairman is that the committee
my name is jd bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater albuquerque chamber of
commerce are unam's school of
public health is making
important contributions to our
state as more more graduates
fell critical roles in our
health care system and senate
bill seventy four is going to
help protect this program that
score from potential revenue
shortfall financial shortfalls
provide recurring revenue so
that there are certainty that
this program can be sustained
and grown into the future in the
chamber of commerce strongly
urges your support for.
If not then we're back to
questions from the committee.
Getting my attention
straight ocean for a due pass.
Second by center my estimates if
you will call the role please.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
Yes
you have a new pass thank you
mister.
I should say yes pass on the
committee substitute for then a
bill seventy four
we get an officially taking care
of
that I believe next center lopez
are you here for senate bill one
o three
so you come but then I didn't
follow the track where you went
unam spanish education program.
Good morning mr chair.
I'm i'm here in front of you at
senate bill one zero three and
what this is essentially mr
chairman is appropriating three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars from our general fund to
unm for purposes of providing as
it says explicitly providing
medical spanish education
programs in the schools of
medicine college of nursing
college of pharmacy and the
college of population health and
mister terry do you have an
expert witnessed dropped her
plaza who would like to see a
few words and support if this
measure.
Is memorially.
On.
I health professionals.
You in different damage.
Yes.
We'll go out the audience people
in support if anyone like to
speak in support come up to the
microphone please.
Mister chairman members of the
committee I am valuary romaro
like it vice president for
diversity equity inclusion at
the health sciences in her and a
family practice doctor here new
mexico and you heard very
eloquently from doctor plaza the
needs that we have in the state
or linguistic competency in our
providers and thank you senator
lopez.
Providing this bill for us so we
have a huge need in the state
with twenty six percent of her
population spend.
And what we know is that when we
have populations.
They'll have english as a second
language.
They have poor health outcomes
they have less access to health
care.
And we need to provide them the
health providers that will be
able to change these health
disparities for our state and
what I can tell you as well is
that a cross all of these health
professions we have so many of
our students that come in that
have already spanish language
skills and they're looking for
the education and the
opportunity to have the
curriculum in the training so
that they can be certified and
they can provide the services
back to their communities and
back to the populations that we
serve so thank you for your
support of the spill appreciate
that thank you.
Thank you.
Yes I could chair dougs the
doneness ceo for the unm health
system and executive bice
president for health science.
So they includes our college in
earth saying school of public
health are medical school are
health professions are pharmacy.
I am very supportive of this
initiative.
Over half our patience
are hispanic
many where we need to provide
tra.
Our students are interested in
this.
And remember seventy percent of
the nurses come from you and am.
Eighty percent of the pharmace.
Fifty percent of the doctors
come from u and m ninety percent
of our health professionals
graduates stay in the state so.
Your influence here on providing
this curriculum to help our
students will not only help her
students while they're at u and
m working in our clinics but
they're going to be all over the
state and need to be able to
have better skills in this area
and i'm pleased to announce also
we just recruited our new dean
for our college of nursing
reservation.
She's by lingle she suspending
this is going to be a great
edition for us we can't just
have the top leaders being
bilingual we really need to
enhance the skill said at at a
deep level for the students
where there also is an interest
as always thank you for your
support and your partnership on
these important matters.
Thank you after anyone else in
support is there anyone in
opposition.
Francisco romteo.
You would go these addresses for
up to two minutes.
Good morning yes mr terror
members of the committee center
linda lopes think response from
senate bill one three and
everyone that presented the
doctor plaza.
Driver middle naked doctor said
on this my name is francisco can
go i'm with office for a
community health my work three
of the community health
extension officer and really
working with communities in the
central mexico i've been with a
health extension of his work.
Fifteen years and one of the
needs that i've seen is this
precisely i've mentioned medical
students public health seems
nursing some pharmacists that
come as as its to the
institution.
Cultural interest has been by
not sure being bilingual this
bill is really gonna
acknowledge honor and meet and
serve the needs of arguments
compopulation totally in favor
thinking.
Thank you
thank you
questions from the committee.
So guy goes
mister thank you and center
experience just a couple of
questions so with this already
been.
Mr chairman if I could doctor
plaza.
Yeah.
I apologize.
I could see the means
I know they took it.
Yeah.
Okay thank mister center so I
guess my question then is.
With cancer but.
He started every time the.
Not very very.
Mandatory.
I still had the inte.
Slowly.
Both languages.
Thank you center city.
The.
Thank you mister president like
I have similar questions through
a certain.
Mister terr we've had this feel
a few years in a row and very
back in front of the committee.
Eight it in a I cannot answer to
the budget process at the
university goes we all know
their different processes that
they have
and I don't know if maybe one of
our experts in the audience
would like to answer that but I
do know mister chair that i've
already.
Put in some of my gromanies into
a with some other full amount
that we have here in front of
the committee but at least to
start the process where there's
some cash in the bank.
For them in addition to the four
thousand dollars that doctor
plaza m.
That's alright with you center
yes.
Dexidonus u and m c o the health
system and executives present
for the health sciences thank
you very good question.
Six percent of the.
The.
We do provide other.
Health system to cover.
School medicine has had a defin.
The.
Hoping that we would get.
The.
So with some.
We do have a process.
Process.
Think about how to fold it into
some other a.
The.
The back of the support for this
tr.
If I can go off that topic.
Rural in urban area bethlehem
steel.
You may not be c.
The.
And people.
Appreciate.
Even if you're not float just
then little bit of beginner.
I think.
The.
If they're patient load.
The.
Thank you center for that
question.
We do have translator.
And they're available for all
our patients so
that is.
Of course priority for us.
I've just put together gather a
million dollars for an office
equity including a center for
hi.
So.
Fluent speaking is really
important we don't want family
member to rely on family member.
To the level.
Of both.
But also.
Spanish but don't know how to
say the terms.
Part which I think is critical
for everybody.
But it is vital to us and we do
provide the translation I think
it's undergrad and very very
good point thank you miss
chairman senator.
Thank you mister
senator lopez
want to come in.
Since in comments I was and the
fact.
But I can tell you in that
experience I I often on the
wards and in the clini.
The.
If I was lucky enough to.
As we would make rounds in the
morning we would get so much
more understanding of.
With the patient and I often
time sodden and while there are
at least back in the
the good bad old days we didn't
necessarily have that act.
And so this programs I believe
is critically important I did
has been seven years on the naba
hope and I took courses the
first couple of years to learn
medical nava hope and while we
did have translators it
certainly helped me and a lot of
my interaction and make a better
diag.
The same I can say the same at
the university of new mexico
when I was there spent eleven
years after leaving and
supervis.
Again this is a critical program
and I just one questio.
You probably should offer this
program.
The.
Because they they'd need to have
that profit i'm i'm i'm saying
it in all seriousness they they
really do in and doctor legit
the value of merrill leg at
sitting here was when I might
medical students back in the day
and she was one of their points
who could you know translate for
me but if she was off to a
clinic or somewhere else in her
patient man I was out of luck so
this is important for the fact
so thank you mister chair and I
just is j.
Thank you sender boat.
Look.
The.
Mr tear this is as you learn a
new language there is some
cultural aspects that came with.
Touching into the cultural
competency now thank you.
Thank you
looking for a due pass they get
by center never if you will call
the role please.
Yes
yes.
Yes you have a due pass thank
you mister chairman members of
the committee thank you and I
believe our last build senator
never entire responses internet
bill if you'll cover and this is
for senate joint resolution nine
on moving back to a state school
board
he's walking out the door right
now but we had the the dean of
the college of hester new excuse
state university was your few
moments I was going to
introduce.
Considered a bill
in that things were busy I
didn't get to you but but I had
drafted a very short amendment
that makes a couple of comments
that make of one line a little
bit clear enough and so with
your glance at that but if that
makes sense to the committee if
we can take care of making that
little amendment it takes out
like a double end.
Yeah.
So that amendment on page two
line
is a nineteen.
People look at that.
You know it's got a shall be
nominated in by end with the
that's
wonky at best and I think this
clarifies that so if everybody
will glance that amendment and
if.
I would like to make the motion
to.
To amend the belter to include.
I make the motion if you second
it all seconds very discussion
on the motion.
If not we will accept that
amendment set.
Thank you mister miss chairman
this is.
Through the senate.
It made it to the house.
The.
There used to be saying.
The point was that should be was
fiftieth in the country and
education and they were we were
forty nine so we.
Unfortunately what has happened
is miss miss.
Particular thing not necessarily
constitutional amendment like
this but what they did do as I
stabilize their education system
they put together program that
did not have the turmoil and so
forth if they had had prior they
took the politics to a minimum
and they were able to get a
program that dealt with
education and not with the
political ramifications we all
know that those of us that were
here during the martinez all of
the political turn oil around
the sector of education.
We haven't necessarily have that
this last governor the current
governor but we've had five
secretaries.
We can't improve we don't get
stability with this
constitutional minute does as it
brings us back to something that
existed a number of years ago
and was.
Superintendents of education
over.
That's crucial if we're going to
try to do som.
Back on tracking in the sta.
School board state school board
that would have a ten.
It has a delayed implementation
this does not affect the current
governor it is something that
takes plate place after the
current governor goes out of
office and who was a l.
That's the jest of it of course
there.
Sets up a school board.
Changing philosophies.
The.
With that i'll stand for.
For questions
thank you senator
first out in the audience those
in some word they would like to
come up and and speak and again
you have two minutes and then
we'll take the l.
The.
Mr chairman standard for this
coalition education leaders and
the school superintendence we
strongest support this bill in
fact our membership.
We supported it
it was unfortunate it did not
get.
I just want to note two things
are.
As a senator raised.
What you heard from him just.
Under this model which is
twenty.
Secretaries of educa.
That's a very different.
So this chairman was saying a
full support of this weird also
do.
Thank you anyone else please
come up line up so I can see how
many people there are in support
and then same if we get when we
get opposition mr cines.
Good morning chair members of
the committee.
Um i'm steve singers are any new
mexico government relations and
on behalf.
Of this resolution.
We believe that an elected
school board with five a with
five appointees from the
governor will be better suited
to move research based in
educator so.
Education policy should be
thoughtful.
Fully better and input sought
from education patient
practitioners before the.
With implementation and
regulation
we have been we have seen with
the curning last administration
what happens when thoughtful
well bettered policy is n.
The.
Teacher shortage is a resort of
rushed underbedded policy and
regulation.
For these reasons.
And for the ones expressed in
this room from our supporters we
as you will in favour of this
bill thank you.
Thank you mr c honest lily may
with the school word association
good morning and mister terman
members of the committee lilly
or tease the legislative layers
on for the new mexico school
board association the nms be
does not have a formal physician
on this particular piece of
legislature but we do however me
throughout the year to
collaborate and work together
with our educational partners in
an effort to combine our joint
education priorities and when
possible we want to speak with
one voice towards the benefit of
our students and school
districts and must be has not
agreed on this issue in the past
but we are now speaking with our
educational partners with one
voice we believe it is time to
look at and consider the
benefits of a constitutional
amendment to reinstate a state
wide or the education thank you
for allowing us to come it.
Thank you really may anyone else
in support.
Those in opposition if you like
to come and speak these come up
to the microphone.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee i'm I made out of
on the executive director of new
mexico kit skin.
As we know there are forty nine
states that ring above us in
education outcomes and they all
have different government
instructors some similar to ours
some different thin ours.
And I too and the mexico kids
can as a whole is extremely
frustrated by the lack of
academic outcomes that we've
seen but we were frustrated by
that twenty years ago when we
moved to the current system that
we have and so we really worry
that rather than do you
politicizing education this move
to a state elected school board
in participant elections while
result in greater politicization
of our school policies natwest
in fact we need look no further
than the school board elections
across our own counties and
states and school districts and
across the country to see that
politics are out of fever pitch
and education today and running
ten state wide.
Partisan elections is not going
to help that situation
instruction is our court problem
and we believe that our energy
and attention would be better
spent on improving instruction
our solutions why in the
classroom and aside from all of
that we really have a major
concern about the lack of deep
debate about changing government
structures that we've had over
the last year and would
recommend that this is something
that be studied.
I then buy the legislative
education setting committee over
the next year because this is a
hundred we have eight hundred
and forty nine schools
approximately in three hundred
thousand students that are going
to depend on its making prudent
actions and we believe that this
needs more time and attention to
discuss and debate thank you so
much.
Mister chairman my name is matt
paul w.
Because it can tear down s.
The.
Consider this.
Low incom.
Twelve thousand more kids.
This body spends over the days
overseeing charter schools with
this one focus.
They work politically.
I'm pretty sure they don't.
In fact they've told me that
because they're focused on the
issue of managing charters it
takes focus.
The schools are assessed on
student outcomes there are
there's their interventions when
needed and they are closed when
necessary.
If this resolution goes through
it will delute the purpose of
that body and and a group of
schools that can serve as a
model for us.
And there's real accountability
for results a lack of focus and
an introduct.
This ma'am amanda de bell
representing their public
education department i'm
currently serving as the deputy
secretary for teaching learning
and innovation we have several
points today that we would like
to reiterate but also highlights
in opposition of this bill for
one we do know that the state
moved away from this in two
thousand and three there's a
rationale and reason that we
moved to the public education
department to we are afraid that
this will slow down decision
making to a cycling degree
currently he d e c e c d
we are creating a a cradle to
career collaboration and how can
this
bell at sure that we will
continue to have that
collaboration current answer
also we were would like to work
how the lakelihood of ped
working and other cross agents
use including cyfd and work.
Would serve students.
Most of our innovative some of
our most innovative work comes
from our capacity to collaborate
across these dep.
What would this do as a
hypothetical question for the
work being done with a gd as
well as ecec.
Elected officials.
We have concerns as we have
heard from our previous two
speakers about the political
grants.
Create as we have seen across
the nation.
Education.
Fifteen seconds please beginning
in the committee of two thousand
into twenty six we do have a
concern that the long term
success of school achievement
and outcomes would be stifled by
this movement.
School board for you.
Anyone else in opposition please
make sure that you're standing
up there because I we saw three
we're ready to move on so please
go ahead.
Mister chairs sorry I was in the
back so
mister chairman was the
committee minimum superface I am
a registered lobbyist for
excellent schools new mexico we
take the set the stand to oppose
this a bill for the very same
reasons that matt passed it up
here and spoke to you thank you
very much
thank you
anyone I might
thank you questions from the
committee.
So bring
the us german and and this one
of those situations were I i'm
torn cause I can see both sides
of education is.
The.
We just haven't been able to
effects.
Isn't functioning so I see that
sign.
But i'm also concerned about
what could happen to the charter
schools not sure if it would but
i'm concerned about what good.
In here today.
Races.
The partisan.
Political issue so might be a
couple of ways we can deal with.
Really in favour but I thought
i'd bring it up i.
Have this.
Basically be the same.
I probably not support this
right now because I I think.
What do you think about.
Apparently.
Thank you mister chairman
senator.
III can understand the concerns
and charters but on the other
hand from the standpoint of what
charters.
Is kind of what i'm try.
Put.
But it would.
Let me point out a few things
these are six year terms they're
staggered terms.
The appointments can only be
removed for cause.
We did debate making a mon.
And so some of these thoughts
have gone in this is the product
of a lot of consensus.
But what we wanted.
With one body that.
If you look at the ten districts
that exist out there they're all
over the.
So this would not be domi.
And that's current districts
that's not new d.
To try to get people who were
interest.
Whenever they select a
superintendent we would hope
that somebody.
Some of the goals we need to do
to try to get education.
Taking swipes at charter school.
I understand.
When we're trying to look at
education as a broadbase not
trying.
Damage.
The eighty some districts.
And in some ways this would help
to.
Bring about some level of local.
Yeah.
Represent the interest within
the.
The.
I.
Thank you mister chair.
The app.
I'm fascinated by this topic and
certainly after.
They they highlighted to me that
probably the best educat.
Altogether and what makes that
doable is that there are no.
Priva.
Learning education in that
country their band.
And so everyone is very focused
on the really the.
Essentially almost perfection of
this from kindergarten all the
way through college and but
that's not going to happen here
so and i've I believe that
professionals like teachers
should emplacement should be
some of the highest paid and I
like in medicine primary care
the most valuable to society of
the lowest paid so things are
kind of messed up that way but
here's here's my point I am i'm
i'm i'm concerned that there
could be an impact.
My district is very strongly
supports them and
I my question is with this
board of education
be able to have a vote in
another among themselves to
define.
I'm i'm fairly certain of.
Still s.
With long terms.
Excuse me that does not work
then you can.
They come in and for whatever
reasons they're not able to
cont.
So the problem becomes.
Again the stability situation.
Even if.
Thank you senator in.
Is.
Superintendent appointed and the
stability of that and i've
watched the biologics s.
And so I am really supportive of
that concept of having
the the boy did that higher that
individually believe that.
Able to be brought to that as
just I have the concern that it
not be a platform in which
there's this pushed in paul and
targeon and potential danger to
the charter schools so I I am
going to support this
amendment and I think that the
the discussions about the
concern around what might happen
to charter schools is probably
best served down the floor.
Support and move this to the
floor and I applied to the the
concept of taking it after the
governor politicization
component.
More professional and hopefully
people will have to have some
type of qualification to run not
just depoliticize that in and
and i'm not an expertise I don't
know what it is that some sort
of qualification to to surround
the board and
mister chair and while this is a
little bit off topic I know that
there's some thought that see
why fd might go under some type
of state board as well that's a
whole another topic and issue
but I think these kinds of
issues really should be debated
and come.
A solution of taking this most
valuable asset and putting it
under some stable state board
has married and i'm willing to
take the risk and the charter
school component because of that
because.
Mister chair and thank you
sanitor for bringing the b.
There's some presumption charter
schools.
Let's understand that charter
schools are performing very well
across the state why would any
board.
The pointed members removed only
for because as much stabilities
you can do in some kind.
I don't see that there's like.
Thank you center my.
Thank you mister thank you
saying the built the.
Interesting stuff because I
think when this came up last
year's chairman it was just a
question of whether.
Up.
Having educ.
Charter schools cause I would
not do it want to do.
But this real quick just just.
Mister chairman we repealed
section six.
But we don't have section six
with us up in front of us.
Which is the weight which is the
great way for the bill drafters
to do it instead of.
Just cleaner to do that.
The.
The
but I don't like a whole lot of
words in the constitution
so mister chairman and page two.
Paragraph b.
That that's kind of a given it
says change of residence of a
board member to replace.
Automatically terminate the term
of that member that's I think
that.
So there's a lot of stuff in
this.
So assuming that the
the voters are proved this.
We would have to come back the
next year and do.
The.
Within our laws of an elected
official from parti.
And then.
And then also why fifteen.
Was their conversations about
seven or nine extensive maybe
six districts with three
appointment
there
my fifteen very extensive dis.
It went through.
But last year when we went to.
The.
Stability we.
And then mister german certain
abilities in the other elected
board that has.
I'm sorry is there another of
governmental.
Board that includes elected
members.
I could understand the
compromise.
Compromise but it just.
I would hate for the elected or
the.
One good thing about the
appointments as they
theoretically represent the sta.
The.
Have district members and then.
And then also.
Ledge council.
Has not pin down that the
definition of like general
election or.
The non partisan elections into
november there I think there's
only like four five cities that
still cling to this march
election model but we're almost
there in which every single.
This every single year the first
tuesday after the.
Even after the first monday in
november.
But this so but this would read
kind of weird so anyway mister
on page four it says you know
everything you know all the
constitutional amendments say
this the amendment proposed
shell be submitted to the people
at the next general election our
notion of a general election is
the isn't even numbered year.
But then on page three line
fourteen it says.
The elected members of the
school board shall be elected at
that twenty twenty six regular
election and so I think they're
all regular elections I think
they're all general elections
but I think the way we use it at
least council general elections
are an even number of years and
then read your elections right
odd number years so you might
want to just under that and then
I think I think these elections
should be.
In odd number of years.
As much of the partisan politics
or them the whims not so much
baltics mister with just the
whims of education policy every
five ten years you know.
But I think up they should be an
odd number years.
And then lastly missed your many
six so right now there's five
districts correct as internal
bill
district there's ten.
Okay so okay great so that that
that really be it's one of my
concerns with the ten districts.
Since these folks have already
since the current board members
have already won in that
political universe sort of
speak.
Nothing would proclude from
running and be.
The final consensus was.
I don't think they're.
The.
I think the timing was the issue
try to get this.
Infringing on the c.
The.
I wouldn't have any objection.
Yeah.
I think that's why is to push
this new board to january first
twenty twenty seven.
But there nothing would
preclude.
Up.
It would be like these folks
november of twenty six to take.
Then then in terms of regular or
or general.
And page three line line eight
it uses the term next regular
election.
Um.
So just to have ledge council
take a look at that because.
This regular nection mean the
very next one.
Or the very next election in.
On page four line three.
For this year.
Thank you senator
thirty eight
thank you mister center
to start up.
When we were at that point we
didn't have that okay
so.
The.
Schools.
So.
But I have a lot of question.
Center of your approach.
What about that.
The amendments that they propo.
The.
That.
That's the b.
Advisory.
Enabling education.
Separate from the constituti.
Another team.
I guess my.
This version.
That it could become more
political and.
The place.
The.
In a passion.
This is the location we fix it
if there.
Yeah.
So what you're doing here.
In the bathing.
Yeah.
Repercussions are.
Yeah.
The.
They brought me.
In addition to.
The.
What who do we.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Confusing the the ballot so.
The focus on what we want to do
is.
I just don't.
The reality is alright doesn't
it happens
here there
but mostly.
The.
A friend of mine.
Expecially w.
Replicating.
I soon.
It sort of like what you d.
Yeah.
I I guess I don't agree that.
Um.
This group is going to
automatically dislike charter
schools.
Would want to promote.
The benef.
Doesn't make much.
And with this.
I think you and I am one of the
sponsors so i'll ask a couple of
questions but also some of the
comments about it is there
anything in this build the
prevents pro charter people from
running for the seats on the
public education.
Like I said be earlier mister
chairs we could have the same
current es.
That we've currently the same
cool we're going to have the
same district the same pool of
odor.
Not any different it's the same
society built there's nothing
that indicates that I mean there
was a little bit of concern that
it may be run by the n a
any reason that you know anybody
is able to run regardless of of
how they feel about education
one of the arguments.
Circle of wagons.
They care i've been in education
for a long while other than
stand may be more than anyone
else in the room.
When we first changed back back
in two thousand and three I was
a school principle at the time
and I advised people don't do
this.
Don't change
and for the very reasons that we
are now trying to change back is
the inconsistency and just about
every superintendent will tell
you that their best schools are
the ones that have a consistent
principle for a long period of
time that consistency in
education and education policy
allows incremental changes that
lead towards good education and
when you have constant switching
back and forth of philosophy of
leadership of all of those types
of things leads to lower
education outcomes.
Is it absolutely one to one know
there's some correlation in
there and other things but
consistency center hickey
indicated in finland it's been
consistent policy that has made
the change in mississippi people
talk about the mississippi
miracle it was no miracle it was
consistent policy over ten to
twelve years that went to the
increases certainly our high
quality charter schools which
are public schools literally
december of our good outcomes
and I would find it incredibly
inconsistent that a new board
would come in and try and then
win good schools in education
that's going on
I think what this does is it
tends to depoliticize it many of
the concerns I hear people
bringing up our some of the
issues are things that will go
into the enabling language.
On how do you actually structure
some of the pieces in some of
the other.
Again it's it certainly is not
cousin affect but that when we
first went to a secretary of
education new mexico was not
last week tended to be about
thirty nine forty i'm not good
but certainly weren't last and
the number has done down in
those intervening years i'm not
saying that's possible to affect
their multitude of other things
from under investment in in nab
poverty programs in the state
and other kinds of things.
But certainly education programs
and systems were functioning
reasonably well back when we had
estate school board and a state
superintendent of schools hired
by them who were professionals
working for the better of
education and senator I think
you you said it very well in
that of most things in the state
education tends to be less
political and say it's not
political less political than
others because though we
disagree sometimes on the
mechanisms the republicans and
the democrats can do agree that
we want good education for our
children and I think this is
something that moves towards the
stability that's needed across
programs in order to to provide
opportunities to move towards
high quality education in the
state in new mexico where the
investments we've been making.
The other final comment
nothing specifi.
But nothing specific accepted I
just don't see that.
Would want to und.
Some of our best numbers come
out of our charter schools and I
cannot imagine in the my wildest
dream that it scooped.
Thank you
please.
There must just briefly
mischairman a bill of thank you.
If I may on page three line
fourteen.
Strike.
The word.
Is the other sponsor I don't
have a problem with it was that
either so.
On that amendment did everybody
catch that just to make it clear
which of the elections and the
that the language is consistent
across the.
Which were beats to be thank you
mister chairman thank you ville
on page three line fourteen.
After twenty twenty six strike
the word regular.
And insert in lewer of the word
gen.
Said that they are always on the
the even numbered elections.
The.
So i'm lying eight of the same
part i'll make them in the same
motion thank you mister also and
page three line eight.
After the word next.
A strike the word regular.
And insert and lew there of
general insuring that it that it
will they will be uneven.
There you work in on a
retirement plan to work for
council service
cross my mind
you have that marion that makes
sense they're the opposition to
to that amendment.
If not we have a motion on the
bill please.
Motion for a do apparently
second second by senator pope if
you will call the role please.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay I have called if there was
the opposition to the am.
And there wasn't any sony
adopted I should have members
stopped.
I thought that was.
Okay
let let let's rewind a little
bit if we can let start over is
there any opposition to the
amendment through the bill to
pick those changes to the
general election as opposed to
regular election.
Seeing no opposition we have an
amended bill
now the vote on the regular on
the bill as amended.
The.
Yes.
Yes
yes.
Thank you
do pass as amended thank you
everyone senate education will
meet again at eight thirty on
monday or first presentation
will be from their education
commission of the states
gabriello will be the here in
person but also a zoom
presentation about education
issues night nationwide is kind
of just updated education for
the education committee thank
you all for your participation
today and with that we stand in
a journal.
