Yes the one sixty nine.
very well Mr chairman thank you
and good morning to the
committee members so.
so the recall on Monday the the
we started listening I mean up I
started present in the bill and
then we went over you know the.
Representative you know the
basics of what the bill does not
only to do a review of that
local to my expert witness but
the point where we're ready for
questions from the committee.
Yes thank you and we already had
public comment on one sixty nine
we're not going to go on to
additional public comment and so
we are at the point of questions
from the committee and so let me
pull up so I can watch for hands
going up but is there anybody
who has.
Questions first Senator Roberto
Bobby Gonzales.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you Senator Gonzales as
sent I'm just a little bit with
my.
independent college back home
and and he certainly is
supportive of this and so I
think this is a really good way
to learn is out for work with
kind of making sure that all of
the universities and an
independent colleges and
community colleges are working
toward the same goals and and
provides for long term planning
is that pretty much the purpose
of this bill.
Mr Chairman Senator Kernan
that's exactly what it does is
just bring state fission see
between a two year four year
they depend of and our main a
research institutions to and the
the big winners here role Mr
chairman and members this is
students so anytime you have
students and you have all the
right articulation between the.
You know higher education the
it's to their benefit to our
one.
Well thank you thank you Mr
chairman and senator Gonzales
and your we recognize that on a
local level and as you is this
committee knows we did pass the
two plus two pilot moving that
forward we're going to begin
regionally as well did that many
I actually benefit the work of
the.
The work of this coordinating
council so we're looking forward
to seeing how we can do that
regionally and then working
beyond the reach and to make
sure that students can
transferred that data many of
the things that are hampering
our kiddos will be taking care
of and I think that one goal is
to make sure that students can
complete and also we want to
keep in the New Mexico so thank
you anything that we can do to
collaborate to achieve that
certainly is to the benefit of
the state's that's all I have
thank you Mr.
Thank you any other questions
from the committee if not I I
have just a couple Senator two
years ago we had this there was
strong opposition from the
higher end department and some
of the universities what has
changed between now and then.
Mr chairman members so I have my
thoughts on that but let me
refer to one of our expert
witness so Micaela Fischer from
the LFC.
Thank you
chair actually I think mark
Valenzuela is on as well I was
gonna pinch hit for him but
where do you want to chime in or
should I go ahead go ahead go
ahead and get.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think you look
fishermen LFC program evaluator.
What's changed at the last two
years is that we continue to
have decreasing enrollment in
our higher ed system mainly you
know it's got less students in a
system that's the same size to
serve them so problems that you
know my office started bringing
up three four years ago about
you know the need to find
efficiencies in our higher ed
system are are just continuing
to be exacerbated you know the
COVID nineteen pandemic it'll be
interesting to see how that
plays out you know in the last
recession we saw
a larger return back to
especially a community colleges
we're not necessarily and now
and so we're hoping that this
coordinating council can help
steer our colleges to provide
those efficiencies that continue
to you know operate equipment
financially responsible manner
but also in a way that serves
the students better
that gets them to degrees that
gets them to get jobs.
Thank you.
Thank you I talked with New
Mexico State University and they
had some opposition some
concerns two years ago and now
they're like nope we're all good
with this and higher in who had
some serious concerns two years
ago the like no no things are
lots better we're we're all on
board now and so that's nice to
know that two years time and
we've got it all worked out
everybody are happy campers.
The other questions from
committee members.
I'd entertain a motion.
We also under current seconded
by Senator Neville if you'll
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
I don't know that Senator
Hickey.
He says he's here.
let me let me move on a little
bit okay well for passing
compact okay Senator Kernan.
Yeah Senator Hickey said yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senate Bill yes Senator Padilla.
Net loss Senator again he may be
headed to his office so
Passed by him for a minute
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Pope.
And I saw Senator Brandt come on
madam secretary of center Brandt
about yes thank you Sir.
And.
Senator Padilla are you back.
Okay I'm going to show him
excuse on this particular one
Senator souls yes.
Yes thank you for coming back
you have a do pastor.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee.
The next of for the public we
just had a do pass on Senate
bill one sixty nine we are now
on Senate bill two oh six with
Senator home after school
program funding and following
that will be F. B. two ten
ethnic studies education with
Lopez.
Senator Tallman are you with the
server.
Yes yes.
If you would please present SB
two oh six after school program
funding.
Good morning Mr chairman that
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr chair for
scheduling this bill in a timely
fashion.
This bill appropriates two
million dollars which would
enable us to send to some expert
witnesses for million you're on
you're not muted.
Which is
go ahead with it would probably
two million dollars to enable
more parents to and enroll their
children and after school
programs that are in high demand
and that demand has only
increased due to the pandemic
these programs are a lifeline
for many since they provide not
only childcare for working
parents but more importantly
they provide many.
Budget.
After school programs.
Help children thrive and feel
connected to school which often
leads to improved attendance and
academic gains.
Okay after school programs
provide meals and mentors
increase self confidence teach
leadership skills workforce
skills and make sure children
and youth have access to daily
physical activity after school
programs keep children safe
unsupervised during the hours of
peak juvenile crime.
As a matter of fact the US
department of justice research
indicates that most violent
crimes are committed.
I'm juveniles at during after
school hours.
School programs give working
parents piece of mind that they
don't have to worry about where
their children are or what
they're doing after school.
A national organization called
America after three PM this
founded in New Mexico for every
child in an after school program
three are within our.
Waiting to get in the number of
students left without after
school in New Mexico is on the
rise.
Is estimated at a hundred twenty
four thousand children in New
Mexico who would be enrolled in
after school programs are are
are not available to them it
costs about eleven hundred hours
per year per student.
For after school and summer
programs it would cost a hundred
and thirty four million dollars
to provide after school and
summer programs for the hundred
twenty four thousand children
waiting for an after school
opportunity.
Part two million dollars with
the.
Underwrite the cost of
approximately two thousand
children.
And or it could also which would
we mean that we could of start
up thirty to forty sites around
the state.
just decide.
I can bore you with the last to
six CEST at two or three eight
ninety seven percent of the
parents surveyed felt that the
after school programs I created
a safe environment for their
children eighty nine percent
believe the staff was
knowledgeable and caring.
Just a little over half or fifty
four percent of children
efforts.
programs are from low income
households spend eighty three
percent your all the little
boxes.
Eighty three percent of after
school programs are located in
public school.
US public schools at the
summarized Mr chair.
There is a critical need.
For after school programs that
only increased to this pandemic
after school programs can offer
and provide many benefits which
we've already enumerated.
And one final thought Mr chair.
Talk to settle teachers who told
me that for me.
Many kids.
It is your favorite part of the
day not because of the snacks or
play time because they get to
delve into areas of study that
they're not able to do during
the regular school hours.
So thank you Mr chair members
the committee for the your time
and consideration of this
program which offers many
worthwhile benefits and I have
with me today Mr chair.
And my expert witness who is
that may said back in.
So.
If you could letter and and
speak that would be helpful.
May are you with us in the
enable the.
Expert testimony yes I am can
you hear me yes ma'am.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is my
son but can I run that statewide
network for after school and
summer learning The New Mexico
out of school time network and
we work statewide to make sure
that all children in New Mexico
regardless of zip code and
income has access to quality
afterschool and summer learning.
Hold out of school time because
children spend eighty percent on
school so that time is really
precious and as you know during
the pandemic that time has just
increased and if you listen
closely to Senator Tallman who
is a strong champion for an
increase in opportunities for
children the access is not
equitable in New Mexico at the
time we have a hundred and
twenty four thousand you central
and waiting one out of and or
three out of four are waiting
for an opportunity for access
and that is an increase of ten
thousand the state's a decade
ago and the only funded federal
program we have for after school
is the twenty first century
community learning centers and
one of every two applications
are not funded and that cycle
comes around and mapping has
shown that all funding currently
for after school both in the we
are when corridor so the rural
parts our state and tribal
communities are very often left
out of the funding stream and
currently the state of New
Mexico has no allocation for
after school funding at all and
I know some people think that
extended learning is an after
school program and that has
substantial funding millions of
dollars currently with a
requirement for schools to
implement after school however
there's no line item in the
budget formula for the schools
to do that so this bill Senate
bill two oh six will help
schools.
Amending that mandate issue and
the extended learning program
now as you also heard.
Two million is a short and very
small important step towards the
goal of a hundred and thirty
four million dollars needed to
fully funded after school system
in the state and we strongly
believe that a fully funded
after school system will reduce
truancy drop out and crime rates
and increased graduation in in
our states is also really
critical for reducing that she
meant gap by eighth grade to use
in our state has six thousand
fewer hours of enrichment and
extracurricular activities if
you come from a low income
family so if you really care
about the achievement gap please
consider supporting this bill
because we want to change that
it's also really critical right
now because of the pandemic the
pandemic and the recovery the
parents as you know are
desperately looking for
childcare solutions if they are
essential workers today and when
we start you know moving into
the recovery phase parents will
be desperately looking for
quality after school programs as
many have had to close down
during the pandemic so this
support is important for the
economy not only for our
children's well being but for
the economy and for parents to
be able to go back to work and
feel that their children have a
safe place to be.
Finally I want to talk about
public safety as senator Coleman
mentioned that crime rates in
the country as a whole is proven
you know to happen for juveniles
between three and six PM
unfortunately in New Mexico we
don't have that data with the
only one of one of five states
they're not tracking the timing
regional crime so that's
something that we the like to
see in the future but nationally
that number is.
It also shown the current data
that since two thousand five the
increase in after school has
gone up seventy percent and you
know the crime has gone down
sixty percent so there is a
strong correlation between June
on crime prevention.
And after school.
Finally hunger in New Mexico as
you know unfortunately we have
more than a hundred and seventy
thousand children going home
hungry every day on a normal day
and that has increased
dramatically during the pandemic
and after school plays a
critical role serving that third
meal in our state some so that
children do not have to go
hungry from lunch to next
breakfast in school.
So those few points that I want
to share with you there is a
strong bipartisan support for
after school and from the
learning.
Transportation and the
availability and costs remain
the main obstacles pool for
parents so to fully support and
make sure this is happening in
our state we thank you for your
consideration for these two
million dollar bail we wish it
was more of that this is that
gigantic first step to make sure
that the state of New Mexico has
a separate cleanly allocated
funding for after school and
summer learning thank you.
Better call then back to you
Sir.
I don't have any other expert
witnesses so you stand of for a
stand for questions thank you.
Thank you mark you can leave
this through the public
testimony.
She speak in opposition.
No all right moving on we will
hear from many say oh no we just
heard from you may who here from
Colby Wilson.
Mr Wilson.
Good morning can you all hear me
okay yes we can excellent thank
you mark Keller good morning my
name's Kobe Wilson on the CEO
chief encouragement officer for
the boys and girls clubs of
central New Mexico.
She at the time here today and
just want to speak in favor of
this bill and thank may for
inviting me to do so.
I want to focus on it on a gap
that exists in after school
programming that is more
specific than we've talked about
so far and that is middle school
after school programs here in
our service area in central New
Mexico which is Rio Rancho and
Albuquerque virtually all of the
one hundred and twenty plus
elementary schools have an after
school program on site and
that's fantastic.
In contrast and here's where the
where the problem is none of the
thirty plus middle schools have
a similar program a daily after
school program a city run
program boys and girls club YMCA
none of those middle schools
have a program on site.
And this is a you know maybe
kinda highlighted some of the.
Our area is why this is really
important but just some some
examples of why this gap exists
first these programs cost money.
And most parents while they want
these programs for their middle
schoolers if they are faced with
the choice of paying for them
verses them being able to go
home by themselves for a few
hours.
Parents are going to make that
choice okay thirty seconds thank
you also I just wanted to add
that middle school is a tough
tough to get them to choose
programs requires of excellent
staff trained professionals and
also want to add that the boys
and girls club is ready to step
into this gap we have a program
partnerships in place with APS
and there was a study done in
two thousand fifteen that for
every dollar invested in boys
and girls clubs in New Mexico
ten.
Then we will be moving on to
Alicia Dolly Alicia.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa deal and I'm an attorney
with that New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty and a member of
the legal team for the us weekly
test me acting Martinez lawsuit
are we support this bill for all
the reasons we've heard today I
would just add that programs
like after school are also part
of a sufficient education for
students when they are
culturally and linguistically
relevant message heard the need
is very great so we for the
reasons we support this
legislation and we urge the
committee to to pass thank you.
Thank you Lisa we will now hear
from Willie Mae Ortiz Mr teas.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman can hear me yes we can
I am millimeter tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
I'm representing the school
board association also speaking
on behalf of stand around the
superintendents association who
has to be in another committee
of the school board association
the superintendents association
both support this bill we
support any local decision
making flexibility in
implementing and the ability to
implement extended learning in
our schools we appreciate the
sponsor that brought forth the
bill we appreciate the
appropriation because with that
will extend learning and
instruction for students and we
we so are thankful for after
school programs I will say this
I know my children both attended
after school programs and
their successful individuals the
as an engineer and administrator
and thank you for allowing us to
speak on behalf this bill and we
asked the committee to move it
forward and give it favorable
consideration thank you.
Thank you Mr teams we will now
hear from family what I'll go
ahead and leave.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee at thank you for
having me today thank you
senator Clemente for bringing
forth the stealth and Emily will
die representing New Mexico
voices for children we stand in
support of SB two of six because
providing afterschool and summer
programming for students has
been shown to increase academic
performance.
The state environment after
school and support and support
working parents and we believe
this investment in our kids will
pay off and we ask the committee
to support.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of the bill.
Okay that concludes public
statement present.
I.
Mr saying any X. yep.
Yes please go ahead.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the board my name is Steve
Shani's government relations
director with taking New Mexico.
I may have more members we stand
support of SB two oh six.
Are two twenty twenty one and
the NM Legislative goals strive
to provide a sufficient and
equitable education for all
students and we believe the way
we treat this goal is to ensure
student equity and opportunity
for all students including after
school and summer regional
programs we do have concerns
around health issues related to
COVID and urge our state to make
sure we vaccinate all.
Involved in any in person
learning program we think the
sponsor for bring forth this
bill will be considered
favorable folks taking into
consideration the health of all
thank you.
Thank you now we will hear from
Mr trump Campbell Mister
Campbell.
Good morning Mr chair and I will
also expressed support for the
Senate bill but I do have a
Kattegat M. as again of the
member of a the school community
in terms of school leaders after
school programming is very
important there's a lot of
research around like what do
it's our witness stand the
positive effects of after school
activities for students doing
something productive any after
school hours versus you know
other things they could be doing
however if the objective is
truly to close the achievement
gap then it shouldn't matter
what time of day the activity or
the academic program is offered
so I'll also stated according to
the expert witness this is
really called out of school time
and so out of school can be
before school members date or
after and therefore suggests
that are referred as a school
leader that the after school
part of the bill be changed to
out of school and that would
open the opportunity for us to
offer opportunities for activity
our our programming for students
either before during or after
their significant number of
students and the state that
cannot stay in school after
school due to graduate school
bus answer but time or having to
work or things like that and
therefore if you give us the
opportunity to be innovative
whatever programming and offered
things during the day or before
school as long as it's not in
regular school time then out of
school as a more appropriate
way of stating what can be done
for our students are to close
the achievement gap so that's
the only copy at I really have
obviously after school time is
is that important and those
programs are important but they
are more innovative ways to do
it so that we can include more
students offering a program is
very different this students
attending the program okay thank
you
so attendance is a big issue
with after school programs and
that is staff a lot of our
students particularly lower.
Income students who can't stay
after school for various
reasons.
Ten thank you Mr.
The.
And are there any other members
of the public who wish to speak.
If you could raise your hands
using the reaction button there
at the bottom.
Okay that includes all of our
public statements reasonable to
a six thank you thank you my
caliber handling that very ably
Center common we're back you any
comments before we go to
questions from the committee.
Mr chair thank you know but
thanks for asking.
You're very welcome Sir we're
now going to go to questions
from the committee and first I
have Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Clemente and we all know
that after school programs
certainly do help our our
students and I was I was noting
and in one of the FIR said are
receipt that basically funding
has been.
Operated through M. House Bill
to previously.
Not at that level I think in FY
twenty the PED are recommended
one million but I think we've
only I think only three hundred
twenty five thousand state
appropriation so there is a line
item in house bill two from
previous years to to cover the
cost of that after school
programming so that's a good
thing that's a good starting
point it sounds like you're
trying to to increase at about
to do that across the state so
I'm assuming and did this money
would be considered the level
the line funding is that the
correct it would be part of
money that districts or
organizations charter schools
would have to go through at the
application process to obtain
some funds is that correct.
Senator right current that is
correct.
Okay and so Mr chairman and
senator Tom and it doesn't say
in the FIR that it comes from
the reform Fund which I would
would probably not be able to
support because I think those
dollars should be dedicated to
extended learning time in K.
five plus but it is simply below
the line we've down below the
line setting.
For many years and some people
like it some people don't and I
guess it just depends on what
it's for but this is certainly
an appropriate purpose I think
for below the below the line
funding it's not every district
probably would have been
interest in in doing that so I'm
I think that I don't know if
there's anything in the budget
currently being proposed both
from the executive order of from
the PED are the legislative
budget for this but it's
certainly an appropriate request
and I will let Senate finance
figure out if it fits into their
plan to present to us so want to
thank you for bringing it I
support after school programs
and and I think they serve their
purpose thank you.
They think about.
Next I have Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair senator Tom
in you know I I I support this
bill as well as a person who
benefited from after school
programs myself.
Keeping me out of trouble
getting some additional
education and and sometimes
getting like was stated before
getting that third middle of the
day so I really appreciate this
the question I have from the
analysis other requests ends on
basically how this money would
be distributed you know what to
go to school districts charter
schools with this be used by
community based organizations
practice will programs as well
wonder if you can kind of help
me answer that question.
Thank you senator hope for that.
That.
Question I I really
I really don't have an answer
for.
I I system helpful Sierra yeah
go ahead may yes based on the
previous line item
like Senator Kernan was was
mentioning the after school
summer enrichment program is
there's an application process
for school districts and they
have a scoring sheet and they
can partner with the CBO in that
process so that this is an
application that goes to school
districts but they can partner
with local organizations to
implement the program.
The previous month.
Okay Mr chair senator tall man
with charter schools and would
community based programs be able
to apply as well.
Based on the previous models we
have charter schools apply as
well.
Well thank you thank you for
that thank you for the response
thank you Mr chair Senators home
and that's all I have thank you.
Thank you senator pope next at
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Tom and I. eight am very
grateful that we're rebuilding
this particular item that is
just Paul has fallen by the
wayside for about a decade now
your passion for work for
lifting up our children center
Thomas is always evident and I
and I really love that about you
Mr chairman and senator so we
seem to have a decline in
funding in this area for like I
said probably eight to ten maybe
even twelve years where where is
how does this compare to where
things were previously are we
are we going to be able to
fulfill the need with the
appropriation of Trask import
your or or as a sort of building
on.
On what we did previously what
where does this put us exactly
I'm still trying get my hands
around that I and I and I and by
the way I never could I can ever
imagine Senator pope not being
totally one hundred percent
focused any at any point in his
life so if this looked at him up
I had chair lifted me up you
know out of poverty the extreme
poverty myself but
where does this put us where
does that what does this do for
us in terms of where we were
before because it was very
successful before.
Do I give you a partial answer
as I stated earlier.
Hundred twenty four thousand
children would like to take
advantage of this opportunity
and this two million dollars
will only provide funding for
roughly two.
Roughly two thousand children
all.
So I as far as.
History of the program I have to
defer to may my expert witness
thank you thank you Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Sierra land Senator
Padilla
yes so I've been in this
position before years and when I
started the appropriation was
three hundred forty five
thousand on that supported ten
programs and in the past that
funding has been in one point
two million up to three million
and he went down during the
economic crunch and then it was
phased out during the.
so we lost the funding for after
school for that you're in the
extended learning expansion I K.
five plus and as we mentioned
earlier to extended learning
package has a mandate for after
school but there's no line item
in that law or budgets for after
school to be funded so this will
help restore the previous model
and also support extended
learning program but it's a very
small steps to meet the full
need in the state.
What.
Mr chairman and and senator and
and may I I wanted to hear kind
of what this would do and it is
a step forward and I think we we
should not pretend like these
problem this issue doesn't exist
and we should rebuild it and I
appreciate senator Tom and the
trying to get this done so what
does that mean in terms of what
the the the unmet need is how
much money are we looking at to
fully because you know we've had
poverty in the state we've had
achievement gap issues in the
state for so long that sometimes
we don't even see them anymore
because they've been there for
so long and generationally what
what what and and maybe said
this because I have a little
clunky be able to get into the
on to the network in my office
the roundhouse what is the real
need financially.
Senator Padilla
I it's my understanding would
cost a hundred thirty four
million dollars to fund the.
All the children who wish to
take advantage of this program.
I appreciate that and so I think
this is just a you know good
right step in the right
direction and then once we see
it working again and and doing a
good job we can we can try to
augment the.
And then maybe we can apply to
the COVID family foundation for
the other hundred thirty two
million thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you I did sing Center
Brandt was on there but is hand
I think is down Senator Brandt
did you have a question or you
you satisfied or go on.
I don't see it so I will go to
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
How is this bill going to be
implemented
well let me say that Senate bill
forty was X. us force extended
learning time and the.
You I'll is against it saying
the teachers are exhausted so I
hardly see how that when we're
gonna we have to do something.
in that sense of the gatt that
is exists with the pandemic on
top of the other gap that
existed before the pandemic and
there is federal funding that is
available but in that in my
district the problem is
transportation two million
dollars isn't going to cover up
a little part of it there are
already programs in place to
for after school but as far as
attraction in being effective
during that time especially at
the mid school level is
You know I can see this.
For the urban area yes but they
don't have the problems we have
my district both of my school
districts are in the red
severely so I'm.
I do understand that we should
be doing something but I don't I
don't feel like this is really
going to support the area are be
effective enough in in my area I
don't know if you can speak to
SB forty of how I think doubled
complete thing because of the
extend the school day and try to
have after school what time are
kids going to be going to be
leaving by the end of the day.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Sir and so
for the.
This two excellent questions if
you raised regarding
transportation and availability
of a teachers
I really don't.
Like to.
Defer to a made for a more
comprehensive answer more you
available yes I will Senator
Tallman as senator Shannon.
Remember from the two screening
processes that I was part of the
the previous funding model there
were several tribal educations
and their budget was full and
fully a hundred percent spent on
transportation so your point is
very well taken and this
This process or this program
allows for the school district
to have a program in place and
spend the entire budget on
transportation so in that way
it's flexible and allows for
support for school districts
and transportation I think
across the board even within the
rural areas are one of the main
barriers for accessing and I
think one of the public comments
from Campbell emphasized you
know the flexibility needed in
schools and that's why we
usually use out of school time
term so that you can have a
program before school or even
during lunch hours or after
school so that you can be
flexible with the needs of the
population and I think this if
PED true says to to use the
previous design and application
you will allow for that to
happen this funding.
Mr chair thank you.
Thank you of Senator Brandt I
see your hand is back on back up
so if you would like to please
ask your questions thank you Mr
chairman person in its
Mr chairman sponsor
Just a couple of things so first
of all
Thank you Mr Wilson who is with
the boys and girls club
That program was that funded.
Because my is thank you for the
question center my understanding
is.
Wanted me to take that risk.
Okay go ahead Mr Wilson.
Mister Wilson you are still on
mute.
Hello there we go sorry sorry.
Yes Senator Brandt the club is
funded by various of local state
government grants as well as
private fundraising from
corporations foundations
individuals but the expansion
into middle school after school
programs really need some
government subsidy on annual
basis for us to sustain it.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Wilson you're my wife
actually was was a girls club
director in Shawnee Oklahoma.
While I was in college section
one of the ways we.
We pay for to support our family
why I went to school
and so I'm I'm fairly familiar
with the boys girls club not not
completely a great program but
it's it's you know it gets
grants and things like that but
it's really.
It wasn't done in the schools
are now the one Rio Rancho is
not done it at the school
facility brand to another
facility I think it's on sont
les to change that
and the.
You transform their and then the
parents pick them up after the
programs over is that the way
that works for.
Yes that's correct but again our
vision is to expand into the
middle schools and have programs
on site there to alleviate some
of that transportation issue.
Thank you I appreciate that so
Mr
Chairman Senator Tallman you
know
The after school programs are
kind of one of the areas that
the community could potentially
fund thank.
And one of the things that if
the city wanted to put money
into they could put money into
right now the state pays for
everything that comes to
education is in the something
the local communities to help
pay for.
Well Senator a thank you for
thank you for the question yeah
I I guess they they could but.
It education is not the primary
mission of the City of
Albuquerque so I think it think
it falls upon the the state
to fund the program thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
appreciate how after school
programs can help with education
but the state's role is during
school hours to provide
education and to pay for that
this is one of those areas that
the local community could help
fund since they've been really
written out of funding education
in our state all the funding
comes from Santa Fe.
and so it is an area of your one
of the the FIR talked about one
of the great benefits of having
an after school program is that
most of the crimes committed by
children which is a horrible
thing to even say crimes
committed by children.
It happened in the LFC right
after school hours.
To me that seems like it would
be a compelling reason for
communities to help fund these
programs
that Mr the state to help fund
these programs it's just I've
been trying to get some
alternate sources because as
we've talked about many times up
your answer clinic has been
ringing that bell many times up
here
yeah we're we're trying to kill
the industry that funds
everything in our state and so
how you gonna pay for these
things going forward to talk
about a I think was a hundred
thirty million dollars need.
the local communities are gonna
have to step up and help fund
these things if they're gonna be
funded because the state is not
going to have money to even pay
pay state employees of circle
and if you get your way.
because there will be an oil and
gas industry and everything will
be electric and that'll all be
powered by wind and solar so it
is a it is a serious concern to
figure out how we continue to
add things to the state budget
and pay for more more and save
state is responsible for this
and say strong support for that
but yet our greatest source of
revenue we're trying to kill and
so
stepped down from my soapbox
Center sure
Goldman and Mr chairman let you
up for that thank you.
Thank you the.
Thank you senator brands that.
Use that a question just a
COVID.
As it was more of a COVID ideal
for that to the chair thank you
well I'll say he's Senator
Brandt is that yes sure well out
of things could happen.
it it would be nice if other.
An organization stepped up with
funding but we have an
opportunity here to fund the
excellent program and I think of
since we have no no else is
stepping up to fund this I think
it's should be the
responsibility of the state to
fund it thank you thank you
senator and thank you Mr chair.
Thank you I don't see other
hands I have a couple of
questions
this this is going to reside
within the public at department
is anyone for public education
on with us mark hello.
Do believe that we do you if
there's anyone I haven't noticed
would you like to speak at this
time public education officials
representatives.
I know they often are are in the
room with us for things.
It says this is going to reside
with the public education
department.
What is the application process
what if there are more than the
Senate vote somewhere between
thirty to forty programs who
makes that determination who
gets funded who gets
prioritized what is the
application is it going to be
the boys and girls clubs applies
to the public at the department
and yeah we is there an RFP
process please if you could
Center Coleman if you'd walk me
through how these monies
actually go back out the door.
Thank you for the I.
Your question
Mr chair I really don't to.
Have a a detailed answer for you
that may can you help out with
an answer to to Senator cells
question.
Yes Sierra and
Souls and I have to and I see
Johnson I is now with us from
PED and and I can give you a
brief answered as based on my
previous experience with that
screening committee and then
number two million actually was
based on those two years because
we had forty five applications
at PED received and was only
able to fund ten so this number
is based on you know previous
experience with received
applications from the school
districts and what I learned
during that process is that they
have you know criteria for
building will and Ariel low
income and number of children
receiving free and reduced lunch
and then they have various
categories for them you know
physical activity that the the
program is to have and then
there's the scoring based on
numerous categories within that
application and this the they
have a pretty vigorous scoring
Committee and then that PED
makes a determination as to who
gets the funding and what's
exciting about the two million
even though it's not close to
the hundred thirty four million
is that it's based on a previous
interest expressed from school
districts.
Okay thank you I understand John
Santa might the on with this
John are you there and can tell
us what the process would be
through the public at Amanda and
how you would actually
administer a two million dollars
for after school programs.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee sorry it's running
over from House said
so you know I would agree that
maybe it's probably pretty
pretty correct in describing
that process with these types of
drugs generally will will issue
a request for application and
then prioritize those.
Those awards based on the
criteria that that may
described.
So Mr said are there are already
criteria as they're already a
panel that looks at at requests
of this sort in order to get the
money out we've got boys and
girls club here who wants to get
some of the money up is there a
requirement for a local match
out of the local school district
W. what are more the details are
processes to go through to
ensure that these are high
quality programs with trained
staff that are.
Yeah Mr chair thank you for the
question so I think what may was
describing was a previous
iteration of after school
funding and how we how we
administer those funds
Each time we get a separate
appropriation obviously we have
to take a look at it and figure
out what it is that we like to
do and how we would that those
programs I would imagine it's
very similar to the way that
that made this described but
there's because we have not
received this this type of
explicit funding in the last
couple of years but we have to
revisit our our application
along with the criteria so I
don't I can't say that there's
something in place currently we
would use for the specific
appropriation if we received it
but I would imagine to be
similar to the way we
appropriated are allocated these
funds in the past.
Thank you one of the analysis
that we got indicated that this
would probably require an FTP
through the public education
department would that be an
appropriate use part of the two
million dollars two or Peddie
use that for part of their FTE
or R. applications like this
totally have to go out the door
to
the groups that are doing this
in the past come up with the
FTEs separately and I think I'm
still asking questions about
about Mr center with the path.
Thank you Mr chair so I I can I
can say that the you know we do
have a limited capacity to
administer these types of funds
us especially when they're when
they're coming from from surf
external fixed terminal
quests we do have staff who work
with these kinds of programs on
a regular basis but this would
be additional duties for those
folks
And I think we're losing.
Please try to do our best to get
funds out trust passing.
Okay
Mr dominate their senator
Clemente I apologize Senator
Tallman anything else before we
go there of the but the
committee pleasure what might
be.
Mr chair and all no further a
questions or comments thank you.
Okay I'm I I just.
This back to one of those things
I wish we fully funded
everything that we needed for
our public schools and our kids
rather than have to do it
piecemeal where only some of
them are going to have the
opportunities because we don't
put enough total body into the
SCG where every district could
do this I also have some of the
the same feelings that Senator
Brandt does that there should be
some local by in in some local
match that depending on the
ability for the community to do
so
because these really are
community types of programs and
they're very much the kinds of
things that you get at a
community school and that whole
model of community school and so
if we is better than no deal but
it still doesn't provide for the
the feeding of all of our
children so the committee
please.
Mr Chairman over the past we
have a motion for to pass a set
up of the up and I second.
And seconded by Senator pope
Merion if you will call the roll
please Senator Brandt no Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Yes okay there are yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator.
Excuse me senator Neville.
Yes.
Yes Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator souls.
Yes.
We have a deep yes that are you
have a do pastor thank you for
coming thank you.
The Senate education I and
moving on I just got a message
from Senator Lopez who would be
our next presenter she just got
to the office it isn't quite
ready so we will move on if
senator bill Nelson is available
for Senate bill twenty five of
our getting in going Senate
education has got to do pass on
Senate bill one sixty nine are
creating a higher ed
coordinating council Senate Bill
well six after school program
funding
ethnic studies SB two ten will
follow SB two twenty five if we
have time we have a hard stop at
about ten I stopped about that
right right about ten twenty or
so we will be ending in order to
allow for some of the caucus of
between the Republicans
Democrats before the floor
sessions are that'll have a
thirty so Senator logos are you
with us Sir I am with you Mr
chairman good morning to
everyone I think you heard this
impact Aid Senate bill two
twenty five for.
In several different forms.
Can you hear me yes Sir please
continue.
Okay Senate bill two twenty five
and and you've heard Senator
Stewart bill is everything is is
pretty much the same as Center
Stewart's Bill except for the
language in the federal
the federal language on impact
date of and the way it's handled
and to save time for the
committee to make sure bodies
out I know everybody's fresh on
impact eight and I Martin real
money is made expert witness in
Martin at the discover the
federal language and then.
Yes you on with us.
Yes I'm here okay great.
The federal language that
Senator manuals references it
regards regarding
In this bill basically removes
the removes the he credits.
Or Rod impact Aid from.
Consideration when the state
calculation SCG Senator Judy did
you want me to address the
differences between your bill on
Senate bill forty one yes okay
is that the difference between
the two bills is Senate bill
twenty five removes the credits
with no restrictions the federal
credits the local credits the.
Our research grants.
Senator storage bill had one
restriction L. a lot a link the
restriction regarding use of
federal impact aid funds and
calculation of match or capital
outlay projects it was a phased
in approach over ten years the
concern that we have with that
and I believe.
Senator Stewart has been
Offered a friendly amendment to
respond to
They say a severance clause in
her bill regarding this language
but it talks about.
Recalculation of state matches
for funds from impact aid that
are sub subsequently used for
capital outlay our concern with
the language is whether or not
it will comply with federal
language regarding the use of
impact aid funds and
restrictions by the state the
friendly amendment that we hope
Senator Stewart will be amenable
to would basically separate
language and if the federal.
The language regarding uses of
impact aid is found not to
comply with federal law that it
would not prevent the rest of
the bill from becoming law.
Is ready at is that what you
wanted Senator you also yes and
and I think with that Mr
Chairman will stand for
questions.
Thank you senator
if mark LSU will lead us through
public input please.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition to Senate bill two
twenty five go ahead and raise
your hand at this time please
use the reactions at the bottom.
It looks like we do not have
anyone for opposition statements
one more time opposition
statements.
Okay moving on to statements of
support for Senate bill two to
five we'll hear from Martin
remain.
He's our expert witness out he
is an expert witness Connery
Chino.
One more time Mr Connery Chino.
We're gonna go to.
Mr marks question mark.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
committee I'm Marc Fleisher
vision lobbyist for Gallup
McKinley county school districts
we stand district we cancel
support of of this bill to
relieve impact Aid credits being
taken from the school district
we've.
Willfully Shortland.
Funds for capital.
Improve.
Programming in this will help
with the ball long wait on the
line to get those things
resolved improvements in favor
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Now we will hear from Mister
drew Center.
True.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is drew
Center on the registered
lobbyists for the public zero
nine.
And
We are.
Senator Tallman you need to get
your mute on please.
There goes.
Thank you Mr chairman the public
Jenny supports the legislation
as we think this is the cleanest
of way to move in advance and
address the issue that's been
put forward thank you we
appreciate your support.
Thank you Mr Senator we will now
hear from Mister John Thompson
John.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning my name
is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for Zuni
public school district and
central consolidated school
district Mr chairman members of
the committee we support this
legislation for the reasons
stated by Mr Fleischer and
others also we'd like to thank
senator Munoz for his support
and this initiative we ask that
you pass this bill thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Thompson are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
the bill Mr Burciaga on algo
had.
Mr chairman members of this
community crystals on the
register lobbyist for the neck
college as I'm not going to
college is the only situation in
New west region off the state of
New Mexico that provides the
four year degree college also we
work very close with the school
districts in seven different
problems
not only you know with the the
net students all tribal students
and we stand in support of this
piece of legislation we believe
that this is the the cleanest.
Formed version Office bill we
ask you to please or and thank
you for this possible bring this
up thank you.
Thank you Mr balls are there any
other members of the public who
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two to five.
One more time for members of the
public who wish to speak in
support.
Mr Connery Chino are you
available to speak yes ma'am I'm
sorry.
And I the and mute button but up
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Khan
Regino and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the problems of
Aqaba and toss Public
we stand support of HB to to
about sorry Senate bill two to
five program because we for that
addresses many the issues and
concerns have been raised over
the years by tribal governments
and tribal communities who
students attend districts that
apply for and receive impact aid
Senate bill two to five
addresses a concern that tribes
have raised about using federal
impact aid as a credit towards
the SCG now this bill will allow
for the districts to be able to
keep the federal impact aid
seconds would address students
educational needs for those
reasons Mr Chairman stands.
Thank you Mr Chino we will now
hear from Mr Joseph us Esposito.
Just morning Mr Chairman just
Escondido Albuquerque public
schools thank you for having us
this morning we stand support
thank you.
Thank you there any other
members of the public that wish
to speak.
No and that concludes all of our
public statements for Senate
bill two to five thank you.
Thank you Sir we know Senate
comments before we go to
questions from the committee.
Senator maybe you still what
we're going to stand for
questions Mr chairman.
Thank you of first I have
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and you
know I lived all over the state
growing up I lived in in that in
soon you for your time and I'm
just so shocked and disappointed
all the time when we are still
all these years later trying to
figure out how to get this all
done and I fully support center
when yes is attempt here I know
that it's taken a couple years
to get this exactly the right he
wants it and the way it's it's
right in the way that many of us
want this to be done and I I
just in the full support I I I I
do ask in in getting this done
what we fully expect the outcome
to be do we expect to see
you know full rebuilding schools
are dilapidated falling down are
we looking to put this into
ropes work where where do we
think a lot of this money will
go directly into the classroom
any given just a little more
more a details of that Mr
Chairman.
Mr chairman and senator you know
they the problem with what
happens in McKinley county and
is the impact they school
districts is we don't have the
property tax match so when we
want to build a new school we
have to wait a couple years to
get that match money built up in
capital and so we're so laurel
in McKinley county I believe
that one of our schools is
ninety miles away from the
central office and.
And so if you send a maintenance
man out there to think so of
water fountain or plugged toilet
full there.
Yeah it's a full day affair and
some of that and then we have to
treat is out there and so when
you got it you got a house
teacher just and there's nothing
there but a trading post and gas
station there's no you got to
build housing apartments part of
that is for infrastructure some
of it will go in the classroom a
lot of it will it's going to
infrastructure first to bring us
up to par I will tell you that
our football stadium that that
you high school chairs.
On the on the toilet stalls
there is no stalled dollars
that's how far behind we are so.
Yep Mr chairman and you know.
I disclosed I live in foster
homes all over New Mexico was
happened and to live with my
grandparents at the time he was
the assistant superintendent in
soon and we lived in that all
teachers and I think that was
torn down by the high school and
and you know in order to to to
get folks out there you do have
to find some housing of some
kind
You know I I I I.
I hope that we use is also for
technology and for broadband
internet ready it's pry sicken
me talking about broadband with
every ten for the I talked about
but it's so critical you did are
we gonna make the least always
be available for that type of
work of in these areas.
I think the school district can
use a dollars however they they
need and that will I will tell
you that they do have I relate
to the edges in the it and the
providers are fighting over who
gets to be the provider and and
it's kind of a mess they will be
using the dollars for
instructional.
Technology to get our children
caught up so it can use any any
way they see fit as long as
those restrictions are not there
in in the other bills in the
house bill in center Stewart's
bill there were restrictions on
what they can use it for with
this there's no restrictions and
we're trusting that they're
going to do the right thing.
Right right for sure that I mean
again if you bring say for
instance a gig to all the public
schools and in some of these
more rural in areas all boats
rise at the same time everyone
you know for a five mile radius
around that we're going to see
better broadband so I hope that
that's you know we're some of
this money will go and then full
stop Mr Chairman one of the
other things that I see this
doing is
it can potentially be for a
short period of time and
economic development engine for
those areas so I hope that this
doesn't get swallowed up by the
the big a large contractors
around the state just will been
build something and then get out
I hope that local labor is used
I hope that that this turns into
something that that promotes and
and stimulates the local
economies of these areas can you
talk a little bit about that
senator Munoz.
Mr Chairman etcetera I will pay
that we at one local contractor
that that does a lot of school
work in our school district and
they're all locals Navajos
duties.
And X. they're all local workers
of the school district does a
pretty good job and tell you get
to a certain service level that
becomes unavailable and in rural
New Mexico than they have to
outsource that our main point is
let's get the children educated
let's get what they need in the
classroom first
and then let's work on
infrastructure in in sports and
activities keep kids in school
we know that so we just.
We don't want the bus passes by
every day we want everybody to
get on the same bus.
Well gosh I love my video so
isms when I hear of
it thank you Mr chairman of.
I think you are in the same
boat.
We know how to sell but what I'd
say Mr chairman and and senator
again a test I I know that's not
the purpose of this bill but I
see secondary and tertiary
budget for these communities are
suffering a number of other
areas to like economic
development what have you and I
hope that that the effort is to
work with local builders and
contractors and employees and
and and this and that but but
you know a child needs to have a
roof over their head that's
that's warm.
And and inviting and for that
they have need to have a
classroom where they can learn
so I I just you know I'm I'm so
excited that we're finally gonna
turn this corner make this
happen for our state and and
senator when yours I'm very
proud of the work that you're
doing on this thank you.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Sir Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and senator then yes and you
know this this issue's been
discussed over the last few
years and for those that are
fairly new to the Legislature
understanding the funding
formula has been one of the I
think the greatest challenges
over the years for maybe even
though had a really good
instructor back in two thousand
three with that my
superintendent Mr rounds to
taught me how to read that SCG
in the funding formula and I'm
still learning that for those
that don't know in nineteen
seventy four we change state law
which are changed from funding
schools through property tax to
a general fund dollars so.
Many of the school districts and
mine included we were considered
one of the property rich
districts and you know I fully
support that I wasn't around
when that happened but I think
our goal is to provide all
students across the state of New
Mexico and I think the proper
way is to do it through the
appropriation bill and
throughout through the SCG which
I think it's a very equitable
formula and I think the federal
government over the years has
considered it to be a very
equitable formula until just
recently when
non members present in that that
created at two or three percent
that.
Change that made it down not
meet the criteria for the
federal government so that has
led to this issue with regard to
impact date what we're having to
do now we've already debated the
bill is to back fill that amount
of money to I think eighty
million it's going to be an
ongoing at recurring expense to
make sure that other districts
now that.
You know the impact aid is not
going to be taken as a credit
the mill levy half male the
forestry all of that's off the
books now will be when this
passes
and and and I think that's
that's that's fine my concern is
that I'm not quite sure what
what this bill does it's
different from Senator Stewart
but I want to be clear on it
because.
As we distribute money through
the public school capital outlay
process we change the match on
that a couple of years ago and I
know my district went from I
think a fifty six percent match
down to seventeen from the state
it was a significant difference
and so what are you I guess so
we want to make sure that all
the money goes to those really
property poor districts and
that's pretty much what that
bill did and so other districts
across the state have to come up
with a lot more money now and
not in districts that are going
to be the beneficiary of that
change we're not going to have
to come up with much money at
all if you kind of want to know
where the money I have operating
capital other revenues it's in
the FIR is attachment one in I
think everyone should take a
minute look through that at some
point because where the money is
flowing so my question is I want
to make sure in Senator Stewart
spill there was a face out
where
we would begin at some point to
consider
The the funding for the capital
outlay projects and take that
into account with regard to
match in the future can can you
explain the expert witness in
simple language what that does
with regard to the districts and
how they spend the additional
money is it going for operation
is it going for can it go for
anything so I'm not taking
credit anymore which impact aid
is about property tax it's a
replacement for property tax but
now it's going to be used for
operating I'm not sure how this
money can be used going forward
and help this bill is different
from Senator stewards Bill
bank talk it removes the
opportunity to take into
consideration all the money that
flows to the district so help me
understand because I did not
understand the member.
Martin Senator are you talking
about Center stewards amendment
on her bill or.
I'm talking about at Mr chair
and senator what your bill how
it's different again from from
Senator starts Bill in how funds
can be either distributed or
spent what's the difference just
in simple language I don't want
to.
Recruitment.
Missed Mr chair Senator Kernan
but the big difference is in the
bill that senator Munoz has
before the committee today
simply remove all of the credits
and doesn't say anything about
how the money can or cannot be
spent in.
In federal language impact Aid
while it was designed to replace
lost property taxes impact aid
dollars can be spent any way
that general fund for us
operational dollars can be
spent.
The deferred the bill that
Senator Stewart presented to the
committee last week.
Ads to ads aware of.
Of the match changes for capital
if the districts want to spend
the money on capital then over a
ten year period the percent
added to capital projects will
reduce state match is increased
increase local matches.
Our concern on that is.
How we complies with federal
regulations and.
Could the bill be voided just
because just because it contains
those constraints about.
Using impact aid dollars I can
tell you that for for SUNY.
I'll just give you a quick
history when I start working
this district in our central
office there was our central
office building was built in the
nineteen thirties there was one
door that had a sign on it that
said do not enter a specialist
contamination we were in that
building for thirty five years
the reason we stayed there is
because.
Yes C. O. C. didn't fund
administrative spaces.
We want to build student housing
for students that might be
considered homeless.
Yes you'll see will not fund
that we will and most districts
I believe impacted heavily
impacted a districts will be
spending this money on capital I
know that when you get a
legislative finance.
The paper.
Evaluation they always say that
this is going to do is going to
what by the formula because
we're gonna be putting all this
money into operations I've
talked closely with Gallup was
central consolidated and our
needs are not operational are
are true needs our capital
projects but as I say.
We are concerned about senator
stores bill just because it has
the original the additional
language about.
Capital projects and state match
is and we're concerned that it
will not comport with federal
statutes and that's why we
support a bill that has no
restraints no constraints is
just a clean bill the removes
the credits.
And I can assure you that.
The book of ninety five percent
of impacted dollars in New
Mexico are generated by native
American students those are the
districts that have the capital
whether it be buildings whether
it be broadband what ever it is
those are the needs that I I I
am fairly confident sure that
the bulk of these impact aid
dollars will be spent on not
additional operational needs
increasing salaries beyond what
the rest of the state can can
afford at this time.
Thank you that that really does
clarifying I I have no objection
to all of the impact aid dollars
going for capital projects I
think that's very appropriate
another way to get around the
issue that at PSC State Mr chair
restricts how those dollars can
be spent and how people come and
rise to the top on on projects I
I would have no objection to
expanding the use of those
public school capital outlay
dollars for those projects my
concern is when does scholarship
used for operating intestacy
belies the budget that it does
disable by the formula I think
going forward and I've been very
proud of the formula that we
have had I think to dedicate
those dollars to public catch up
to it capital outlay projects is
very appropriate and certainly
needed but I do worry going
forward at that as they complete
all the projects they need and
then they shift over back to the
operating that puts my area to
disadvantaged with regard to
when you look at at Hobbs
municipal schools in Rio Rancho
per member funding if you
compare that to per member
funding across the state Senator
Brandt I argue all the time that
they have to is the lowest in
per member funding in its house
in Rio Rancho and some of the
mid school some mid sized
districts because of the
efficiencies that they're
getting so you know I I think
that my concern is just a.
Going forward with regard to to
how capital outlay dollars are
spent
I don't object to any of that
money going that in that
direction and that.
So my guess is we'll go to
finance and at that point
chairman then you know send a
centrist approach and Stewart
can.
Figure this out in probably come
out with something that is
probably going to be mutually
acceptable by all concerned but
I do think people especially if
you're a new legislator really
important to understand the
funding formula for schools
because that's almost half of
our budget.
If you understand that funding
formula if you understand where
the resources come and I I'm I'm
not gonna say this every single
time the public school capital
outlay is funded from revenue
from the severance tax dollars
so enjoy spending it now and
next year the next year the next
year it's a five year average
but I will tell you down the
road at those dollars just are
going to be at the event so
anyway we'll just see how it
goes but I think that this will
finally get through and I do
support addressing the impact
aid issue I I again ready to
just say it's time I just wanna
make sure we get it right and I
would sure like to protect the
idea that we have an equalized
funding formula thank you.
Thank you a next have Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'll
be pretty short I just wanted to
say you know I'd worked with
this group and ceremonials on
this issue that we have the a
good agreement ready to go
couple years ago that would have
solved this whole issue and I
just want to you know I I
appreciate the.
The the districts to this mostly
affects we have talked about
this several times and every
time we have talked they have
expressed that this will be
mostly used for capital projects
I and I think that that that's
correct the talked about the
teacher teaches that they need
they've talked about I mean
their buildings are are having
concerns I I do think that one
of the things hopefully that
won't happen but may need to
happen is the costsharing they
end up getting changed at some
point because they'll be able to
receive this money but I think
they would rather have this
money that they can use of right
now to to take care of the
projects within their district
that need to be taken care of
they have some great needs when
it comes to facilities that most
other districts don't have and
so I do support this
I do think that it's something
we need to get dealt with but I
just want to remind everyone
that I know senator Munoz knows
this because we set and in in
this office and had an agreement
worked out that would have taken
care of this I think four years
ago and we wouldn't be in this
position so thank you.
Thank you center Brad are there
other committee members to want
to speak before I get to my
questions.
Not see other hands go up
I have several questions
Senator lots of this is the
difference between Senate bill
forty one Senate bill of two
twenty five of.
In your bill does it deal with
the holding harmless the other
districts where the other bill
does does yours.
Mr Chairman center Martin you
want to answer that.
Chairman Mr chairman members of
the committee my understanding
is that
Hold the the hold harmless
provision I don't believe is in
this bill but I believe it is
in.
In the executive budget that's
been submitted the one from
legislative finance and also one
for the legislative education
study committee.
And so senator bill holding the
other districts harmless eighty
million dollars coming out of
the General Fund is takes money
away from other districts
doesn't it.
Mr chairman and in center and
Senator
We we are not taking money that
is currently appropriated work
we're adding additional money in
a recurring money to do that so
I don't think the sources not.
Trying to get a credit card so
we're not taking money away from
other school districts were this
is new additional new money that
that'll be added to the budget.
I'm not sure I understand new
money SB forty one specifically
talks about holding other
districts harmless as the money
for impact aid is
allows districts to where the
state doesn't take credit for
it.
This one it's great if I let is
silent about that what is the
difference between those two did
dealing with yeah hold harmless
with the other we're SB forty
one specifically deals with
that.
Mr chairman and senator and
Martin you may want to chime in
on this but I don't think we
need to require that language
because we are not taking
anything away from another
district we're not taking
anything out of the SCG to do
the impact aid money it's a
recurring source of money on top
of that and so the SCG remains
equal throughout.
Martin the everything that that
Mr chairman members the
committee as I says said earlier
I believe that the hold harmless
language as senator what Yost
stated has been taking care of
in the budgets presented by LFC
Ellie yes he had the executive
and the money has been.
Line item there are line items
to each of those budgets to take
care of a the funding.
The changes in funding
Hey impact a half mill and
Force reserve predator and.
Well yes Senator when we are
underfunding education across
the entire state and then eighty
million dollars is taken out of
what had been that of the street
all the rest of the districts
are getting go could be getting
fewer dollars than they might of
that out SB forty one
specifically address this this
bill does not
that's a concern that I have
Is there any requirement in the
estate to twenty five that the
money must be used for improving
student outcomes.
Mr Chairman centered up.
Because you.
Is that part of SB forty one
that there's a requirement that
it be used for proving student
outcomes.
Mr Chairman center I don't know
the inner workings of SB forty
one all of them so Martin do
know those.
There.
Martin your muted I apologize I
thought I had it done you'd in
Senate bill forty one I do know
that there were a couple of
lines a couple of sections
regarding Yazzie Martinez and
Miss capital lawsuit which were
amended out in committee I do
know that there was the language
about the committee matches I do
not recall anything in there
about a student outcomes.
I believe SB forty one
specifically indicate that the
the money must be you for
improving student outcomes at
and senator your there is no
restriction and F. B. two twenty
five is that correct.
Correct.
And so this money could be used
for anything whether it's
towards student outcomes or
building a house my whole for
the administration is that
accurate what.
Mr Chairman that the
administration already built the
Taj Mahal five or six years ago.
And the committee regarding your
the.
And so
really I mean at the end of the
day in our in McKinley county
eighty twenty two percent of our
county is taxable and I will
tell you like on one of my
property tax bills rather large
one fifty percent of that money
goes to education and we still
can't meet the match to put
stalls on the bathroom door at a
football stadium we still
struggle with schools that are
adequate or inadequate and do
they have the heating and
cooling in it and so we're
struggling with that
You know I will Senator Kernan
mention this I will personally
see that that the money spent on
capital first and and and needs
for the children first of which
is highly and most important
thing that we can do and then
that we're not spending on that
if there's money in in those
those kids play sports sure it's
pry gonna prove their outcomes
every kid wants to be that
football player every kid wants
an opportunity in life and
education the best opportunity
that we can get.
but.
And.
Mr chair so I may.
Read more.
The only the one thing I'm
finding it in the Senate bill
forty one is language that a
report has to be prepared each
year summarizing how the funds
were spent.
That's the only language I'm
seeing.
Yes is there any federal
boarding and yeah that's the two
twenty five.
More news reporting into twenty
five Mr chair not that I'm aware
of.
And so yet there's no reporting
what is the oversight for how
these funds are being used.
Mr chairman and senator I think
we're relying on the districts
to to make sure that they do the
right thing we don't require
other counties to report how
they're spending their their
county property taxes and this
is this is a payment in lieu of
property taxes and so if we
require them us to report then
maybe we should require
everybody report the other
spending their property tax on
education.
But as senator I believe all of
the other property tax when but
they are spending any of those
bodies yeah they are going
through that the SCLC for how
those buildings are being built.
That's correct but we also I
mean impact aid as a payment in
lieu of taxes that's that that's
basically what it is for every
native American kid and so if if
there will report PS you'll see
because we're gonna use the
money for infrastructure and
capital and and the match money
will be there and where it came
from.
Well but Center you're telling
me they're there is no reporting
mechanism.
Mr Chairman you're correct there
is not Martin having that C..
Mr chair members of the
committee just as any district
that uses general obligation
bond money and also uses the
state match or subpoena C. O. C.
in a district that uses capital
impact aid funds and also
employs a state match of the
state reporting requirements as
general.
Funded construction so we would
be under the same reporting
obligations that those other
districts are just because we
would.
If we still access to take money
we would have to report that way
however there are districts to
build buildings do not use any
state money and as far as I know
they there is no state reporting
that they have to comply with
regarding the construction it's
only if they use if they access
a putting PS you'll see.
Okay I'm.
One of the things that we hear
regularly our tribal communities
are feel like they're left out
of the decision making for how
funds within the the districts
are being used is there any
requirement for consultation
with the native American
communities on how this money is
being used.
Mr Chairman representative in
this bill there's no
consultation that the school
district consults with the
Navajo tribe on on almost
everything they do the screen
city school district probably
consults with the governor and
the council of and so the
consultation meetings I think
their monthly it within the
school district and and the
Navajo Nation does attend when
they consult on everything from
language to.
school activities to busing
transportation so the consult
patient consulting is already
there well I don't think we need
to repeat it
In the bill.
Well Senator the the concern is
that that tribal communities
often do not feel like that is
been meeting for consultation
and the Indian Affairs division
indicates are recommends that
information on how districts and
charters are spending the fund
should be mailed made available
to the tribe's this has no
mechanism for how those or
reporting or how those funds are
being used is that correct.
Mr Chairman center this this
bill doesn't have a requirement
for reporting or our
consultation but it already pre
exists Martin asked how does you
consult with within the school
district Mr chair committee
members of the committee before
a districts can submit.
An application to the US
Department of Education Act
eight office they have to have
to complete what is called an
Indian policies and procedures
application in which they have
to consult with the tribes or
pueblos within their district
and get their approval and
signature on that form before
they can submit the approved
receive impact aid funds so the
the there is already a required
to do that in our district three
comment and we are just starting
it again all of our principals
and superintendent meet with the
the tribal government every
other month the superintendent
and directors meet with the the
tribal council on the other
months we have we have regular
meetings we keep them informed
they are in our base there
attending our board meetings.
We we are already doing well
what do you what the chair is is
asking about.
Mr chair yeah that may be
happening in one district but
what we have heard over and over
again when this is come up the
and LESC and other places is
that there has not been meeting
people.
reporting interaction how the
monies are being spent that
there be asked how they think
the money's out of these and and
as you indicated Senator of it
is those children that have
generated the funding and those
communities are very concerned
about how that money is being
funded and this bill has no
reporting mechanism for
accountability mechanism back to
those communities or to the
state on how those monies are
being.
being expended and I did not
understand the matter is that
accurate.
Mr Chairman center I don't think
that's accurate all
matter of fact before we used to
have an Indian Education office
Gallup that would consult with
the school district all the time
the state in the Indian
Education and I believe that
Indian education system is now
at the school district with the
school district every day
sure sure a lot of chapters in a
lot of people are upset because
they don't
See that they're getting what
they want or need at that time
but it's up to the school
district and they consult with
the Navajo Nation department
education
they consult with the state
Indian Education Act and I
believe those are inside the
school district and and so we
hear a lot of that and I hear a
lot of that.
Of the school districts not
doing this the school districts
not doing that Gallup has this
yelp has that well Gallup is
almost seventy to eighty percent
native American inside the city
school district we have kids
that come from to hatch the the
route all over the all over the
the district fifteens going out
because their parents may
working L.
the the can the academy which my
wife runs they baskets from
every school in the district to
go to to you.
Well nobody's ever happy with
it in the school system and so
we're gonna have a little bit of
that and I think it's up for the
school district in the end the
tribes and the pueblos up to
consult with the other and the
term but you're not gonna make
everybody happy especially when
you're picking locations just
goals and and what the school
has.
And and senator I understand
that I I just think that what we
continually hear is informal
consultation with the tribes and
with native American communities
is not the same as them getting
reporting as to how the monies
are being used in more formal
types of of the interaction of
Senator you indicated that the
impact aid is really up in lieu
of property tax money that that
group.
Correct.
And therefore in Senate bill
forty one it has a mechanism
over I believe it's ten years to
start looking at those monies as
property tax monies in the
calculation four of the public
school facilities authority to
get public school capital outlay
council is that true.
Senate bill forty one I think
that is strict.
Doesn't that make sense to that
those bodies be treated as
taxable money as far as making
for that match having that match
does or changing that match
doesn't change the amount of
money that the district is
getting it only changes the
amount of money that the local
community needs to come up with
and that now is look to be
looked at as if that is property
tax would you just indicated
that that is the Lujan of which
so it should be
this bill says nothing about
changing that
that match mechanism based on
additional you have just
indicated increases in the
century property tax for that
districts
should that be looked at as far
as what the state local matches
and I think one forty or forty
one very responsibly doesn't do
it all at once but over time
basically that in so that those
are looked at because that now
what is tax money that is coming
into the district is that
accurate way of looking at my
missing something.
More you might be on answer that
first and then.
Mr chair members of the
committee as I stated earlier
that the concern we have with
that language in Senator
Stewart's Bill is it may
conflict with but with federal
federal regulations and impact
aid and that it is.
It is it may be considered a
limiting factor how those how
those dollars can be used and
that's why about a minute
friendly amendment has been
proposed to Senator Stewart to
separate that from an impact aid
bill and my suggestion would be
to if that's what the the state
the center of the house wants to
pursue I would suggest that is a
separate bill just so that it
does so that it does not.
Event
that the legislature from
removing these credits from the
SCG formula.
But the same at because because
IT conflicts that there might be
with federal state federal
regulations and allow an impact
a bill to stand on its own.
Have you know that I know this
is dress a couple years ago I
believe was Senate bill thirty.
Matches were address Dan in a
separate bill and it's the
opinion of of the districts that
that if the state desires to do
that it should be addressed in a
separate bill just to avoid any
conflict with the federal
regulations of might invalidate
an entire bill that was a that
was created to address the
impact aid issue in the state of
New Mexico.
Senator yeah I'm I guess I'm
concerned with words like you
might possibly potentially with
federal and this doesn't change
any of those the actual use of
the money's in anyway of that
sort all it does is it
recognizes that this is a
payment in lieu of taxes and
that that now changes what the
the local state match would be
and I think it's perfectly
appropriate and trying to to use
things like well the federal
government might not like this
into the future I don't think is
a reason that we should be
putting in what I believe is
very responsible legislation I
would would.
Or motion I guess.
Yes second.
They do pass seconded by Senator
Brandt if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla yes.
Can tell.
No and to explain my boat.
Senator pope.
No.
Sanders Sauls no okay but we do
have a due pass and Senator.
And to explain about Sir.
Senator Pinto thank you Mr chair
thank you members of the
committee thank you senator and
also bring in this bill Ford and
the efforts that were made to
address the issue of impact aid
but I do believe that we should
be supporting one bill so that
the focus is on one bill and
that we as a legislature get it
right or in that compromised so
I am in support of Senate bill
forty one thank you.
Thank you Senator Pinto thank
you thank you center but yes you
do have a due pass on to the
finance committees or.
Thank you.
Yes we are at ten fifteen.
Bill we would have is going to
be.
As the ethnic studies education
we only have about five minutes
and I would ask.
Our with us whether she wants to
do I have a brief introduction
to get us started we're just
wait until our Friday meeting.
Lopez are you still on with us.
I know I've been texting with
her and that she was going to
send her witnesses are heard as
students and various others
we're going to get public
commented and sent them hold a.
Mr Chairman yes I appreciate the
opportunity and I did have some
students who have to go back to
school and I apologize
and I realize just about five
minutes for presentation could
we just hold back and then just
do the full presentation of bill
discussion on Friday.
Yes that would be fine of and
we're gonna schedule again for
eight thirty on Friday you've
got your built up and if you
want to put all I got for in my
committee so we could just make
it Senator Lopez date.
Okay.
Mr Chairman.
Excuse me I'm going to send me
that said so we're not going to
Where does that put the Carlsbad
bill.
The we need.
Yes I would Carlsbad bill will
be right after that I suspect
will be able to get through
those.
So that would be that we would
put that when the next one
because you did have your people
on today were falling a little
bit behind and so as I mentioned
to some people that were on
early Saturday afternoon
potentially open for a committee
meeting of kids we falling
behind at this point we are just
going to try to get to what's
currently on our list for Friday
and try not to add anything
additional we get through those
then we won't be the to worry
about having this Saturday be.
So Mr chair what you're telling
me so my my group will know
you're going to do for Senator
Lopez bills and then my bill
would be next yes ma'am I'm my
guess is we will not get to it
prior to at least ten o'clock.
So how much time we have to do
that bill.
The things that I've heard is I
think we will be having ideas
ten will be scheduled to have a
four session at eleven thirty we
should have plenty of time to do
all of you I think that would be
plenty of time with it.
I thank you and we're gonna
start at eight thirty so yeah we
don't lose that half hour that
we normally have going kids in.
Thank you very much Mr Chairman
has there was a discussion on
whether we would have a floor
session on Saturday or not in
your caucus I am not aware of
the four sessions will be
scheduled for Saturday I know
conservation committee is
planning on having committee
meeting on Saturday morning
because they falling behind so
I'm not aware of any plans for a
Saturday for session.
Very good thank you.
So Mr chairman this is Senator
Lopez my bills will be moved to
Friday is that correct yes ma'am
it will staff your for up at the
top and then followed by Senator
Kernan and then we'll see if we
get to Google part of bills and
senator Neville yeah that you're
on the list to and so we'll
we'll see how things move at
that time okay thank you Mr
chairman C. radio everyone and
thank you for a very productive
morning I appreciate everybody.
