online, some of the things we do
in the education committee is
limit public comment to a
maximum of 2 minutes, and I'll
tell you when there's 15 seconds
left. Please wrap it up because
I will start banging the gavel
if you go over that, um, also,
uh, we have a couple of bills
that I know might be fairly
sensitive. Please make sure that
you stick to the topic and don't
disparage others or anything
where I would need to control
that, uh, kind of our members,
but certainly anyone from the
public that's not used to how
things are.
here.
Uh, I believe our plan is we're
going to go pretty much down the
list with Senate Bill 247 1st,
which is the publication of
certain education info, Senate
Bill 21566 and 268 of the floor
session, I believe is scheduled
at 11 today, and so we will try
and make it to the floor
session. Um, I reserved the
right depending on how many
people for public testimony to
limit public testimony on both
sides, both in the room.
And online so that we're not
here for 4 hours hearing the
same things over and over again.
So any questions before we get
started,
but Senator Ramos retired uh
public employees of New Mexico,
um, the superintendent
association, I don't know, I
think of uh by being in
attendance as well, I'm able to
speak if if there's a minute or
two. You've got a couple of
minutes left, so if any of those
folks are
are here, come on up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the board. Thank you
for allowing me to bring SB 247
in front of you today, um,
Senator Bill 247 is an act
relating to the public schools
requiring the public education
department to publish the
results of the department
approved summative assessments
for science, mathematics, and
English language arts,
establishing a deadline for
publication requiring reporting
on specific performance and
trend data. It's also requiring
Friendly publication access,
assigning duties to the public
education department. This bill,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
board,
um, is a simple common sense
piece of legislation aimed at
enhancing transparency and
accountability within our 5
billion education system.
This bill focuses on making key
student performance data more
accessible to the public. It
also requires NMPD to release
the state assessment data by
September 1st of each year. It
ensures that the results of
statewide assessments are made
available in a timely manner.
Which allows the data to be
utilized for improvements and
supports and supports for our
students.
Uh, it also is about fostering a
culture of transparency,
improving educational outcomes,
ensuring that every student has
the opportunity to succeed. As
noted in the alias Aliy analysis
SB 247 would create an
expectation that policymakers
and the general public should be
provided with finalized
proficiency rates by September.
In the state more time to
analyze the results before
building budgets and policy
proposals during the subsequent
legislative session.
This data allows the community
to better understand how the
state's $5 billion education
system is performing. It allows
us to highlight districts and
schools that are making
progress. As mentioned in the
Analyst, it can be analysis, it
can be used
for this.
Um
I opposed this last time, but I
will support it this time.
But I
caution to pass
right now.
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Uh, also, as
mentioned in the LESC analysis,
it can be used to better
understand the budget process
and prioritize initiatives and
programs that are yielding
results. It's also essential for
tracking progress towards the
outcomes demand in the demanded
in the Yasi Martinez ruling.
School about accountability uh
system data is, is very
important to us, so we, we just
definitely need to do something
to get these results so that we
can uh work hard and to improve
the, the process for us for the
following year. Um, historically
in 2015, the uh
The uh report was, was given or
put out in October 16th in 2016.
It was in August 16th.
MT was July 25th, 2018, July
12th and so on. There's always
been pretty late so that we
couldn't uh so that the
education committees could not
uh make uh.
Promisable and uh educated
decisions. Thank you so much and
uh.
At this time, I'd like to go
ahead and let my expert witness
introduce herself.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee, um, I'm Amina
Aragon. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Kits
Cannon here to help answer any
questions.
Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, we'll go out to
the audience first, quick show
of hands, those in support of
this legislation.
Those in opposition.
Couple of those in support would
like to come and speak.
And you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Kerry
Robin Brun Durham, the
registered lobbyist for Public
charter schools of New Mexico,
assessment data doesn't do very
much good for our schools and
our teachers if we receive it
very, very late. So we think
this bill makes a whole lot of
sense. It actually helps our
schools make better decisions
for how to educate their
students and as the LESC said,
hopefully gives you guys more
information to make really great
decisions up at the legislature.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Stan.
Thank Mr. Chairman, stand rounds
for the school superintendents,
coalition of Educational
Leaders, data is important, but
timing is important also. We've
been frustrated as districts in
testing students and then not
having testing results for
months and months and months and
months. The steps in that
direction is that we think it's
something we need to look at.
We're not certain the dates
certain in this bill is the
best, but as this moves forward,
we'd like to work with the
sponsor on determining what that
might look like. Thank you.
Let's
Well, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Deval Westfall, executive vice
president of policy and programs
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber.
There's a well-known idiom that
you can't really know where
you're going until you know
where you've been. And that's
especially true when it comes to
our students' academic progress.
And yet every fall, we expect
our school administrators,
teachers, parents, and students
to fly blind into the new school
year going months without
proficiency results. That's
patently unfair and sets
everyone up to fail. Students
who need the extra help, don't
receive it. Students who are
excelling, hurry up and wait to
advance, and the month go by.
We point out that the LESC
analysis shows many states don't
just meet, but beat the proposed
September 1st deadline to
publish the statewide summit of
assessment results for ELA, math
and science. So if Florida,
Tennessee, Texas, Indiana,
Louisiana, and Georgia can
release test results before
August. There's no excuse New
Mexico can't as well.
To improve student
proficiencies, our educators,
parents, and students need this
information, and they deserve
it. It's being done in other
states, and it should be done
here.
Please pass SB 247. Thank you.
Thank you. And next, Eli Cassas.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Eli Casa, and I am an
educator of over 16 years,
having served as a teacher,
principal, and currently as the
manager of policy and programs
for Teach Plus New Mexico.
This year we have a team of
teachers focused on high quality
data systems, and this has been
an area of focus for the past
several years, as we seek to
create quality, accurate and
timely systems.
Our teachers are conducting
research and bringing in their
personal experiences to ensure
that the teacher perspective is
included as stakeholders who
utilize data to make decisions,
often in their classrooms. We
strongly support Senate Bill 247
because timely and transparent
assessment data is critical for
educators, families, and
policymakers.
As a former school leader, I
know firsthand how important it
is to have access to student
performance data as early as
possible.
Schools use this information to
drive instructional decisions,
allocate resources and provide
targeted support for students
who need it most. However, in
New Mexico, we lag behind much
of the country and publishing
these results, often releasing
them months after they are most
useful for planning
interventions and making policy
decisions. SB 247 would help
ensure that statewide assessment
data is available starting our
school years, aligning New
Mexico with best practices and
other states. This would empower
Our educators to respond more
efficiently and effectively to
student needs and to provide
families with a clearer picture
of their child's academic
progress. I urge the committee
to support SB 247 to improve
timeliness and accessibility of
critical education data for all
stakeholders. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you. That's, is there
anyone in opposition online?
OK, uh, thank you. We're now
questions from the committee.
3
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. I think this is a
very important issue that we
need to resolve and hopefully we
can resolve it here today.
Um
I'm just curious as to why we're
late. Uh, the LESD report says
most states publish their
results between the beginning of
August.
And the end of October, and in
fact, it says there are 6
states, Florida, Tennessee,
Texas, Indiana, Louisiana, and
Georgia.
I've consistently released their
assessments in August, which is
plenty of time then to allow
schools to adjust their
priorities. So do you have any
input from PED as to why they're
not releasing these, um.
August or around August time
frame. Mr. Tur, I'll let my
expert with that question.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, it is
one of the reasons that this
bill is being brought forward
because it does, there has been
a significant change in the
timeline as um Senator Ramos
indicated earlier, historically
in 2016, the data came out
before the deadline again in
1718, 19, and 22, the data from
this public education department
all came out before September
1st. It's been the last 3 years
that it's come out closer to
December and in November. And
so.
There may be some process that
they've undergone to.
Change their system at the
public education department.
But this administration and this
PED has released the data on the
timeline offered in this bill
historically, um, and there's
nothing in the federal law which
requires the state assessment
that would prevent a state from
meeting this timeline as
indicated by the states that you
mentioned.
Thank you for that answer. Um,
is there anyone here from PED
that can tell us, uh, why, why
the delay in the last few years.
Yes, thank you. I was lucky I
for my usual face is a PED
please. Uh yes.
the microphone.
OK
My name is Jacqueline Sanchez,
and I work at the policy
division in PED, uh, I don't
have an answer to your question
at this time, but I am taking
notes and I can't get back to
you on that. Uh, something that
I will say is that uh SB 247
doesn't differentiate between
the preliminary or
accountability data. So PED does
have the ability to, um, publish
preliminary data.
But at this time, not the
ability to publish, um,
The final achievement data.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Um,
Seems to me this is probably the
most important information that
we need after each year is to
know how our students are doing,
how the schools are performing.
And this should be a priority by
by the PED to make sure that
information is provided to to
all of us as we go forward.
So if there's, if there's a need
for staff, you know, more
staffing, is it a data logistics
issue? Is it uh a data
collection issue, um, those are
the kind of things that would
help us to understand why we
can't get this data.
Uh, very quickly. This is uh
something that's known to recur
every year, and should be a PED
priority though to make sure
that data is provided to us.
Thank you very much. That's all
I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Mr. Chair, I
move to pass on Senate Bill 268.
OK
a motion for a due pass by
Senator Pope, seconded by
Senator Eel.
Quick question from Senator
Figueroa. Sorry, Mr. Chair, I
didn't catch your eye. Uh, my
question is only about
placement.
Right, in this section, rather
than making a new section of
law, which tends to slow PED
down, they have to look at that,
figure out how to do that and
the other previous pieces we've
made, there is a section of law,
it's about 3 sections before
this one would be would appear,
222C 11.
That already says they have to
publish this data and what they
have to publish and has a
Deadline in it, so I think it'd
be much faster and more
efficient to look at just
changing that date to September
1st.
I think adding all of this other
new language is gonna slow the
process.
And that's my only comment.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. And so as it
heads on, is this the 1st
committee, 2nd committee?
So if it heads onto the other
committee, you might look at
that because that might make for
a quicker, cleaner bill that'll
that breeze through, so to
speak, so
um and Mr. Chairman, I'd like to
make a correction that was a do
pass on Centerville 247. I was
reading on that.
do pass on, yeah,
247 probably confusing the world
with never signs wrong. You'll
call the roll, please.
And
Yes.
Yes.
You have a due pass.
The next, uh, we'll move to
Senate Bill 258, human sexuality
education and Senator Charlie.
Charlie here.
You might be right outside. I
know she was around.
And I believe that she's trying
to come in, there are a couple
of amendments that we're going
to go through and need to.
OK, I understand she's on her
way.
OK, no, she's here.
OK, uh, Senator Charlie, if
you're ready, please, uh, talk
to us about Senate Bill 258.
I'm ready. Good morning. Good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the Senate Education
Committee. I am Senator Angel
Charlie, and I'm honored to
present this bill to you this
morning. Senate Bill 258.
This bill ensures that New
Mexico students receive
comprehensive medically accurate
human sexuality education as a
part of their health curriculum
beginning in the 2027, 2028
school year.
This bill is about equipping
young people with knowledge.
So they can make informed,
responsible decisions about
their health, their safety, and
their futures.
But just as important.
It respects the rights of
parents.
By including a clear opt-out
provision.
Giving families the choice to
decide what's best for their
children.
Senate Bill 258 also prioritizes
local decision making.
Ensuring that school districts
and charter schools retain the
flexibility to design a
curriculum that aligns with
their community values.
As long as it meets the core
educational standards.
So this approach balances the
need for students to receive
critical health education will
also allowing local control over
how it's delivered.
Comprehensive human sexuality
education has been shown to
reduce risky behaviors, improve
health outcomes.
And support the development of
healthy relationships.
By ensuring that students have
access to this education, will
also allowing parents and local
leaders.
To make key decisions. Senate
Bill 258 offers a reasonable
balanced approach to a vital
issue.
And as a parent of a high school
student, I know how challenging
it is to compete with the
abundance of information
regardless of accuracy.
On the Internet and social
media.
I just want to ensure that my
child and their friends have
access to medically accurate sex
health education.
Because let's face it, there are
some conversations and
questions. I know my child might
be more comfortable not having
with me.
And if and when that happens.
I want to know there is another
trusted and responsible adult in
the school system who will
provide medically accurate
information.
And so this morning I'm urging
you to support Senate Bill 258
standing with parents, students
and their communities in
fostering a healthier, more
informed future for New Mexico.
And before we welcome your
questions. I'd like to introduce
my two expert witnesses starting
with uh Doctor Dixon.
Good morning.
Good morning Chairman Souls and
members of the committee.
My name is Doctor Elizabeth
Dixon, and I'm a faculty member
at the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center at the
College of Population Health.
I'm a public health nurse with
over 20 years of experience
working in community and
schools. And for the last 7
years, a researcher and
educator.
In my role as a researcher, I
have conducted or been involved
in research supporting
school-based sexual health
education in New Mexico.
I published in multiple peer
reviewed academic journals and
been awarded research funding to
better understand.
sexual health education is
taught.
And the barriers to teaching in
school settings.
There are 3 key points I'd like
to share with you that are
relevant to this legislation.
The first is that sexual health
education that is comprehensive
in content, medically accurate,
age and developmentally
appropriate based on evidence,
and inclusive and representative
of all students can have a
positive and significant impact
on adolescent health.
This includes decreasing rates
of unintended pregnancy.
Decreasing rates of sexually
transmitted infections and
decreasing rates of depression
and anxiety.
Increasing protective behaviors
such as the increased use
increased use and correct use of
birth control and condoms, and
the abstinence from and delay of
sexual activity.
It reduces behaviors that place
adolescents at risk, such as
reducing the number of
unprotected sexual encounters
and the number of sexual
partners.
And it improves school climate
by reducing reports of bullying
and violence.
The second point is that
school-based sexual health
education in New Mexico is not
offered to students equally.
New Mexico's statue currently
requires sexual health to be
taught in a health education
class required for graduation.
And it allows parents and
guardians to opt out their
student.
However, the statute language
lacks requirements for medical
accuracy and does not require
content related to consent,
sexual orientation or gender
identity. These are all critical
areas to include for violence
prevention and to assure that
all students are represented in
the content being taught.
From our research, we know that
not all students receive sexual
health education in our schools.
Not everyone teaching it has
been trained to teach this
difficult content and due to
this lack of training, many use
fear-based approaches when
talking about sexual health.
And many are not aware of the
statute requirements such as
assuring parents the right to
opt their students out.
Our research also included
students who shared stories
about their sex ed class.
Some describe classes that were
positive and firming. However,
many described sexed as not
helpful and often harmful.
Where they felt shame and fear
in their class.
Students confirmed that they
wanted and needed sex ed in
class.
Because this wasn't something
they could talk about at home.
And they had questions about
what they were seeing online.
Third and final, we all want to
assure that the young people in
our state experience excellent
health outcomes, growing their
self-confidence as individuals
are safe in their school
environments and grow to be
healthy adults. We assure, when
we assure that the sexual health
education they receive in school
is comprehensive and all content
areas is evidence-based
medically accurate, and
inclusive of all students, we
can rest assured we're
contributing to that vision.
Thank you for your time and I
look forward to your questions.
And my second expert witness.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Marshall Martinez. I'm
the executive director of
Equality New Mexico. We are a
statewide LGBTQ advocacy
organization.
I'm incredibly proud to be
sitting here alongside Senator
Charlie and Dr. Dixon on this
human sexuality education bill
this year. This bill is priority
legislation for equality in New
Mexico, Planned Parenthood, and
a number of advocacy and
education organizations, many of
whom you will see in the room
and hear from today.
At EQ&M, we've prioritized a fix
to the state sex education
approach for many years and
always for the same goal.
Good sex ed helps young people
avoid the many harms that can
come from a lack of information.
Bad sexed, hurts young people.
It hurts them emotionally, and
it hurts them physically.
New Mexican young people deserve
to hear information about their
bodies, how to protect
themselves, and how to negotiate
a world in which, whether we
like to admit it or not, they
will be faced with decisions
about sex.
Parents can always opt their
child out of sexuality
education. That has been the
case, and that will continue to
be the case if this bill passes.
sex ed curriculum will continue
to be culturally appropriate to
our whole state and its many
diverse populations and
communities and local school
boards will still make major
decisions.
But our communities have
continued to face the impact of
bad sex ed in classrooms. Right
now there are LGBTQ students
sitting through lessons that
tell them they are broken, that
all sexuality is a sin.
Or that they are ruining their
lives if they ever engage in
sexual activity for any purpose
other than creating a child.
Not only is this untrue, but
this is damaging to young
people.
Who already face extreme
pressure, lack of self-worth,
significant self-image issues
and as LGBTQ young people.
4 times.
4 times the rate of suicide.
As there heterosexual
counterparts.
This bill, this is the sexuality
education bill fix that we need.
It will reduce sexual violence.
It will reduce risky behaviors
among young people. It will
address public health crises we
are facing in all 33 counties,
and it will help young people be
prepared for the very serious
decisions they will face as
adults.
Sexuality education is good for
young people. It's good for
LGBTQ students, and it's good
for each and every one of our
communities. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator. Anything else?
No, chair, that's it. Thank you.
Thank you. uh, we'll go out to
the audience first with a show
of hands, those in support.
Thank you, those in opposition.
OK, uh, we'll take, uh,
You know, like somewhere if we
limit a little bit we don't need
everybody, but if some of you
would like to stand up and
support, please come up to the
microphone.
And then we'll take some, these
are ones in support.
And you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alexandria Taylor and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Coalition of sexual
assault Programs, NMCSAP is the
statewide organization
supporting the prevention and
intervention services throughout
the state. Data from the
recently released New Mexico
Crime Victimization report shows
that sexual violence directly
impacts over half of New
Mexicans in our state of New
Mexicans who have been raped,
40% indicated that the first
time
was when they were 12 years or
younger. SB 258 provides youth
with vital information they need
and deserve. It encourages a
positive sense of identity and
inspires community investment,
which are all protective factors
in sexual violence prevention.
As this committee knows, you
passed our affirmative consent
bill 5 times out of this
committee. And in the end, it
still does not apply to K
through 12 students. As the
mother of a
10th grader. I know that we are
leaving our young people out of
this critical education that is
so needed. Time and again, we
continue to fell our kids by
withholding education that can
help them make empowered
decisions about their lives.
Recently, we've heard news of
the military removing sexual
violence training, and I
recently received a message from
a woman veteran who said to me,
she was so angry about that
change because it wasn't until
she received that training.
that she realized what happened
to her as a survivor was not her
fault. Even adults are living
the impact of having not
received this critical
education, um, when they were in
school. Comprehensive sex
education is not just about
preventing harm. It's also about
creating cultural change that
better cares for all of our
valued community members. Thank
you.
Thank you. Mr. Chairman, members
of committee, Julian Kub, I'm
here as the registered lobbyist
for Planned Parenthood of the
Rocky Mountains. We stand in
full support. Um, this is a
sexual violence prevention
measure, but it also is an
option for parents. Um, the law
stands the remains that with
this bill, without it, parents
can opt their kids out of sex ed
in our public education system.
That will not change with this
bill. I think this is important
because as
Somebody who, um, has had
requests from parents, from both
sides of the aisle to talk to
their kids about sex ed. Um,
this is an option for parents to
have medically accurate sex ed,
whether they want to opt their
kid out or um, have the school
systems helping with that. Thank
you.
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Savara. I'm the program manager
at Equality New Mexico. I'm here
to speak in support of SB 258.
Sex and relationships are
something many wish they knew
more about, both while growing
up and throughout adulthood.
That's why we see so many books,
news publications, podcasts, and
other forms of media on those
topics. We're desperate to
learn, but our current system of
sex education does not provide
that opportunity from reliable
and trusted sources. Instead, we
look elsewhere, which is
especially true and harmful for
LGBTQ people.
I was raised in Valencia County
in the Berlin Consolidated
Schools District. My first
introduction to my body was in
5th grade, where I learned about
body hair and erections. In
middle and high school, I was
taught by a PE coach how to
maintain my physical health,
what a condom is, and that if
you have sex, you will get STIs
and someone will get pregnant.
As a young gay man, this left me
with a lot of questions, as I'm
sure it did for everyone else.
How did I answer those
questions? I did what any team
would do. I went to the
internet. I knew I liked men,
but that was it. I didn't know
how it worked. I didn't know how
two men could have a
relationship, let alone that it
could be healthy and happy. My
personal research, due to my
lack of a trusted source for
information only results in
long-term personal insecurities,
stigmatization of sex and
relationships, bad decisions,
and unhealthy choices. Issues
that have followed me well into
my adult life. This is why
comprehensive, inclusive,
medically accurate, and
evidence-based sex education.
is so important. I urge the
committee to vote yes on SB 258.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee, Tatiana Prieto
here with the ACLU of New
Mexico. We stand in strong
support of SB 258. This bill is
about ensuring that all students
have the tools they need to
navigate adolescence and
adulthood with confidence and
care. Comprehensive sexual
health education in schools
equip students with the age
appropriate and inclusive tools
they need to be safe and to
support responsible decision
making about their well-being.
Access to medically
accurate, evidence-based
information is essential for
young people to make informed
and responsible decisions that
will shape their lives far
beyond the classroom. Research
shows that when young people
have access to this education,
they make safer, smarter, and
healthier choices. It also helps
students to build relationships
rooted in mutual respect and
communication, we urge the
committee to support this bill
and affirm the right of every
student to receive the knowledge
and education they deserve.
Thank you.
Chair and members of committee,
good morning. Happy Valentine's
Day. My name is Kat Sanchez. I'm
with Bold Futures. We are a
statewide organization by and
for Black indigenous women and
people of color.
First, we'd like to thank the
sponsors for uh bringing this
bill forward. In 2021, spanning
almost six months and alongside
strong families New Mexico, we
hosted virtual conversations
that included intergenerational
individuals from urban and rural
communities in Donana, McKinley,
and Santa Fe counties, about
access to healthcare and
resources in their communities.
One common thread we heard
clearly was the inadequate and
vastly different levels of
sexual education and.
public schools, even though it
was an educational requirement.
And as a mom of 4 kids, all of
whom went to the same schools,
they also expressed having
vastly different sex ed classes.
This bill offers comprehensive
department-approved health
education with an opt-out
component for parents who would
prefer to address sexual
education on their own. Thank
you, and we urge you to pass.
2 more. Thank you, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Haley Zo and I'm the
staff attorney from Southwest
Women's Law Center. I strongly
support SB 258 because every
young person in New Mexico
deserves medically accurate,
comprehensive and inclusive sex
education. It empowers them to
make informed decisions about
their health and relationships.
I never received sex ed in my
small Pennsylvania town, and the
lack of information hurt me
tremendously.
Without proper education, young
people are left to navigate
complex issues like consent,
healthy relationships, and
reproductive health on their
own, often relying on
misinformation or fear-based
narratives that do more harm
than good. In New Mexico, I have
heard of harm harmful,
shame-based sex education being
used. My best friend was subject
to a lesson where students were
asked to chew a piece of gum,
spit it out, and pass it to
their neighbor.
When the students were coiled,
they were told, that's what you
are if you are sexually active.
Use gum that no one wants.
Sorry.
pregnant lady, um, this is a
cruel and dam damaging message,
especially to send to young
people, particularly survivors
of sexual violence like my
friend. No one, no child should
ever be taught that their worth
is tied to their sexual history.
SB 258 ensures that New Mexico
students receive age-appropriate
evidence based instruction on
topics like consent, healthy
relationships, and reproductive
health, free from shame and
stigma, and that's why I asked
that you pass SB 258 today to
ensure that all students in
Mexico have that access that
respects their dignity, prepares
them for adulthood, and protects
their overall well-being. Thank
you.
Hello, my name is Olivia Thomas.
I'm currently in, still in high
school and I have grown up in
today's educational system and
I'm strongly in support of
Senate Bill 2258 because
It's something that a lot of
schools lack a strong um support
in youth with sexual education,
and it's a very important thing.
I know that me and a lot of my
friends peers, and others in my
community aren't given access
to, um, an environment where
they can feel safe and confident
to ask the questions that they
need to ask in order to ensure
that they keep themselves safe
as well as uh keeping
other people safe.
Um
So I believe that it's very
important that this bill gets
passed, so our communities and
our youth feel safe enough to.
Have the I don't just to be
safe.
Thank you. Uh, we do have it
looks like 6 online.
And so Eli.
The sauce
These are ones still in support.
Eli, please go ahead.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair. I did not
um make requests to make comment
on this bill.
OK, thank you, uh, Leela
Quesada.
Lila Quesada there, please.
Go ahead, please. Thank you.
Sorry. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Leela
Quesada. As a part of Girls Inc,
I have been trying to get any
type of comprehensive sex
education passed for New Mexico
students since I was in the 9th
grade.
I am now a sophomore in college.
Let that sink in.
It's been over 5 years.
I may have been failed, but I
will not let the next generation
of New Mexicans go through the
same thing as I did.
Comprehensive sex education is
life saving for students and
prepares them for the real
world. The current curriculum is
lacking the information that
students need most. Speaking
from my experience as a student
who received sex education in a
New Mexico high school, but this
bill will change that. It is
absolutely vital to bring this
bill to
Mexico schools. I ask you to
please pass Senate Bill 258.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next Diane Berger.
Um, hello, Mr. Chair, uh,
committee members. I'm the
co-founder and director of Kids
Empowered in Albuquerque. We
teach kids how to stay safe from
abuse.
I'm in full support of this bill
because I know firsthand how
important it is to equip
children with the knowledge and
skills to recognize
inappropriate touch and behavior
and to know what to do about it.
I also support it because
reducing unplanned pregnancy
will also reduce abuse and
neglect rates in our state.
I do want to make one specific
comment, however, I'm very glad
the bill includes a graduation
requirement on this topic,
because in my experience, even
though there have been laws in
place for years, which you can
see in the crossed out version
of the amended bill. There has
been absolutely no enforcement
of it.
Children in all grades are
supposed to be receiving
age-appropriate abuse prevention
education, but in my
observation, the vast majority
are not.
This is because the law as
written has no teeth and no
enforcement mechanism, which
means that schools really don't
have to comply.
I'm not suggesting schools are
choosing not to, it may just be
a lack of awareness of the
requirement or simply a focus on
subjects which are foundations
for later graduation
requirements.
So the only addition I would
like to see in this bill is more
strongly worded language that
addresses the safety education
for elementary school students.
Statistically, we know the
youngest children are the most
at risk for abuse. So while we
can't provide public education
to babies and toddlers, we can
absolutely do that starting in
kindergarten with topics such as
good touch, bad touch, and safe
grown-ups.
We can't wait until middle
school to start teaching our
kids to have respect for the
safety of their own body, and we
need stronger laws to ensure
they receive this education to
which they are entitled. Thanks
for your time today.
Thank you. And next, Milan.
But iPhone?
Is Milan there, please?
Island
Sorry about that. I'm here. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Milan Ortiz Ruiz. I'm
with the University of New
Mexico's Women's Resource
Center, and I'm speaking today
to uh express my support for
Senate Bill 258, a bill that
addresses the need for
comprehensive sexual health
education in New Mexico.
Data from the 2023 youth risk
and resiliency survey highlight
the reality that our students
are already making decisions
about their sexual health and
without access to medically
accurate, age-appropriate
information, they are left to
seek answers elsewhere, often
leading to misinformation and
risky behaviors. Comprehensive
sexual health education is not
just about providing
information. It is about
inclusivity and relevance for
all students and fostering safer
school environments. Senate Bill
258 offers
to ensure that all students
receive the tools they need to
make informed decisions,
communicate boundaries, and
build healthy relationship.
Thank you.
Thank you and Liza.
There you go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Liza Bly. She pronouns, and I've
had the privilege of teaching
medically accurate sex education
with Planned Parenthood since
2013. I'd like to start by
reading just a couple of
questions from the past month
that I've received out of 100s.
The first is, what do you think
is the best way to look out for
red flags in a relationship. And
is it normal for all my peers to
be sexual?
When I'm not.
I spend a lot of time
normalizing behaviors or
feelings just like this, uh,
student was asking in our
classrooms, talking through
what's going to be right for
someone or wrong for someone,
helping them make those
decisions. I have thousands more
questions stored up from classes
I've taught over the years, and
some are pretty alarming, which
means I was able to provide
resources in those classrooms,
so students knew how to get
support.
Sex education opens the door for
students to ask these very
important questions and figure
out what's right or wrong for
them.
I also work with adults who were
denied sex education. They don't
know how to take care of their
bodies. They don't know how to
take care of their vaginal
health. They don't know the name
for semen or that it contains
sperm that it comes out of their
body.
New Mexico youth deserve
medically accurate sex
education. SB 258 would protect
that right for generations to
come, which is so important to
be proactive right now. Thank
you.
Thank you. And last of the
online ones, Cameron Griego.
Good morning, members of the
committee. My name is Cameron
Grego, and I was a K through 12
student here in the state of New
Mexico, specifically Guadalupe
County.
Growing up in a small town of
Santa Rosa, where sex was
learned about through friends,
risque movie scenes and minimal
lessons about STIs, I can say
with confidence that mine and
many other New Mexican students,
sexual education experience was
and is inadequate. I sat there
with my classmates as the
teacher showed us various STI
photos showing us a condom and
telling us to make a self
promise to abstinence and
idolizing purity, never mention
in contraception. There was also
the time in class where they
showed us a non-human.
Cartoon video attempting to
teach us what our private parts
were. These lessons together
that total 3 hours of class
time, were supposed to be
everything we need to know when
it came to sex education for the
rest of my life. No medically
accurate terms for body anatomy,
private parts is not enough. No
elaboration on what sexual abuse
can and look can look like, or
who and how to report it.
No conversation about consent,
especially never iterating that
consent cannot be given to an
adult from a minor. No
translation for my fellow
classmates who are still
learning English or needed
learning assistance. These
points being addressed to a
comprehensive level can help
students have autonomy to
navigate sexual experiences
while also giving them the tools
to be able to seek help
inaccurately relate important
information to authorities if
needed.
When discussing the bill, please
think of the students who have
already sexual experiences
beyond the control and do not
have the verbiage to report it
or even know that it was wrong
and feel shamed for not being
pure, who at home do not have an
adult who will give them the
proper sex education if they do
not have it at school. The
students whose first language is
not English or who need learning
assistance as they more often
are likely to be left out of
these types of.
I stand in favor of Bill SB 258.
Thank you for your time.
Now, uh, those in opposition to
this bill, if you would please
come up to, to the microphone.
And you have up to 2 minutes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee stand rounds for the
school superintendents and the
coalition of educational
leaders. Our opposition isn't
what people might think we're
gonna refer you to your LASC
substantive issues on page 2,
you have in your materials.
Last year under chapter 2 laws
of 2024, we redid.
All of the graduation
requirements.
Mr. Chairman, is
well-intentioned.
But incompletely vetted vetted
legislation requires further
study.
On how to be articulated into
that system, Mr. Chairman.
We recommend, Mr. Chairman, that
this be taken to the LESC over
the interim.
Because there are many, many
ramifications of curriculum.
Of graduation requirements.
And other issues that need to be
dealt with in each district
which that little local control
thing that we talk about and set
balancing act, Mr. Chairman, we
believe requires the wisdom of
your interim committee. Thank
you.
Hello,
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Andre
Stradling, and I'm a school
board member in Farmington, New
Mexico. Um, I, there are parts
of this bill that are fine. We
love uh parent control and opt
outs, um, I will say that my
personal experience has been
that I have an 11 year old
granddaughter who due to all the
different misinformation that
she received in her classrooms
has.
now decided that she's so
confused, she thinks she's
nothing. She's non-binary. She
just has no direction. She's an
angry little person now where
before she was very sweet.
She is undergoing therapy. Um,
she learned some of this.
Dysphoria, which is a mental
health.
Exact um diagnosis, um, because
she does not understand she's
too young. Her brain is not yet
formed.
And she is struggling with the
information that she was given
that was incorrect, so this
curriculum does need to be
looked at more closely, I agree
with Mr. Browns. There are so
many facets to this on our
board, we've, we've just
finished our graduation
requirements, uh, that you
legislated and uh we hope that
we made good decisions for our
students, that's always up to
the student themselves as to.
How they put together their
credit requirements for their
graduation we, we want good
outcomes for our children. We
want them to be able to gain the
education and that they want,
um, I am all for health
education, but it needs to be
correct. It needs to be age
appropriate and I really think
we need to have a closer look at
this. Thank you for your time.
Mr. Chair and senators.
My name is Mary Joe Gallegos,
and I urge you to strongly vote
no for SB 258.
Comprehensive sexuality
education is based on the
philosophy, the children are
sexual from birth.
And this philosophy is promoted
by 3 main organizations, the
Kinsey Institute, Planned
Parenthood and seekers sexuality
information and education
Council of the United States.
Doctor Alfred Kinsey claimed his
research showed that children
are sexual from birth and that
children could engage in sex
with no downsides.
His research involves
pedophiles, molesting children
aged 5 to 13 years, 5 months to
13 years. Mary Calderon, founder
of Secas, was former medical
director of Planned Parenthood
and former Kinsey Institute
director.
Most CSE education programs are
cleverly disguised abortion
rights, sexual pleasure,
education, masquerading as human
rights, gender and sexual and
reproductive health education.
The curriculum uses gender
neutral language, normalizes
deviant sexual behavior,
normalizes homosexuality and
transgenderism and promotes
promiscuity. It only provides
more customers for Planned
Parenthood, multi-billion dollar
industry. CSCAE is really about
destroying child and parental
relationships, destroying
parental authority that parents
should have.
in their children's education.
And it undermines parents'
duties to train up our children
in the way they should go. Our
education is failing children in
New Mexico, as we have the worst
proficiency rates in, in, in the
US, New Mexico steel, uh,
schools need to focus on
reading, writing, math and
sciences.
Anyone else in the room in
opposition?
There anyone online in
opposition? No.
Uh, Senator Charlie, any
comments before we go to
questions from the committee.
Um, chair and members of the
community, we are ready for
questions.
OK. Questions from the
committee.
And boom, Mr. Chair, I move the
amendment.
An amendment.
8 senator and uh Marianne, if
you'll pass out the amendment,
please. And have you seen the
amendment?
OK.
Do you have a copy of it.
Thank you.
And Senator, if you would
please, if you'll uh explain
what your amendment does. Yes,
sir.
Mr. Chairman, I, uh.
I proposed to the Senate
Education Committee the
following amendment.
Uh
2308241
Uh, on page one.
Line 19.
After the first occurrence of
education.
Strike the remainder of the line
and strike lines 20 through 25.
And on page 2 strike line 1 and
insert in lieu thereof a period.
Then on page 22.
Strike lines 5 through 25.
Senator, slow down just a bit so
we can switch over to page 22
and see where that is. Thank
you, sir. No, no problem. Thank
you, sir.
Everybody gets a chance to move
over page 22.
want to make sure we're all on.
Looking at the same pieces. I
understand. OK, go ahead, sir.
OK, on page 22 strike lines 5
through 25.
And strike pages 23 through 26.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Does everybody
Understand what the amendment is
doing.
Thank you.
Um, and I would need to go to
the, the sponsor, would you
consider this a friendly
amendment?
Chair we would not consider this
a friendly amendment. Not a
friendly amendment, um, would
you like to explain, sir, what
your amendment does?
Well, we just feel like that
that these.
Descriptions are
Pretty well set forth.
By the department and and we
just feel like they're.
Unnecessary.
OK
Senator, if you'd like to
respond to the Senate or to the
amendment to Senate Bill 258.
Cherry deferred to my expert
witness.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee.
Those of us who have been
working on this issue have been
working on this issue for a very
long time. What we know, what we
know to be true, and what we
have heard in the public
testimony, um, and shared by Dr.
Dixon and myself this morning is
that students in New Mexico are
not receiving equitable access
to medically accurate
comprehensive sexuality,
education, information. We
believe that the that the
descriptions in this legislation
are critical for ensuring that
students all get access to the
same.
Information no matter what
community they live in, no
matter what geographic part of
the state they may be in and
And we believe that this
legislation is drafted in such a
way that local school boards
still have plenty of authority
and control over what is
culturally appropriate for their
community and remembering that
every single parent maintains
the current right that they
have, which is to opt their
student out of that curriculum
if they so choose.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I would just add that
the currents language and
statute as it relates to the
standards and benchmarks.
That address sexual health.
are not clear, do not provide a
broad definition of what is
included and that is determined
to be part of the problem of why
there is such an inequity of
what is actually taught because
it's not clearly defined. And so
this legislation provides that
language and that clarification.
So it's very clear what is
expected and why.
And again
Allowing local school districts
to maintain that authority to
decide what curriculum is gonna
be best for their schools and
their students.
Thank you. Uh, go out to the
audience, those in support of
the amendment and I believe if,
if I could summarize them,
please, if I get it wrong, sir,
correct me, uh, but it takes out
lots of the definitions under
the new
Material of what comprehensive
sexual education definitions,
academic content, information
standards, etc.
I mean, that's the the main crux
of what it's doing. Is that
accurate?
Yes sir.
OK.
So those in support of the
amendment.
They went in opposition of the
amendment.
OK. Do any of you feel compelled
that you need to come and talk
about your opposition to the
amendment. If so, I, I'd provide
you the opportunity.
Seeing no hits, OK, then we're
back to questions from the
committee, please.
Senator is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I would like to ask
Senator Boone and uh and his
amendment of Senate Bill 258.
He did uh strike quite a bit on
page one and then I get uh the
first line of page two, and then
he goes all the way over to page
22 striking lines 5 through 25.
And strike pages 23 through 26
in their entirety. One thing is
in reading this bill, and I have
marked this whenever I read it
the very first time.
On page 16.
Lines 24 and 25 continuing up on
page 17, lines 1 through 6.
That particular language was
left in there.
That is new language I didn't
know if that was an oversight on
Senator Boone whenever he was.
Drafting his uh amendment to
this bill.
Or if it was intentionally left
in because it does reference 9th
grade students.
Which is, I, I feel is more age
appropriate.
Age appropriate for what.
The senator is trying to get
done here instead of.
The 7th grade part of it, so I
don't know if that was his
thinking there on the 9th grade.
Following those guidelines that
are already listed in the new
language.
Senator Boom.
I would agree with that, Mr.
Chair. I understand, but we have
an amendment, we can't amend an
amendment.
No,
I'm just asking where what we
want to do here, Mr. Chairman,
what I was asking is the
intention for that language that
I just read off of page 16
following on to 17 if that was
intentionally left in there
because that language is more
age appropriate for 9th grade
students than it is for the
younger students.
And according to what I've just
heard from.
Senator Boone that that was the
intent of that language being
retained in the bill contained
in his OK. OK, so that that was
purposely retained in, in the
bill is what you're trying
trying to keep us from getting
confused, that's all. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions on
the amendment.
If not, what is the will of the
committee?
We have a motion for a due pass.
Seconded by Senator, if you'll
call the role on the amendment.
No.
Oh. No.
No.
And so the, the amendment fails,
we're back onto the main bill.
So again, questions from the
committee on the main bill.
He questions from the committee
seeing not is there a will of
the committee, Senator Figaro.
OK.
Mr. Chair, um,
Thank you. I wanted to offer an
amendment.
But it is not beautifully typed
up, Mr. Chair, um, but I wanted
to offer an amendment to address
the issues that we have been
discussing around uh the change
in high school requirements that
we settled on last year, and my
concern, Mr. Chair, that I've
expressed to the sponsor of the
bill is we just changed those
requirements, we need to leave
them alone for a little while,
um.
My additional concern is the
most.
New Mexico middle schools teach
health in 8th grade.
And if they continue doing that.
Under this bill, students would
have health in 8th grade.
And then 9th grade health is
when it's usually taught in high
school. So it'd be back to back,
little repetitive in the age
appropriate piece, probably
would not be that different.
So my proposed amendment, Mr.
Chair, would change back to the
option.
Of students could meet this
requirement in middle school or
high school, and leave that
piece alone.
Um. So Senator, we're in that
would, would that be? That would
be page 14, line 22, page 14,
line 22.
Mm
Where there's language that has
been struck out.
Just put that language back in.
So that it would provided that
this one a unit may be earned in
either middle or high school.
Put that back in, but then we
also need to change on page 16.
Line 22.
Are you with me, Mr. Chair?
Everybody's page 1622, after the
word graduation after that
period there.
Insert
It changed the period to a
comma.
And add provided that there's
one half unit may be earned in
either middle school or high
school.
We're on page 16 line 22.
After graduation changed the
period to a comma.
Provided the half credit union
unit can be earned in.
Provided that this 1 unit may be
earned in either middle or high
school.
And then it requires one more
change on page 21.
And if you could write them down
so that
Secretary has it OK, and then
the last.
The last change Mr. Ter is page
21.
Line 23.
OK. The very last word on the
line is and.
Strike the end and insert or or
that.
Everybody, OK? Well, we're
gonna.
Work on, on the amendment, so
questions on the amendment,
Senator.
22
Yes, Madam Chair and senator on
page 16922. You've got it right.
Change the period to a comma and
then insert.
Provided
that this 1/2 unit.
May be earned in either middle
or high school.
Yes.
And Mr. Chair, do I need to
repeat the page 21 change.
That was just changing the end
or I'm correct.
Gate Committee, everybody up
with what this amendment does.
So questions on the amendment.
But first, is this a friendly
amendment?
Chair this is a friendly would
be a friendly amendment.
Any questions on this particular
amendment.
If I can summarize, I believe
what it's doing is it still
allows the credit to be earned
in middle school rather than
must be in high school.
That accurate
Yes, Mr. Chair, that's the
intent. OK.
I might go out the audience,
anyone in opposition.
OK
Well, I don't think we need the
supporters for that.
So, on that particular amendment
discussion, Mr. Chair I pass on
the motion of do pass on the
amendment.
Seconded by Senator Figueroa, if
you'll call the role on the
amendment.
Senator Boone.
Yes
Yes.
The amendment failed.
So we are back on the main bill.
Questions on the main bill.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, so what happens if a
parent
Has their child opt out.
apologize. Senator, you wanted
to explain your vote, Mr.
Chairman, uh, it's not really
relevant now that the bill has
failed, but the concern is
There's a difference between a
middle school, a junior high and
high school.
So whenever you're using the
language uh middle school.
For our middle schools are
located, that is 6th and 7th
graders, and that is not age
appropriate material for those
young people. So therefore I
could not support this.
OK, thank you. I, I've failed
to, to give you that
opportunity.
So Senor Ramos, we are to you,
sir.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
so what happens if a parent has
their child opt out, what
happens with that credit?
Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, thank
you,
um, at current statute requires
that the district provides
support.
For that content to be taught
around sexual health that is
required in that larger health
education class. So what happens
if they opt out and they're not
getting that class. It is the
responsibility as it is in
statute right now, as I
understand it, that is the
district.
Um
It is the district
responsibility to provide that
education to that this currently
exists. This isn't something
that is new in this.
OK, well, I'm, I'm just trying
to wrap my head around this
thing. Yeah, the opt out.
the opportunity to opt out is
once a parents are made aware
that content related to sexual
health is being provided at a
health education class.
They are
They do have the right to opt
their student out of that course
content.
Mr. Chairman, uh, senator.
Currently, can a district opt
out?
At this point
Uh
No.
OK, um, since we're offering
this to uh parents to opt out,
is there any way you would
consider opting out, letting the
district top out of this, uh.
Out of this, uh, you.
Senator, um, chair, senator, I'm
gonna defer to my expert.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Ramos, no, and the reason is
actually very simple, right?
Individual parents have, they
have had, and they maintained
the right to make decisions
about the material that they do
not want their child to learn in
a school.
However, when a district has the
opportunity to opt out of the
content, then a handful of
individuals.
are making a decision about
every single young person in
that district being denied
access to information that their
parents may want them to receive
by a professional trained expert
who is prepared to deliver that
material. And so opting your own
individual child out is, in
fact, the parents' right which
continues under this
legislation.
But we also mean must maintain
equitable access to life saving
information for all students, no
matter what school district in
which they reside.
Mr. Chairman, um.
This, uh, senator, this morning
we were over at the uh school
board.
A breakfast and uh.
Uh
You did a wonderful job, by the
way, Mr. Chair, um, representing
us and uh.
When we were there,
Many of the school boards
expressed.
They want local control on many
of these issues.
And I think we need to respect.
That they want that local
control because they know what's
best for their districts.
And
I truly believe that local
control should be utilized in,
in a lot of our bills.
Because
The smaller districts have
different needs. The bigger
districts have different needs.
And uh we need to do our best
to, to comply with local
control.
Um, for that reason, I, I, I
can't vote for them vote with
this vote for this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair,
Senator Ramos, we agree with
you, and this bill maintains
local control.
Senator is up.
Language now, starting on line 4
section D. It's talking about
the 4th through the 8th grade.
And that area does very at the
very bottom, number 13 whenever
it's uh.
Pointing out the subject areas
that shall be taught.
And number 13 is health
education.
But Madam, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, whenever we're going on
over to page 4.
Line 6, section G is stating for
students entering 7th grade.
And that's where I really have a
problem.
I was one of those students
whenever I started school, I
started school very young. I
graduated at 17 years old, so
you do the math. I hope
everybody in here can do that
math, OK? That's what we're
trying to teach her, you know,
it's math to our students.
Did you go back and figure out
how old I was in the 7th grade.
And in my opinion, and if my
children were subjected to this,
I would opt them out because 7th
graders, this is way too
explicit for 7th graders.
I think whenever you're talking
about local control, would it be
up to local control to make the
decision on what is age
appropriate for those students
because I know a lot of parents
would be after that school board
like.
You know what, uh.
Telling them this is not right
for my students.
Whenever we're talking about age
appropriate curriculum through
the health program.
There, I agree it needs to be
taught.
But whenever it is bringing it
all the way down to 7th graders,
I cannot agree with this.
Another problem I saw in this,
uh, let's see.
One of the thing that I do have
a problem with and I'm talking.
Outside the realm of of the
bigger school districts and we
do have several of those in our
state.
But whenever we're talking about
our more rural schools.
Sometimes it's pretty hard for
them to get the dollars there.
To be able to hire somebody and
teach this curriculum.
So that's another burden that
we're putting on these small
districts.
Plus, even if there is somebody
that is qualified to come in
there and teach those classes.
That can be a hardship on those
uh schools as well.
I will go back to what I keep
saying every everyone and every
one of these meetings here.
Parents should be the ones that
are more inclined.
To be a part of their
children's.
Education life.
I wish that more parents would
step up and do that and take
part in what they might be
taught in this health program
that you're, uh, coming up with
your senator.
Unfortunately, that's not the
case in most kids' lives,
unfortunately, I feel really
sorry for those children.
Oh, whenever you're talking on
page 21, starting on line 19 of
your bill. You're talking about
each school district and charter
schools shall submit.
Comprehensive human sexuality
education implementation plan
for 2728.
And there in that particular
language right there going on
down to line 23.
It's including in which middle
school and or I think it was
changed.
Or was that Figueroa bill that
was Figueroa. I'm sorry on, OK,
that's why that one is smart.
And then, uh, there was.
Let me see.
The thing that bothers me about
you, Bill, whenever there was
another amendment.
That came forward and it was
stricken down.
But on page 23.
Of your bill line 23.
I, I really have problems with.
That language, whenever it says
all methods to prevent
unintended pregnancy, it goes on
down.
And the real problem comes up
for me.
On page 24 starting on line 4.
And that language does say
pregnancy outcome options,
including adoption, abortion,
and parenting.
Therefore
That that very important parent
or guardian is left out of this.
And that young person needs to
have somebody that they depend
on that they can talk to and
that parental guidance or that
guardians.
Help on the situation.
Should be a part of that
discussion right there.
I understand what you're trying
to do. We do need to make our.
Children more aware, but we have
to have an age-appropriate for
who you're trying to reach this
out to.
And the problem is going to be,
in my opinion.
You're going way too young.
And the burden that is going to
be putting on our rural schools.
I appreciate you being here
today, your expert witnesses,
that's all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, and just
kind of a a point for anybody in
the room or watching, we are not
going to get to SB 266 higher
education bill or 268, the UNM
NMSU Athletic bill, we will not
get to those. They will, looks
like going to be 3rd on the list
on Monday. Uh, we have the
general from NMMI is going to be
first up on Monday and then
those two bills will be next and
then we'll follow through there.
So if anybody is in the room for
those other bills, we will not
be getting to those today. We
will finish.
this bill.
So, uh, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this bill
forward. I
I've got some questions, um.
Just a few
So I know that most parents are
busy and usually you have two
parents. If, if you have two
parents, they're both out
working.
And uh and so.
They are not necessarily aware
of all the things that are being
taught in the school they're
assuming that they're being
taught the things that they sent
their children there to learn.
Um
So one of the concerns I have,
and it's been brought up by some
of the other members to this opt
out issue.
Uh, and my concern is that why
isn't this an opt-in
requirement. In other words,
parents.
Parents own their children,
schools do not.
So why can't parents opt in if
they choose to, they want their
students to be exposed to uh
sexual education.
And they can ask to be
Part of that.
Because it's my understanding
based on the way this bill is
written.
That if they if they opt out,
these children will still be
given the half earned credit
that they're gonna receive
regardless of whether they go in
or do not take the class.
So why can't parents opt in if
they choose to, and all other
students stay out of it unless
they're parents want them in.
Mr. Senator, thank you for that
question.
Before I defer to my expert
witness.
I want to address when you're
taking on a system and currently
parents can opt out. We are not
challenging.
That process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Thornton, I, everything
that Senator Charlie just said,
and also we would just say that.
School districts don't ask
parents to opt their children
into any other curriculum.
This is life saving critical
information that young people
deserve to have access to their
parents can opt them out of it,
but just as with the skills of
reading and writing with the
critical thinking abilities of
math and science classes. We
depend on our public schools to
provide access to information,
and we give parents the
opportunity to remove their
children from a classroom if
they see fit, and this is life
saving information that is
necessary for young people as
they
get older just as reading,
writing, math, sciences, all
are. And so why would we create
a different standard for this
life saving material.
Mr. Chair.
I have it in front of me the uh
LESC report.
From 2025, dated January 2025.
And
Page 79 basically says, our
4-year graduation rate.
76%.
We had a 0.5 point improvement.
Our student proficiency in
reading.
39%.
Our student proficiency in math.
23%.
Our student proficiency in
science.
38%.
We are not teaching the kids the
things that they are supposed to
be taught.
I see this as an example of why
our proficiencies so bad in the
areas where the basic things of
education.
We are ranked last in the state
of New Mexico.
Last
I'd like to see a focus.
On these things.
I think our parents expect our
students to perform in these
areas.
And I don't believe
Our students are unsafe.
Because when I was in 7th grade,
I could barely look at a girl. I
don't want to think about her.
And um
Maybe I was a light boomer.
I took my human sexuality class
in college.
college
Not in middle school.
And that's age appropriate.
So I have some big concerns
about what we're trying to do
with our kids.
I think that we need to get back
to the basics of why we're
sending them to school in the
first place.
And with that
You can, you can respond to that
if you choose.
OK.
Yeah
Senator, um, there wasn't a
question. Thank you.
Other question, hm.
OK, other questions from the
committee.
No.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, sponsors.
I have a few questions. Um, and,
uh.
I want to understand, Mr.
Chairman, uh,
Do you believe that, uh,
Senator, do you believe that
early sexual education increases
sexual activity.
Mr. Chair, Senator Nova.
Not only do I not believe.
that
access this information.
It's not
We have data and science to
prove that it doesn't.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, sponsor, um, you are
correct. I, I spent time looking
into your bell, researching the
data behind it and all of us
have an LESD report in front of
us as well, um, and I want to
point attention to who we are as
New Mexicans, who we are as
communities and who we are made
up of and talk about pregnancy
rates. If we want to talk about,
um,
Sexual education and the
importance in New Mexico. So
according to the LESC report, it
says, uh, that pregnancy rates
in New Mexico have declined
significantly from 2010 to 2020,
but we are still above the
national average. Um, and, uh,
teen pregnancies, um, and those
teen pregnancies are
disproportionately affecting
Hispanic and Native American
women. Um, and there are much
higher rates for them, and when
we have
Children born into teenage
mothers, there's a higher risk
of all of the things from low
birth weight, um, infant
mortality.
To also, uh, grubbing up in
single parent families and have
low attachment and performance
in school. These children, uh,
these children are also likely
to be placed in foster care and
to be incarcerated in adult as
adolescents, um, and this is
according to some Department of
Health, uh, data, and as the
daughter of a teen mother,
I
Absolutely would have to say,
Mister Chairman, um, that I have
these conversations frequently
with my mother, and
Not to point out age, but I
believe I was in 7th grade in a
very different time as the rest
of my colleagues here.
Um, and my experience was very
different.
Uh, and coming from a culturally
strong family Catholic family,
Mr. Chairman, uh, uh.
Sponsor
My experience and the
experiences of students nowadays
are in no way comparable to
those of 10 years ago, 20 years
ago, 30 years ago. We are at
different times, and I am deeply
concerned about the exposure
that our children and our
students are put out to, Mr.
Chairman, and bringing this bill
forward, I believe, provides an
opportunity to access
information.
That is data driven, that is
comprehensive, and that helps
our most vulnerable communities,
because whereas many of us wish
we had learned these things from
our parents. I will be very
honest, Mister Chairman, and
sponsor. My parents would never
have sat down with me because of
cultural issues, cultural
values, and my parents just
never felt that it was
appropriate for them to really
discuss these matters with us,
um, but now in an age where we
have devices as these.
Computers, iPads, all of the
things.
It's exposure, and it's
endangerment for our children
and our students, and I think if
we have the opportunity to bring
forward something that is
collective, that is cohesive and
that provides the opportunity to
opt out. I believe this is a
strategic manner to address many
of the issues that we are
dealing with, Mr. Chairman, um,
and I, my question around all of
this.
Um, is
In regards to the curriculum,
Mr. Chairman, and uh Senator,
uh, have you all consulted, uh,
with uh school boards or PED in
terms of the development of the
curriculum and how that would
take place.
Mr. Chair Senator Nava, thank
you for that question. I'm gonna
defer to my expert witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Um, so this bill was
brought forward after about 4
years of coalition work,
including a number of
organizations that you heard
speak earlier, uh, that
coalition work has included
researchers. It is included
school board members, former
school board members, is
included instructors. It is
included students, and we
believe that this piece of
legislation brings forward all
of that technical expertise and
to your point, all of that
lived.
Experience about what young
people actually need access to.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, sponsors.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
Senator Nava, I would just add
that in the research that we've
done in talking to multiple
different.
Um, leaders and school staff
members and multiple different
districts, um, guidance around
curriculum for teaching those
content, um, is needed. This is
a difficult content area to
teach.
And so having that support and
guidance and training would be
really important.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, I move a due pass
on Senate Bill 258.
We have a motion for a due pass.
have a substitute motion to
table that takes precedent.
There is no debate, very.
Mary Anne, if you'll call the
role on a tabling motion for
Senate bill 266.
258. I'm on the wrong page. 258.
Si
No.
No, so the tabling motion does
not pass, uh, we have a motion
for a do pass. The second
Figueroa, thank you. You'll call
the roll on a do pass motion.
See.
Yes.
Yes, you have a due pass motion
or do pass for Senate bill 268,
258, I'm so lost today.
Thank you Chair. Thank you.
Uh,
that's gonna conclude what we do
today. We've got a fairly
aggressive agenda on Monday,
some of them I think are fairly
short bills. We will start with
uh the New Mexico Military
Institute and then the two that
we rolled over from today, but
in several others that are
fairly short appropriation kinds
of bills on Monday. So hopefully
we'll get through a good number
of those. So thank you
committee.
