Thanks for two eighty nine yes
and I understand that you're
going to begin that presentation
as Senator Lopez is on the road
right now as we speak it I
understand yes.
Okay great I got.
Mister chairman Senator once we
are are are in session in
committee can I give an update
on for a one.
The yes you it indicated you
wanted it moved to Friday I
think and so we were not
planning on it today it that's
correct.
Yes Sir that is correct that I
contacted you about your.
Or one I I.
But pretty late last night with
the secretary of that PED and M.
D. chair of the peach state and
work with the three of us are
still working together to get
that bill right so I appreciate
your patience thank you okay
thank you.
We're just trying to hold in
place to we hear that the
webcast is up and running
Senator the webcast is up and
running now.
Okay so we're right again
whenever you are thank you and.
We will begin Senate Education
Committee or at what are we
March third just the updates for
people watching Senate bill four
oh six has been pulled by the
sponsor will not be heard Senate
bill four oh one career
technical education under the
pad Senator Padilla has asked
did not ready yet so we will
look towards putting it as the
first item on Friday I believe
there were for House Bills the
keen in and got ready and that
are on our list those will also
be are planned for on Fridays to
hear those today we have two
bills left out Senator Lopez
Senate bill two eighty nine
special ed career Division
Department Senator pick those
agreed to begin that and then
new business Senate bill three
nineteen school use of restraint
with that is there anything from
the committee before we get
started.
I'm not seeing any hands I'm not
hearing anybody jump right in
and so with that Senator Pinto
if you will please do give us on
Senate bill two eighty nine.
Thank you senator and we would
like to move forward with the
committee substitute.
Senator K. committee substitute
for Senate bill two eighty nine
page on page nine nine six
deprivations of insert and
exceptional and magistrates with
disabilities and action to the
on page nine line twenty one
after of insert exceptional
strike with an online twenty two
strength disabilities.
Okay I thank you and you know
because we had a lot of dust the
committee substitute yet we're
still on the original bill and I
think we we need to.
Do not pass it does operative
one or Senator Brandt on the
language on that changing from
the regular bill to a committee
substitute with someone like
the.
To make that motion.
Thank you Mr chairman I will
move.
Are you wanting to move to the
point where the amendment.
Get
the substitute first and then
we're gonna move in a right to
the substitute.
I would move it do not happen to
eighty nine and a half I'm sorry
and they do that but you eighty
nine.
Education Committee to we're
gonna go to eighty nine for a
discussion offline.
Thank you senator I think I got
all that.
Thank you do we need to we need
to take a vote on doing that.
I don't think so.
Okay
we move on and and now and now
senator I think we want to do
the amendment on the committee
substitute.
Okay the amendment on so the
what I just read
page.
Amendment for discussion
purposes.
All of the that little part
before Senate bill two eighty
nine committee substitute for
Senate bill two eighty nine and
out of in center we pretty much
got through it but that the
amendment changes within
exceptional instead of with
disabilities in two separate
places I think the purpose of
that is that includes gifted
education not just
of what people might consider
more traditional special
education.
Yes yes Mr chair.
So anything else on the
amendment to the committee set
up.
So committee were on the
amendment to the committee set
up is there any discussion.
I'm not seeing any if we have a
motion to accept the amendment
to the committee order.
Mr chair I I'll make an attempt
to I like to make a motion
To our to do pass on the
amendment to.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
in.
Sounds like you didn't justify
it.
And seconded that I still don't
see any discussion on that so
merry and if you will call the
roll on the amendment to the
committee substitute.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Yes Sanders Sauls yes we have an
amended committee sub so we have
amended amendment to the Senate
Education Committee sub two
percent a bill to eighty nine so
we are now on the.
Committee substitute of.
Senator are you still continuing
on and explaining what the
substitute the changes in the
bill.
We just had the small changes on
the committee substitute and we
can begin the bill.
Senate bill two eighty nine next
the special education act within
the public school code outlining
the powers and duties of the new
special education division and
Assistant Secretary for special
education and create a statewide
autism spectrum registry and
the.
What is in their will correlate
with the different classes that
are in the special education for
funding bill also revises the
public school co to include
charter schools in special
education act requirements to
provide services to students
with disabilities and gifted
students I need appropriations
at a low four one million from
the general fund to the public
education department to provide
professional development for
teachers and other school staff
on working effectively with and
meeting the needs of special
education students and I Senator
Lopez and also representative
Thompson it appropriates that
money to pay from their junior
money into the fund.
And there was some discussion
about that there was a the
bureau with in that PED that
does exist but this is making it
a division in which you will see
an
and that PED organizational
chart they are not listed as a
Department in that sense.
It's kind of more of the bureau
sense and with that it also with
this creation will also create a
director and.
Gives more accountability in
that sense top down.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and I am been and
I do have two expert witnesses.
merry and I don't know their on
line Rachel Goodall was
extraordinary PD is with us and
and.
Were requests for Rico.
I think was the other.
Expert witness
right now we just need to do
want to go or are you.
I'm just here for technical
support I will say we work
virtually any who's also on from
L. E. S. C. we work closely with
the sponsor with Diane Velazquez
Torres to help.
Crop the substitute so I think
if there are technical questions
we are here to help with that.
Okay so miss me worried though
if.
Can you hear me.
A good morning I chair and
Education Committee members my
name is Ronaldo were returned
home I am an advocate for native
American children here in the
state of New Mexico but also
nationally I am also an
education consultant for
special education when it comes
to not only children and in
tribal communities but also in
urban and also residing in our
you know in in other places for
native American children are
residing I'm.
I'm here not only to represent
this bill but also to
acknowledge that we are
beginning and most of you know
after this whole pandemic this
crew clears the slate to where
we can start something in New
and I am hoping it not only with
this bill and as you see it read
it that there is a a great
response and not only looking at
the top in creating insistence
secretary but how does that
trickle into not only
professional development
cultural awareness when it comes
to administering our curriculum
and teaching to our children
with disabilities and but then
also down to the professional
training when it comes to
parents also.
Understanding the needs of
support for how they can be
supported I want to begin with
is just a small story here and
that's my sole reason for having
the staff but six years ago I
worked for an organization that
solely spoke on behalf of native
American children with
disabilities and this particular
staff was created for a power
well we had for our new our
special needs children and
families and with this staff we
also had an honor song for those
children and we invited people
from the community come and join
us not just to honor the
families but also to come as a
great community to support these
children with disabilities and
so the staff was created but the
sad reality is once I left that
organization the staff was put
away and put in the closet so no
one can see anymore and the song
no longer song and so it was
very disheartening for me as
someone who went on to school
and left this to look at
organization in hopes that it
was going to further the cause
of our children with
disabilities but specifically
our native American children and
so I went to that organization
and asked what happened to that
staff and I was taken to a
closet and this was rolled up
and put up and then I said to
them what are we going to do
with this they then said they
were going to do anything and
they returned it back to me.
So.
In that perfect picture I just
want to say to everyone who's
here that we put children with
disabilities aside and we don't
realize the value of who they
are
spiritually the staff represents
the soul of those children.
And native American children in
general.
How we've not only looked at
them as invisible but I hope
that bringing out the staff that
we are no longer going to do
that.
Still reason for being here
because my work for children
with disabilities has continued
on for at least twenty years I
worked in the state of Colorado
and came back to my home I grew
up on the reservation in Crown
Point New Mexico I've had
children with disabilities one
child specifically with a
learning disability and all
three of my children gifted I've
had advocates strongly for their
needs and it taught me from
there that my children weren't
the only ones going through this
but that much that all children
within special ed we're having
these great difficulties and I
know there are laws and policies
and funding that provides for
these children to have a fair
and equal education but I also
feel that this bill also states
within it accountability and
that's strongly needed right now
we do have the laws and policies
but I feel that they're just
those are ways of just saying oh
yeah they're taking care of yeah
they get funding but there is no
one following through on those
ideas on making sure these
children have adequate IEPs the
transitions are taking place for
majority of these children
because when I sit at those
tables advocating for these
children is my.
It's really hard to believe that
I have to instruct and give
professional development to so
many teachers to administrators
and to also stop many schools in
in trying to to discipline
instead of reacting and saying
Hey let's look at this
disability of this trial and
let's try and figure out what we
need to do but what SLO's
lacking is the professional
develop development but also as
a native American advocate the
culture the language in all of
these issues are not considered
until somebody brings it up but
then teachers don't know how to
react to that families try their
hardest to do that but I feel so
many times that they're pushed
to the side but is my place
right now just to bring you the
the importance of this bill and
what needs to happen in taking
it not only the step forward but
how can we make sure that these
children are no longer invisible
just like this staff we have to
take in and pull out and figure
out how are we going to not only
make sure these children have
these these choices how are we
going to stand by them to make
sure these things are being done
in this bill is going to
implement that with with you
know and Assistant Secretary and
the professional development
that needs to happen in the
cultural and all of the you know
the curriculum and things that
need to happen for these kids
but I really the appeal to you
and hope that you would not only
support this bill but also let's
just come together for a moment
and and identify that these kids
are not seen they're not heard
and the families go through so
much because my children are
older now the disability doesn't
go away we're still dealing with
a lot of those issues at home
now that they are adults so I I.
One one The state that I support
this bill but I also feel that
we need to take the opportunity
to step forward and take the
chance we need to end the risk
to really fully implement and
understand what is it gonna take
to improve special ed but is
also that manpower to say
accountability needs to happen I
just thank you for this
opportunity in this time to
speak to you but I also hope
that we not only pass this bill
but also see how we can support
and bring children to the
forefront with disabilities
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Can we go I am you are we all
have that I'm talking away and
realize nobody's paying any
attention because I'm making
those sounds
Thank you what that I'm I'm not
sure I saw where that pertain
much to this specific bill would
be a lot of passion as to the
reasons behind it
at this time to a car will you
take us out to in the input from
the public please.
Absolutely percent bill to
eighty nine we did not have any
members of the public who
registered in advance to speak
in opposition are there any
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition of Senate
bill two eighty nine please
raise your hand.
A no hands we will now move to
those wishing to speak in favor
of the bill with Joan Davis.
Joel Davis has just entered the
waiting room I'm are there any
other members general Davis are
you here with us.
Joel Davis.
We are speaking in favor of
Senate bill two eighty nine.
Yes go ahead.
What has been noted there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two eighty nine
please raise your hand.
Katey stone.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee Senate bill two
eighty nine does what needed to
be done for a long time it
brings special education up to a
level that it deserves to be at
nearly fifteen percent of our
students are enrolled in special
education service it's time for
special education to be at the
at administrative level in the
way that other departments have
been given that have even fewer
students involved thank you very
much.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you now we're ready for
questions from the committee.
Senator Kernan about the call on
because I could tell you we're
finding that but now I was like
I was expecting what yeah thank
you very much Mr chairman thank
you
for The presentation I I
apologize but I'm not working
from the sap of working from the
original bill so I get off point
just tell me.
Read through this over the last
few days I've noted that in the
bill there are numerous
Definitions that I thought
probably were already somewhere
in the public school code or
statute at definitions like
dyslexia exceptional student
gifted students but it's it's
it's tell ME aren't these
already established definitions
either in for our state over the
federal government.
Referred to.
R. L. yes the right to go to.
I'm so Mister chairman Senator
you are correct what the bill
does there are
There are sections and twenty
two thirteen that deal with
special education and this is
repealing those sections and
putting them into a new special
education act so some of these
definitions are existing
definitions that are pulled out
of twenty two I think it's
twenty two thirteen six that's
being repealed by the bill and
put into the new definition
section for the special
education acting those
definitions in twenty two
thirteen six were special
education definitions you'll
also see section two of the bill
as the general public school
code definitions of section
twenty two one two
most of that is clean up.
And those are again of course
existing existing definitions.
Okay thank you very much and Mr
chair and senator and right so I
think that with all track the
federal if there any definitions
in the from the federal
perspective we're not we're not
changing anything there.
Senator now.
Thank you very much I think.
I think I have a question with
regard to Mr chair and senator
and again I'm looking for the
original bill but the the intent
is to I have this Division
coordinating transition efforts
for special education students
and public schools with the
higher J. education department
and are we are we doing that now
and what authority does PED have
a basically to cross over and
make certain I guess request or
demand so whatever in working
with the higher ed and I know we
talked about the need for better
collaboration with fire at that
is that a new responsibility R.
S. that always been the
responsibility the bureau to go
ahead and work at in
transitioning these students
from.
At K. twelve in the higher it is
set to change in general policy.
And referred to Rachel Goodall.
So Mister chairman Senator I
think it I think PED is on and
they would probably be the best
person to answer a few remember
they have the division of
vocational rehabilitation to
that sits underneath them that
works with
adults with disabilities but I
believe John Cena's on.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Good morning Mr chair Senator
Kernan I would have to confirm
whether or not we here we have
had in the division does that as
Rachel said that maybe some of
the work that DVR does but let
me follow up and get back to you
and.
Thank you Mr chairman thank god
Senator I think that's a really
important piece because I know
over the last few months Senator
Lopez actually has been
involved.
With the couple that stand in
discussing at DVR and some of my
concerns because they have
transitioned from what I thought
was a really good program that
was said to leverage through the
are you see in Albuquerque and
other parts of the state and
they have actually ended that
contract and they're doing it on
their own which I still have
real concerns about because I'm
not sure they're going to be
reaching these very important
children that is a transition
from high school either into a
job or into college I'm not sure
they're they're prepared at this
point to do that well and so as
we direct the PED under this new
division at to make sure that
occurs I think there's there's a
gap there and so I would like to
hear back from Mr sent to see
where we are on that and I I am
concerned that that is such a
critical piece of this not just
getting the children ready for a
job but also at preparing them
at the higher end level so DVR
support piece of this but I
think they're in transition with
regard to services that they
were providing through the REC
that they're no longer provided
several real concern about that
moving on with regard to this.
Use included
special education to the added
charter schools and so my
question is Mister chairman
Senator.
I'm.
Whatever I think of charter
schools I think about
Albuquerque because they have
charter schools everywhere in my
district we don't have any
charter schools but it's my
understanding that eight and and
I may be wrong with that
district actually has
responsibility for all special
education students at that
require services whether it's
speech therapy any kind of
occupational therapy whatever
those requirements are that that
they are responsible throughout
the district with your
traditional school or charter
school can someone help me
understand the responsibility
currently in place for districts
to provide services for all
special ed students whether
they're in a traditional or
charter school.
Mr Chairman prescribed for that
too the PED.
Mr chair Senator I'm sorry I can
you can you repeat the question
yes so in in the bill and and
I'm again looking at the
original bill but I I'm I'm
assuming it's in the set that
school districts and charter
schools shall provide special
education related services
appropriate to meet the needs of
special education students so my
question is what is the current
responsibility of school
districts related to that I
think you're that child is
Senate traditional school or
charter school are they required
I does services across the
district all students regardless
of where they're grow charter or
traditional.
So Mr chair Senator Kernan it's
it's my understanding that a.
That depending on the you know
if it's a if it's a charter
school is a state chartered
charter schools are independent
of the district and so they
would be required to provide
those services you know this the
not every school and I'm sure
folks in this room know this
really well that you know some
to some districts and some
charter schools because of the
lack of personnel often contract
those kinds of services out but
every public school is
responsible for filling the
requirements of a student's
individualized education plan.
So Mr chair and senator this is
this is a little bit concerning
to me because we know the school
districts the traditional
schools are they are contracting
those services in most cases out
imagine because typically you
can't number one you can't find
those professionals.
Within just one area many times
I know it rural area they're
probably coming in from from at
other larger community so it's a
challenge just find those in the
traditional school setting and
so now we have charter schools
and parents typically are the
ones who make the choice to send
their children to a charter
school and I would assume that
those parents understand what's
available in the charter school
that might not be available in a
traditional school and so when
they make that choice and
perhaps
in that transition or at some
point that student is designated
to special education students
then that charter school is now
required it appears to go out in
contract with probably multiple
professionals to provide
services and and I'm not saying
that's a wrong thing to do that
but I'm wondering if if some of
our charter schools would have
difficulty in number one finding
those professionals and and and
kind of getting in line to to
get them contracted and what
generate funds for that special
ed students as a member of a
charter school as opposed to
traditional school.
Mr chair and senator.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question so that was one of
the reasons for the creation of
this division is so that they
can provide the assistance and
quite funding for the special
education programs that are
needed so that they can work
hand in hand instead of just
making it up serving as a
resource but really making that
responsibility and
accountability there to ensure
that we do have.
More.
Supported environment for the
schools to come to so that the
state can help them.
Meet those needs of the
students.
So thank you and and Mr chair
and senator and so just kind of
trying to figure out you know
the funding I don't think
funding is generated through the
different divisions I mean they
they can't appropriates are
requests that we just saying
that of course the legislature
we're the ones to determine that
in in and I'm not opposed to.
Having a broader view but I just
think we have to be really
careful about including
Charter schools and and placing
on them the burden of trying to.
Meet such special needs your
district when you've got
multiple schools in our district
you contracted that individual
goes out throughout the district
but then if you're charter
school you're very small piece
the small.
Entity and yet would have that
responsibility they did they
could coordinate with each other
charter schools and in the area
I'm just not sure how that would
work and and maybe I need more
information both from the PED
from the school districts and I
need to hear from the charter
schools to see if they're able
to provide those services in a
meaningful way because we we
don't want to include that and
find out that first they don't
have the funding to do it
secondly there they're not
organized in a certain standard
that the division the assistant
data secretary would would help
that.
It's not the responsibility of
thank you missus and secretary
to find funding I think that
would be an overall
responsibility at the
legislature
when the state.
So
in looking at the gifted I want
to make sure I think I saw
somewhere that
gifted is not required if it is
a decision of district to
determine whether they will find
a gifted program is that is that
currently in place and is that
the intent of this bill to
continue to make sure that their
district.
Our charter school offers a
gifted program but not required.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and I defer that to PED's or
it's answering that first part
of the if the program.
So Mr chair Senator Kernan I
just wanna make sure I
understand your question
correctly you're you're asking
whether or not a district is
required to provide gifted
education services.
So Mister chairman Senator in
the bill it says each school
district or charter school
offering a gifted education
programs which leads me to
believe that they're not
required is that true.
Senator if I might what page are
you on in line or what's on page
fourteen of the original bill
line thirteen and it's set up
you know I'm just trying to
figure out.
Just a question I don't think
every district has to find a
gifted program I think it's a
wonderful thing when they get
and probably a lot of the did
find that but then again now
we're we're I just wanna make
sure it's not a requirement by
charter school they have to find
a gifted program.
Mr chairman if I can real quick
this section is existing law and
the only things that have been
changed are really clean up in
this section so it's really
included in the bill to
recompile it in the special ed
section
I can't answer if they are
required to or not but the
intent was not to change what is
actually happening with gifted
students in this action so thank
you Mr chairman thank you Rachel
but but it does have for charter
school underlying descent in
there and then in.
This so I am so so Mister
chairman Senator in the
In the committee sub it's page
thirteen subsection C. which
starts on fifteen all okay this
cap it's still includes charter
schools but I will say about.
Charters in immunity go back to
your last question about charter
schools charter schools are
required to provide special
education services if they are
not providing in the charter
school is a locally charter
charter school it is the
district's responsibility as
their oversight authority to
step in and make sure those
children are receiving services.
Order charter school legislative
charter charter school is
considered a L. E. a and they
are individually responsible for
providing the services of
students need regardless of if
there are you know they have the
capacity to do so or not they
are required to do so
clear yep that clarifies and
explains that we're really not
changing anything that that
responsibility still rests with
the charter schools that are
part of the district and I'm
assuming the districts help find
many of those services maybe
through a contract situation
with the charter is that
correct.
Mr Chairman they could have
those relationships that that's
how charter school determined it
was best to serve their students
if you think about caseloads
like your small districts they
may not have enough students to
have a full time FTE to do
things
most of these laws are the
special adviser really old like
nineteen ninety five two
thousand and I were the last
time the been amended
So we haven't really looked at
him in a long time.
So what you're Mr chairman and
senator if that's the case if if
maybe eight.
More in depth study of what
we're doing with regard to at
children with disabilities and I
will tell you I am
Just from a personal standpoint
I think sometimes we need to be
really
Good advocates for those
children because I think
sometimes
it's really difficult even state
by state the attention paid to
children with disabilities is is
very if you look at the state of
Texas.
Only about six percent of their
overall population.
Are considered special education
students and it was such a low
percentage that the federal
government actually had to come
in and set you are not serving
the Stroger and in New Mexico
out of bills it's still at about
seventeen or eighteen percent
that we certainly do a better
job in New Mexico that many
State Street with regard to
identifying and providing
services.
So with regard to removing from
appear to the division to me I
think that's a decision
I don't know what that entails
financially with that experience
staffing if it's just a good
line change with a little bit
more focus on the responsibility
of the division to.
To really make sure that these
kids are being served and that
and I don't have a detection to
that at all I just want to make
sure that PED our welfare if
they can comment if there's
forty four not that but I do
think that just the state we
have a responsibility to these
children and if it takes a
little bit more oversight that
we need to do that I do want to
stress that we need to focus on
the DVR he said at the PED and
make sure that we're not letting
these kids not receive services
as a transition from K. twelve
into either career or to college
so that's really all I have I
just want to make sure we work
with the additional
responsibility on a charter
school that it may be out we
were not saying that obviously
they still have that
responsibility as part of the
district so thank you very much
that's all and.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
Our current
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Pinto for bringing this bill
forward
just have a few questions in the
bill we have the special
education division director and
currently does a special
education division within PED is
this gonna be the same role what
they with this be a new division
that's being set up wonder if
you could just clarify that.
Thank you Mr that Mr Chairman
Senator we believe it is a new
division.
You know the borough is under it
but when we talk about
accountability and having that
same hello if you want to say
level of power or that.
I think it's long overdue.
You know we have different
students in New.
In the norm and then we have our
students that need special
services really that's probably
the two divisions we should
really have in this but we have
a quite a few divisions in
their.
But it's just a bureau right now
so just bringing up level at in.
In my interpretation I can refer
to PED or L. E. S. C..
So.
Mister chairman Senator PED
currently has a special
education department they have
eighteen authorized FTE sixteen
of those look to be filled right
now there
Department directors making
about ninety seven thousand
almost ninety eight thousand you
look at the Indian Education the
assistant Indian education
secretary that salaries at about
a hundred and ten thousand so
there's a little bit of funding
needed most of not not most all
of these positions are funded
their idea funds that so through
federal special education funds
Actively your you're giving the
division a new name it likely
makes this leadership position
in exempt position so governor
appointee much like
the Assistant Secretary for
Indian education and
that's probably one of the one
of the major changes in terms of
staffing the bill doesn't
necessarily require more FTE to
be hired in the department
though I know that I think the
senators on now Senator Lopez
the bill has a million dollar
appropriations so there may be
I'm an intent by the the sponsor
to.
Fund to the Department defended
the division differently.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator Senator Pinto
I'm sorry Center gonna do you
have anything else that.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you senator.
Mr chair Senator Pinto the
question I had was concerning a
little bit what Senator Kernan
had brought up you know we are.
really kind of layering I mean
leveling up.
That requirement to charter
schools now to take on this role
of lights you know providing
license special education
teachers and I want this to
happen I want to do more for our
students especially education I
agree but.
I I guess I'm just wondering how
we're going to do that because
you know.
For that option is going to be
more funding more resources from
the legislature place
legislature to make that happen
and just just wanted to get your
comments on that on how we do
that.
Thank you Mr chairman members
Senator one of the things being
a teacher was that I was very
surprised in some sense that.
When a child is identified with
an I EP that the money should
follow the child wherever they
go where it with they went to a
charter school in the state and
public school.
It should really follow the
child but when we talk about
this in the sense of about
funding and where is it going to
come from these children are the
students in New Mexico because
it shouldn't matter where they
go to school I should not be a
gap in their education in any
instance because of money.
And if that is the case then
there is something wrong with
what we are doing in education
if that funding is not following
the child her to give them that
right to an education and I can
defer to L. E. S. C. R. PED.
The reader what director Gardell
said earlier that and I would
defer to her as far as the
drafting and including the
charter school language in this
bill but charter schools are
already required to provide the
services
this so including and charter
schools explicitly in the bill
is not adding any new
requirement as far as their
their responsibility to provide
the services to students
there that this would this would
be no additional
responsibilities that they're
that they're not already
undertaking I just want to make
that clear that charter schools
already responsible for this you
receive funding for special ed
students like every other school
district and public school
through the funding formula
again there are there are issues
of of access to personnel that
and and Senator Kernan mentioned
that about rural schools small
schools are visual educational
cooperatives often provide
contract services for for those
rural communities for these
kinds of you know physical
therapy occupational therapy
those kinds of things but the
bill itself does not have any
any new requirements for charter
school.
So thank you Mr chair Senator
Pinto so it sounds like the way
the funding formula is for the
students were they choose to go
that's that's where the funding
goes and that's my understanding
as well and it sounds like we
just want to make sure that the
students have the same
opportunity as every other
students so they choose to go to
a charter school for that that
education we just want to
provide that same opportunity.
And Mister chairman Senator yes
I I hope we all have that intent
in mind at the end of the day.
Well thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Pinto and Senator
Lopez RPG's online as well thank
you that's all I have.
Thank you senator Senator Hickey
that your hand was up did you
take it back down and don't have
a question about these to you
Sir.
I did it maybe it's not terribly
germane that's why I took it
down but since you asked just a
very quick when
Senator Mr Chairman.
You are back on you we lost you
I think has been unit again.
Thank you Mr chairman and
my question for Senator Pinto
is.
In your opening you had
mentioned the autism spectrum
and I didn't see that written in
the bill
but I'm assuming that are are
they included in this special
landers there's something
separate from them.
Within special education I
believe they are classified in
different levels and I think
this it's correlated with the
the funding that we do with the
the indexing in the I miss and I
can defer that to rally at C. or
PED
thank.
Mister chairman Senator there
I'm looking for the section as
we speak is a section in the
bill that recall occurs.
We're knee with other entities
school districts institutions of
higher ed to create and his
number registry
I am not.
Finding it there we go it is on
page eleven subsection.
Was senator Pinto noted if you
are autistic it is one of the
things that will designate your
your gateway designation of
special ed to receive services
so through the federal idea your
your given services pursuant to
that but this is just trying to
set up that registry.
Thank you Mr Joel and
Senator Pinto I I we're still
dealing with how do you Gallegos
spectrum and so forth but
even even as that gets worked
out over the years it.
I don't want to call it just
bill because many of them are
just growing people it's just
it's a it's a way of relating
and people misunderstand them
and put them into a lower
category having been dyslexic my
whole life I love to see the
updated version that's I'm a
walking version of that
but I do want to be sure that
that we are dealing with the
options and and and and someday
maybe someone I thank you so
thank you I appreciate that that
that one very strongly support
this bill maybe a little selfish
of me that our special ed staff.
I don't know I want to say got
me here today that certainly got
me through medical school and
the practice of medicine thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair thank thank
thank you senator Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Pinto center Lopez and
Senator control outstanding
words in it and and addressing
all of these questions and I
haven't been able to see you
present
my senior percent built with
this I'm I'm very proud of you
and I'm very proud of the work
that you're doing here and also
just want to give a shout out to
my neighbor Senator Lopez she
has been beaten the strong for I
don't know how long and I think
it's just a beautiful thing
It's very timely and I think
that we we're all finally
recognizing the the deep desire
deep need our state to to lift
this student population you know
up and and will now that senior
present many times so I'm just
so proud of you and all the work
that you've done as well
I am all about innovation I'm
all about trying to innovate
state government and and how we
do things and that's why you see
when I brought the early
education department bill and
and then now we're we're trying
to create an officer broadband
access expansion and I think
that we're ironing out something
in the PED that needed to be
taken seriously and to and and
Senator Lopez I'm just like.
Just so honored to work with you
on many things but on this one I
think is a really really super
move in the right direction.
The product of the legislature
if we get this all the way
through so thank you just a
couple of small questions I just
wanna make sure that nothing
that we're going to do here is
going to.
at all adversely affect things
like IEPs and other things of
that nature that we're going to
continue to have those items
they work I believe they work at
scene the work I I I've that
personal experience with them
working and are we going to have
any sort of change to any of
the.
The inner workings of how we the
things are going well today I
guess that's where we put.
Mr chairman thank you senator
for that question and.
When you talk about the IEPs
instead.
With the school has that
changeover in in special
education is a very different
unit we least can see that there
are vacancies and this doesn't
just happen you know it happens
here there and it's a.
With the school is trying to
meet those are you PED's some
might they don't have anywhere
to turn.
Doing this would also create a
little more push to to have less
of a gap in those are E. peas
for the schools because we can
say this is where it should you
know if we can meet it there at
the school or at the district
then it is the state that will
come and fill that role in in my
eyes and I defer that to L. E.
S. C. R. PED.
Mr Chairman Senator the intent
is not to change the process
that's happening at the school
district it's really to create a
new division in the department
get them out from underneath
other division directors were
overseeing multiple multiple
departments and having a direct
line
I would say quite frankly to.
Secretary.
Was my ringtone thank you I
apologize thank you are director
got someone and Senator Pinto
and others I think that's all
very good I want to hear that
and so I appreciate that the
other question I had was I think
might have been along the lines
Senator Kernan questions on
definitions and things of that
nature I don't know if I Center
souls and others and Senator
Lopez trying to think and
senator bill Senator Kernan.
Yes Sir Brandon a few others
what when when I first arrived
here we we found out two weeks
later that we had not properly
applied for
some federal dollars to the tune
of a hundred and fifty four
million that we were either not
going to be eligible for with
what we had to do was a dog
fight to get a hold of that
money to make sure that it came
in the state our our did we do a
complete and thorough you know
kind of once over in flushing of
this legislation to make sure
that we don't put ourselves in
conflict anything that might
come in the state from a federal
standpoint.
For special education.
Mr chairman thank you senator
and I'll defer that to Elliot
CMPD as far as collaboration
with.
So Mister chairman I think here
Senator I think you're referring
to our maintenance of effort
issues we had between two
thousand and.
Eleven and twenty fourteen or
twenty fifteen
that's all managed through the
public school funding formula
and really looks at how much
money is being generated by
students were identified as
special ed students there's five
other agencies that serve
special ed students of their
agency budgets are included in
that calculation the bill should
not have any impact on that
process on a dedication of
students
in so far as it may actually
improve how we are identifying
students
if department operations improve
or or you know some of the
identification process is
improved but it should not
really shouldn't affect
How we are generating local
dollars and then there for
impacting how we're getting
federal dollars and so we did
We did work on a couple of
definitions I think we actually
decided not to put them in in
the bill but they're well
definition H. on page.
Eight.
Is a definition that PED
actually gave us for students
with disabilities so we made
sure on some of those areas to
reach out to Department special
ed staff and ask questions were
we were concerned we might get
into an area that created a
problem.
I think that was a long winded
way of saying we think we think
this doesn't
doesn't and won't affect those
funding streams or how things
are happening at the district
level.
Well that's great I'm I'm I just
wanted to be reassured that and
and thank you director got so
that's why I called you that had
unchecked
it and and Senator Pinto in
center Lopez I I think you know
we we can't lose any funding
whatsoever so I and and I just
you know I'm thinking that this
probably gonna put us possibly
could possibly put us at the
front of the list and and the
top of the list when we're
applying for different things
because now we've got some
additional governance we have
some to get the additional key
focus on this particular area so
again thank you those were my
only questions against
interlopers who does to you for
continued to get this done and
Senator Pinto I really really
appreciated your presentation
center thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator are the other
committee members.
I'm I have a couple of questions
I didn't see other hands up and
let me check one more time to
make sure.
I have a couple of questions as
I look through this
Senator at the biggest thing is
is that changes.
for lack of a better way of
putting it almost what the title
on the door says you know that
it changes it to special
education division chair this is
actually higher anyone there
were just change.
The title of the person that's
already doing this within the
public yet Department.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that of I would
prefer to have the SCG.
No sorry about that I'm.
Talking will muted like you were
Mr chairman
The bill does not require the
hiring of anybody other than an
Assistant Secretary so it
doesn't require
Adding any other positions and
so that could be taking the
division the department director
position and turning it into an
Assistant Secretary position I
see Senator Lopez shaking her
head I think that's fair to say
that's the intent that you would
no longer have a department
director but you would have
Assistant Secretary as I
mentioned that's about a
thirteen thousand dollar
difference if you compare the
current director salary with the
salary of the Assistant
Secretary for Indian Education.
Okay
What of the other things I mean
there's some some cleanup words
you know most of the bill that
looks like that the bulk of it
as I get over to page seven on
the new material on the special
education definitions.
The definitions there for
instance of dyslexia is that a
federal definition for dyslexia
and you know what was the
definition prior or was there
definition our special education
prior to that for dyslexia.
Senator.
Thank
you Mr chairman.
Phoenician it you guys passed a
bill what I think it was last
legislative session it was
compiled a section twenty two
thirteen thirty two we pulled
that section underneath the
special education act so that
is.
Mission as it was negotiated
through last legislative session
the last definition was a two
thousand ten definition so we
simply are pulling the
definition from section thirty
thirty two into the definition
section of this bill I cannot
answer the question is that
the same as a federal it is
there are federal definition
doesn't here that we can look
into it.
The reason I ask I know for
years there's been discussion
about whether dyslexia is a true
disability under special
education whether it's not
whether there's just help you of
that some people talk about
where the yeah they have go
others might call it Matt phobia
dysgraphia having to do with
actually printing of thank you
letters you know that there's a
number of those that are
discussed as being disabilities
as to whether those are in
federal definitions considered
to be our special education
qualifying disabilities or not
under this we're saying that
that dyslexia is does that mean
that this also that people with
dyslexia would be eligible for
any of the federal ID Aid monies
that come along with.
Disabilities.
Mr chair us members of the
committee I think one of the
things we should keep in mind is
that through health and
That changes do occur and
whether things need to be
updated but I will defer that to
LFC or PED.
Mr chair Senator souls you're
the same person Mr chair Senator
souls
after doing a little bit quick
research and I just wanted to
confirm that dyslexia is a
qualifying disability for for
federal federal special.
Okay thank you as we get over
there the gifted definition and
it's almost a circular
definition I used to do to get
that education but it needs a
school aide person if the school
would person is determined to be
get.
Now it it has to go through a
referral process but that's
essentially what the definition
says
I in the past and this may be
for for a great deal with that
we just need we had very
specific requirements that
automatically qualified you
forget it and then we had a
program for people that may have
just missed the cut off yeah we
had the standard error of
measurement on standardized
tests so that we can just people
that way is that all still part
of how we determine get this is
and is that in role in the head
I know it used to be in statute.
Yeah that you had to score two
standard deviations above the
mean on a nationally recognized
measure of intelligence or
something like that is that out
I would have statute is that
enroll in the path how do we
determine.
So Mister that.
I'm sorry Senator Pinto.
What are you
going.
souls.
I and I think John may be able
to to talk more to this but most
of your process sees for special
education exist in rural and not
in statute so the gifted statute
specifically notes The
department shall adopt standards
pertaining to the determination
of who is a gifted student so
you're not gonna find much in
statute on.
On this but it will be in rural.
And I and I just I should be
going to use Senator as that the
bill sponsor but Johnny.
Do we have in roller is that in
statute because it seems like
years ago there was a major
fight through legislation on
determined to get it and what
that meant and ensuring that in
New Mexico gifted education has
the same protections as other
special education.
SO Mr chair
From what I understand and I'll
have to follow up in some of the
details so first of all yes the
the the there are rules
pertaining to get an education
as far as I know there are no
there's some.
There's some standards for how
to identify but I don't believe
it's a specific as you mention
in terms of no Center deviations
in terms of standardized tests
for those kinds of things I
think individual districts have
a rely on diagnostician sent and
sort of accepted practices for
how to identify gifted students
I don't believe we have a a
statewide standard for how to do
that but I can follow up.
And what because yeah when at I
am a qualified judge
diagnostician to give I. Q. test
and as I understand it is it
required and I to score on one
of the nationally recognized I
need yes like the with square
the way Sir or any of those
about one thirty or higher but
then had a plus or ever had down
to five points below that
because that was the standard
error of measurement on the
testing of students didn't reach
that they could go through an
app that process that pick up
giftedness in things like fine
arts or or other things or
because of cultural issues that
they would be under scored on a
standardized test so it was like
there was an automatic mechanism
because we have parents and
districts who take their kids
out that and pay a hundred five
hundred dollars to get them
tested by a diagnostician hoping
they will get you to support and
I see Center picked a laughing
she stated she knows that this
goes on because that was a
guaranteed way to get your it
supports for your child and then
Mr working with get the parents
they are very aggressive about
making sure that their children
are getting forget that supports
because it has power walk behind
it I've worked in districts
that.
Very aggressively pursued
getting all gifted children
identified because there is
additional funding the special
education that comes for those
children I worked in districts
that aggressively tried to
prevent additional children from
being identified as gifted
because that meant they had to
have if the teachers and all of
the other things that go with
that.
I guess that's where my concern
is you know and this is in the
definitions now we're gifted
education that essentially says.
Yeah we it's up to the school
would be put together a team and
the team identifies was get
there get that and if the team
says they're not they're not and
so it kind of support either
districts that are aggressively
increasing the students and I
could certainly see a charter
school for instance that once
all of their children identified
as gifted because the extra
funding that comes with it and
they're gonna hire all get the
teachers and you know you may
have students to others might
not considered to be get that it
just seems like it's fraught
with that concern that problems
with that
what that the but John if you
can look into that because I
think it's a very of that is.
A clear in law and this
certainly within definitions
that address that without
clarifying at least which to me
seems confusing
Mr chair yes interrupt yes
please go ahead I just wanted to
clarify it for you right away
since since we're here so
currently rule does have
very much what you just
described so you know obviously
that we have to have districts
have to have a a procedure to to
find and screen students for
giftedness
and the include documentation
analysis of data from multiple
sources our subject matter apps
to T. meant creativity divergent
thinking and problem solving
creative critical thinking
including standardized meshed
measured as you mentioned
and then other sources work
of student work so it's it's but
it is it is defined in rule
as to how districts should go
about in the kinds of content
they should look at in
determining if this.
Thank you John it and I think
it's still gets back you are
districts that kind of make sure
that there isn't anybody looking
for those gifted students who
don't have that I can score that
meets the standard which is
frustrating I mean I've been on
many many committees where we
look at things and I've referred
many children who to be were
clearly gifted and I think out
of about ten I. referred I
missed one neither the others
all were identified as yet that
I'm.
I'm good at changing over on
page fourteen wine a Levin on
section eight.
What is the purpose of that
particular paragraph me what it
says is nothing in this section
shopper cream the district from
offering additional get the
programs for students who fail
to meet the eligibility criteria
however the state shall not
provide funds for the department
only approved gifted students.
Districts do that now.
So so Mister chair Mister
chairman.
Actually was language and twenty
two thirteen six it looks like
and I I think this might have
been an intentional on maybe we
can talk with the sponsor of the
definition the existing
definition excuse me the
existing definition of gifted
students what's currently in Los
as means of school age person
who is determined to be gifted
pursuant to twenty two thirteen
six point one and standards
adopted pursuant to the adopted
by the department pursuant to
that section I actually don't
know that you need a definition
of gifted in here again because
it is circular and because you
have the section on gifted.
Then the definition included
this language in it which was
really an inappropriate that
that section that you were
reading is current law it just
was compiled in the wrong place
and added to the definition and
it should have been a statutory
section so what I would say is
yes it can already happened but
I think it's making clear that
if you don't qualify you won't
qualify to generate funds in the
funding formula but it district
can go ahead and serve serve you
if they choose to.
And that's why I think it's
unnecessary certainly is yeah
I'm not sure we got any
districts that.
This is centrally.
I'm trying to even describe it
because I don't understand why
it's needed it's telling
districts that yes if you want
to provide enhanced services for
students you're allowed to do to
provide enhanced services if I
will yeah we want to encourage
that I think that would if you
don't get extra funding but
nobody was asking for extra
funding for providing advanced
services for students so it
doesn't make sense to beat that
that be in there
I guess my last question had to
do with the funding portion of
this which is on the very last
page you know there's a million
dollars appropriated.
What the million dollars going
to be used for is that below the
line funding first and what's
the accountability for where
those monies are you.
Mr chair members of the
committee I defer that to early
this year very.
Mr chairman I am
I think it might be better to
have Senator Lopez answered this
question.
I think if if you read if you
read these to provide
professional development for
teachers instructional support
writer school administrators I
would assume it becomes either
if if it gets worked into House
Bill to us section five
appropriation or a section for
PED special appropriation which
as you referred to are called
below the line appropriations
tend to meet the purposes laid
out here.
And Mr chairman if I could and
thank you Senator Pinto and and
Rachel the intent of course and
as you have explained
appropriately is Rachel that
what we're hoping Mr chairman is
that if we can put more money of
course into our professional
development for teachers and
staff making sure that there is
appropriate
Would you say as we look as to
how our students are.
In our in our different schools
I think it's it's a matter of
making sure that all of our
staff at the local school
district in our schools
understand how to work with and
and deal with any of our special
ed students and what you will
find it with my son who is
autistic learning with him from
elementary through middle school
I saw specifically there was a a
lack of understanding and how to
deal with him even in middle
school it was it was very he
went to a charter school by the
way in middle school as as to
what what was supposed to happen
it was kind of what I call
dysfunctional even in that
setting and moving on to high
school course Mr chairman
members of the committee it not
every teacher understood a lot
of the staff didn't know when
the when Lorenzo would go into a
different class for special
learning time you know that that
whole interaction and part of
what our intent is if we can put
some more money into this for
professional development that
too is where we need to focus
and work on to make sure that
all of our staff have an
understanding as to how to work
with our students who have a
learning disability.
Thank you.
And thank you senator I guess my
question is David do districts
of life for how much money they
want is the public get
department going to come out and
say here's the training you're
going to get how this money
actually get distributed out to
provide for the the purposes
that you indicate.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I think one of the
things of you know when we talk
about funding and I understand
you below the line and I'm still
getting my feet wet in that
sense of what the SCG and all of
that but.
When we.
The
student is identified and most
of the time when we get into
that mid level our elementary
middle school level with
behavioral issues there probably
could be a disability in that
sense in which they would be
evaluated probably for an I. B.
P. and when we talk about gifted
students behavioral issues can
be an issue for gifted students
especially if they are not we
think AP classes and going
through that process is a very
the lady put it was a lengthy
process in which you had
psychiatrists and doing all
those I to tested and then going
through it
with the cooperation of the
parents and the teachers and the
referrals.
But those services are not
really given are incorporated to
the students they're still
continue to be be be be April
issues in which AP classes
wouldn't suffice in that manner
So.
That funding.
Should follow the student and in
my thanks but I'll defer that to
Peter Elliott senior senator is
certainly kind of the same sort
of stories some of my gifted
kids were very very good because
they are very smart and getting
under the skin of their
teachers.
So.
Mr Chairman most of the
professional development
appropriations in the general
appropriation act I remember
there is.
This year roughly ten million
dollars I may be off by a
million or two on that which I
realize is a pretty big
percentage I most of that is not
being grant funded to school
districts that PED is putting
professional development
opportunities on
for folks that want to
participate in John may be able
to to talk to a little bit more
about say how they're running
their
you'll programs that used to be
called principals pursuing
excellence and teachers pursuing
excellence a lot of those
dollars are funding and have
been in the past funding
stipends for teachers to attend
hotel and travel costs that
they're having to travel from
lands of New Mexico but it's not
been grant funded out to school
districts.
And I guess it gets to the heart
of my question if there's ten
million already for professional
development is this that make
eleven million and one million
has to be spent on
specific training on working
with special education students
so that that now makes that pada
Levin and any that we had been
planned for training with
special ed can be supplanted
other places and there's one
million guaranteed for supports
for special ed training of
school staff.
And I understanding that
correctly that this is gonna go
into that pot but that one
million has to be spent
specifically for each.
The special education students
working with the meeting the
needs of special ed students.
Mr Chairman
I appreciate your question and
of course we're hoping that we
could get some more money and
professional development and I
am so grateful that the Feds has
been able to increase over the
years for the amount of money
that you have just mentioned
but what are intended with this
is that yes there would be
specific money targeted to help
our in our districts for this
type of training.
you know as you know Mr chairman
members of the committee the
training that is there for
professional development covers
many different aspects within
our educational system and we
just want to make sure that
there is money that is utilized
specifically for training on how
to work with children with a
learning disability.
Thank you this might be more for
for a.
With that PED's is.
Is there are going to be a
report back to someone that is
one million was spent
specifically for these areas of
special education or is it just
get kind of melted into a pot of
the ten million already for.
For a professional development.
So Mister chair first to speak
just to this particular one
million
if if they were said to be added
into the budget you know
We have to determine how to how
to how to use that best I I
should say that are executive
recommendation included about
one point five our request
included about one point five
million specifically for this
purpose you know these these are
special education has been a
real focus for the department
and
working with the senator on on
this for instance the special ed
but act and so we we have
already requested
fund specifically for this
purpose if we got another
million that would be great as I
think that would mean you know
that many more teachers we can
help we do believe that training
both special education teachers
and and almost more importantly
regular education teachers and
how to help their special
education students is really
important because special
education students are regular
expense students first and they
they receive most of their
instruction in the regular
classrooms and so that's that's
something that the department is
made a priority again we have a
requests but we do appreciate
any additional funding.
Please there's about ten million
dollars currently in hospital to
specifically for professional
development so principal
professional development teacher
professional development early
Early reading and there was one
of the steam and then there's a
five point one million dollars
appropriation for indigenous
multi lingual multicultural and
special education that part of
money there was an
appropriation this year of
almost four point six million of
that four point six I believe it
was one point six five million
was earmarked for special
education the intent I think
there's no language in the
General Appropration Act if I
remember correctly right now on
that appropriation it's just the
tagline in the GAA but it would
give PED the ability to use one
point five million for special
ed and meet their meet their
request.
And so Senator you know if
there's one point I already in
there they've got a tag like
this this would be moving it up
to two point five million to be
spent in that area and Senator
Rachel.
This you know that my
understanding that that this
would be in addition.
Mr Chairman
it would be wonderful if we can
get another million dollars into
house bill two I'm always
worried money for education the
that adds I'm I'm all for that
without a doubt just go.
How how is that going to work or
district's gonna requested is
this going to be a statewide
where people as a Rachel
indicated maybe going to a
conference in Albuquerque yeah
this also re is for development
school resource officers police
security instructional support
this a wide range of people that
that the professional to that
would be for yeah is kind of
who's going to be putting that
on the districts and then ask
for reimbursement yeah maybe
that's too much into the weeds
of how things function to the
course of the year but.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I think one of the
things we talk about training is
especially with our state and
how wide it is it is.
I want to say we want it to be
brought but in some sense to
meet the needs of the areas
especially with certain schools
they might need specific
training so to actually you know
go down one specific line might
not be really good idea right
now but to build upon it so that
eight the specific needs of
those school districts and the
schools and the charter schools
as far as the training that need
to be implemented can be
utilized in that manner
especially like if it's a new
charter school and they probably
need you know just introductory
training but we have an existing
school with the student with the
specific need of dyslexia that
that kind of particular training
could be implemented especially
across the board what we talk
about a student being in a
school where they could have
resource officers that would
also need to have the training
down to Westray whoever's taking
the child home who had staff at
the rules if you are a
disability in that sense.
And and thank you and I don't
disagree with any of that the
battle sounds like the district
would provide the training and
then build the paid for it or
something of that sort and I
don't know the mechanisms built
in we're doing that type of
thing so I'll I'll stop with my
questions at that point
Anything else from the
committee.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you for your
time on this and considerations
with the students with the.
That are on both ends of the
spectrum here when we talk about
the bottom in the high end and I
know being a teacher of the
students with both in which
state would have a disability
but were able to make some very
exceptional
The current within their lives.
So I hope we can continue to
make sure and one of the things
I didn't see in the FIR school
both LFC and I think for
The at the other FIR was were in
reference to the young Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit case and I think
this would be a good step in
that direction to show that we
are making the initiative to
address those issues within our
state and what we are trying to
do to move forward hello Senator
Lopez close if she would like
to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Pinto
kind of ditto for what Senator
Pinto just mentioned Mr Chairman
but at your last committee
meeting on Monday there was a
letter from all deaf that was
sent to your attention
and that of course small
difference one of you're working
with the Martinez receives the
state in in the lawsuits the
consolidated Martinez Yazzie
lawsuits and of course small
drafted list of course the
importance of this legislation
especially as we talk about what
the issues were brought forward
in that lawsuit so just want to
just remind the committee that
was if budget we all have many
emails but it was sent on for
the committee's attention on
Monday.
Thank you pleasure the committee
please do pass Mr Chairman
Moshe Purdue passed by Senator
Padilla.
Seconded by Senator Pinto I
think you were that's what it
was you we're waving goodbye to
us.
and then if you will call the
roll please.
Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
Is that just a test Senator
Kernan thank you Senator Neville
yes Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
We have a committee service
amended to pass.
So Senator have a due pass up on
to finance if you can shake
anything loose out of there.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Pantone Committee.
And senator Wirth on to Senate
bill three nineteen we got a
little under we've got about
fifty five minutes until our
hearts stop because eleven
o'clock floor session.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee I am in
front of you with.
the measure dealing with
restraints and seclusion.
And the Mr chairman I also have
an expert witness who is here
with me Mr Matt Baca from the
attorney general's office and
I'm just see if he's been
admitted.
This is.
anyway Mr chairman
I hope he's in with this there
you are I see him.
This looking through the many
screens the screens that we have
Mr chairman members of the
committee as you know a few
years back we did
have some legislation that came
before us as a body dealing with
restraints and seclusion this
one pertains of course to
schools and I'm most notably
there is a a student that was in
the news
up in the San Juan County area
of a student to in in my
estimation Mr Chairman was had
some issues in school the local
sheriff's department I believe
W. was called to the of school
location and it was we we saw
quite graphically as to how the
student was dealt with
so I know those are some of some
issues that that pertain in some
of our schools Mr chairman and
my particular school district
We have a middle school Jimmy
Carter middle school that has a
designated population of
students who have a disability
and of course there are some who
attend their that are on the
spectrum and what I'm
Albuquerque public schools
houses several schools
designated around the district
where a certain populations will
attend
so that there were some students
at Jimmy Carter middle school
who were accosted also and dealt
with in in my estimation as well
as some parents estimation
incorrectly at Rio Grande High
School there is also something
again in my district and also
Senator PDS district our
students was accosted by a
school resource officer and
slammed against the wall and
again students were recording
I'm I know there may have been
some incidents that pre at eight
maybe to what was happening but
the way that the student was
handled was not appropriate.
so Mister chairman these are
some of the instances and I know
we could go on for ever as two
different areas within our
school system as to how our
administration's react and deal
with students who maybe posing a
problem in some way and I am
working of course with the
attorney general's office and
bringing this measure forward
and I'd like to then differs of
time for Mr Baca to explain more
about the bill Mr chairman thank
you.
Mr Buckley may proceed.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
members of the committee as
Senator Lopez pointed out our
involvement in in this
legislation and working with the
senator stems from a lot of the
types of cases that she mentions
where the use of a restraint or
seclusion technique in our
schools escalates it it has to a
reasonable point where law
enforcement measure is is
necessary to come in and review
the conduct of the person who
who use that technique so that
that is the sort of starting
point for our involvement in in
this initiative I think for from
our perspective you know most of
the data show that over the
aggressive or invasive
restraints inclusion techniques
are frankly just ineffective at
controlling the behavior of
students in schools
and they do escalate in the ways
that Senator Lopez has talked
about they also cross over into
use up for discipline and in
those contexts we know that
their uses are
disproportionately against
students with disabilities black
students and indigenous students
and so we see that a really
inappropriate over policing of
student behavior against these
populations and in a really
aggressive in on acceptable way
so what we have done is worked
with advocates from the
education space from the
disability rights community in
the civil rights community to
look at ways to strengthen New
Mexico clause to to address both
the practices and the reporting
about the practices and so the
bill in front of you does a few
things it outright bans the use
of seclusion techniques in
schools.
It doesn't that's not to say
that a to do a teacher can hold
the a student in detention or or
something like that but any
technique where a student would
be isolated in a room and and
sort of with help from the
general population in their
school is is unacceptable and so
the the bill.
Prescribes that practice with
respect to restraint well this
body has done a good job of of
it indicating that restraint
should only be used for the
where there's an indication that
the behavior poses a imminent
threat to either of the students
themselves or to somebody around
them it's the lock currently
still allows for some types of
restraint that that best
practices experts across the
country agree are again
ineffective at alternately
modify behavior and dangerous at
worst so
so again the bill prescribes the
use of prone restraint
techniques of medical restraint
techniques and then limits the
use of any other remaining tools
to add an instance in which
there really just is no
alternative means of for dealing
with the students behavior in
the school up then with respect
to the reporting requirements it
increases the requirement of
notifying the parents another
thing that a lot of the
constituents and families come
to our office have have
expressed concern about is this
happening to their child or to a
loved one and then basically
receiving no notice on the
screen and then we've also seen
of course systemic reporting
problems we're school districts
often will report to the federal
government or to state
government that that they're not
using these text me that these
types of techniques when in fact
they are except for a so the
reporting requirements are
amplified to require.
More immediate reporting both
the parents and school
administration and then to
create a reporting scheme that
that requires schools and
districts to report to PED into
a more robust oversight system
that a lot that required PED to
track the use of these things
and then gives PED the tools to
basically put in reform measures
with schools where there appears
to be a sort of pattern and
practice of the use of these
types of of techniques in
schools so that's a sort of
brief overview of our of the
context for our involvement in
the bill of about what the bill
itself does and with that Mr
chairman Senator Lopez thank you
for having me here today and and
I'm available to answer any
questions you all might have.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Baca
and we will stand for questions.
Thank you senator with that car
if you'll take a through public
input I would appreciate it.
Mr chair.
I believe there yeah Mr chair
believe there's an amendment on
this bill we do have an
amendment on this bill.
Yes thank you Senator Lopez
would you like to move the
amendment with the amendment I
at this point and there but the
of this is where I always count
on you on the moving the
amendment for discussion.
The amendment on the for
discussion purposes only Mr
chairman.
Thank you
and the amendment was sent out
to everybody.
And I think you got hard copies
of it yesterday and given
everyone but Senator Lopez if
you'll take us through the
amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm as
as you know when legislation
is introducing goes through the
process there are always
different persons who would like
to have discussions suggestions
so the amendment I have in front
of you Mr chairman members of
the committee is essentially as
it says it's banning the use of
classroom door window coverings
and it requires also a video
camera installation in certain
circumstances Mr chairman
members of the committee there
are
advocates in our community
also have concerns with regards
to how
in in certain schools that have
doors of course where there's a
window
with their been concerns raised
as to when a child is placed in
a room or in a room where there
is education taking place that
there is no opportunity for
In a state of persons to
to view to see what is happening
within a a particular classroom
of a room and we just wanted to
make sure this ammendment Mr
chairman is that our classroom
door windows shall not be
covered by any material or
substance as it says in here
that expects years of full of
you through the door window
we're just trying to make sure
their safety I'm is it here to
and I bring this forward for the
committee's consideration.
Thank you we are on the
amendment of looking for hands
from the committee it just as a
quick comment is that anybody
else has comments when I first
became a middle school principal
the door on the principal's
office had no window in it
and what stands rents will have
staff closed door trying to
meetings were the first things I
did was you know I want to
window in that door I want there
to be any any chance that
somebody thinks something is
happening where you know for my
own protection as well as for
anyone else that you know those
are important that there be a
window at least even when the
doors closed for private
meetings.
The questions from the
committee.
On the amendment.
I think any wholesaler Padilla.
You just real quick is there a
Mr chairman and senator Lopez is
there a
real quick.
There would be no cost with this
right.
Mister chairman Senator it's
it's Senator there should not be
but again we're just making sure
that there is it's a safety
factor so that if windows are
currently covered we're making
sure that the school removes any
of those coverings I'm again
just to make sure for a safety
issue for the students that not
and it's not too Russia is a
Mister chairman Senator for
accusations but we want to make
sure that everything is above
and and requests are able to see
what's happening.
Mr chairman when you talk about
Senator Lopez when you talk
about the installation of video
cameras in certain circumstances
that's inside the classroom
because the school may already
have cameras but those are are
are probably going to be I'm
guessing so I know that you and
I and others have fund is.
Using security cameras for
school over several years but
but those aren't necessarily in
the classrooms this would be in
the classroom that the the video
camera would be would be
install.
I'm Mr chairman and part of this
test is for safety factors and
Mr Chairman many of us have seen
in a new stories of for their
have been incidents that have
happened but there has been a
camera addition the incidents
that have taken place within
that particular classroom so
that would be I think the whole
of what this parent advocate
organization is asking for for
safety issues yes.
Thank you I I I agree
wholeheartedly I just want to
make sure that we have the money
somewhere put in place to get
this done because that could be
quite a bit quite a little bit
of investment they're thank you
thank you Mr.
Thank you senator Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan on the amendment.
Senator Kernan seems to be
having some difficulty with our
audio.
There any other maybe Jim Turner
video often see fit.
I don't know.
Any other committee members on
the amendment.
Seeing that you have a in center
Kernan will certainly allow you
if you would get things worked
out to to discuss that on after
we were on the actual bill very
if they're a motion to approve
the amendment.
Also moved Mr chairman that we
adopt the amendment most of the
motion to adopt the amendment by
Senator Padilla.
You Mr chair again by Senator
pope Marianne if you will call
the roll please.
For your brand.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
He yes.
That the whole world it got
quiet on this.
No can you hear me now yes and
I'm not that.
Where do I we weren't able to
get you before Senator okay
Senator this is on the amendment
I understand.
Okay I just want to make sure
thank you thank you Senator
Novell the.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Sanders Sauls yes.
The.
Mr chair can explain about the
yes Senator Kernan and and and I
apologize I I standing out but
any if they have to questions
that I wanted to ask was out
with regard to to certain
classrooms not sure that was
clarified in the other issue I
wasn't sure about doors at that
don't have windows but sometimes
teachers have to close the door
for a few minutes I know most of
them keep developing all the
time that I just I just think
there are a lot of things in
there that we're asking our
districts to do and maybe it was
just a lack of clarification on
my part get understanding that
but I do have concerns about
those things thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan and I
know a lot of the because of the
other safety issues that we've
had with all of that the.
Sheeter trainings and things
that most teachers you're
supposed to have the windows
covered by your in a lock down
and so many have a curtain like
think that they pull over in
situations like that and I'm
quite sure that this is not
during those kinds of situations
we're back on the main bill
of anything else Senator Lopez.
Sorry Mr chairman will stand for
questions thank you to Kerr
you'll take us out to input from
the public.
For an opening nineteen go
directly to members of the
public to speak in opposition
first are there any members of
the public schools I could begin
opposition I've built three
nineteen please raise your hand.
That might remind the public
that we limit the public input
the two minutes each so please
because I.
I yes Mr chairman and members
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to present I'm I'm
appearing Dennis Ross appearing
on behalf of the New Mexico
school superintendents
association well we certainly
believe protections against
restraint inclusion are
important we're we're also we
were pleased to participate
several years ago four years ago
in fact in the passage of
legislation that restricts
refrence inclusion that bill
house bill seventy five was a
hard fought compromise that
really achieved a very delicate
balance between we're protecting
rights of families and students
and also maintaining a school's
ability to have an orderly
environment for education we
actually in our platform this
year in new that this idea may
come up again we just
superintendent unanimously
agreed to call for more study
before we revisit this delicate
compromise that took about four
years to achieve I was a member
of the house education are
bipartisan support and
opposition for that bill when it
went through and so with it was
a tricky matter Adela a
compromise let's revisit it with
the study before we take action
today thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Now moving on to members of the
public with in favor beginning
with those who registered in
advance we have Ellen pens.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representing the disability
coalition I'll be very brief and
just say that we do strongly
support strengthening the
limitations on use of restraint
and seclusion in our public
schools out as I'm sure members
of this committee no of the
thirty extremely traumatic
experiences for students and in
the case of restraint of they
can be extremely dangerous even
fatal so building on what New
Mexico has already enacted in
this area is a very good idea
and we encourage your support
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Pamela Stafford.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Stafford I am with the our canoe
Mexico we stand in support of
this bill we are informed by
communication with parents who
tell us that as recently as two
thousand and nineteen of their
child has been I do secluded a
restrained the only way they
knew about that was because of
bruises on the child that they
followed up on or direct
castmate informing them that
they have been the that their
child had been secluded the over
use of restraint seclusion our
medication speaks to a lack of
staffing and training and the
child whose communication W.
hanker is seen as a child that
needs to be controlled is a
child who is silenced who is
thought to be compliant who is
at risk of never fully reaching
their potential and will be at
increased vulnerability and it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Jim Jackson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jim Jackson of for
disability rights New Mexico and
to save the committee's time
also all noted disability rights
New Mexico does support this but
I'll defer in favor of the miss
laurel Nesbitt who's an attorney
with our organization and she'll
have our comments thank you.
Thank you very much next that we
have a moral agency but.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is laurel Nesbitt and I'm
an attorney with disability
rights New Mexico representing
students with disabilities and
their families and special
education matters here in New
stands in strong support of
Senate bill three nineteen
although this bill is not
specific to students with
disabilities and seek safety and
security and learning for all
students in public school we
know from the most current data
from the civil rights data
collection that of the roughly
one hundred two thousand
students that nationally who
reported to have been subjected
to seclusion or restraint during
the two thousand seventeen
eighteen school year seventy
eight percent for students with
disabilities who were also
disproportionately students of
color.
The statistics which are
recognized to be almost
certainly under reported
nonetheless reflect the lived
experience of dozens of students
with disabilities I have no
through my practice in
associations and friendships who
have suffered a single trauma or
sustain trauma from being
restrained or isolated at
school.
One minute to that this practice
has has continued beyond the two
thousand seventeen legislation
and and many of you may be
familiar with the searchlight
New Mexico article that was
written in October two thousand
nineteen that meant into some
significant investigation of
that.
These practices distance
students more and more from
educational benefit and in the
case of students with
disabilities from the promise of
a free appropriate public
education in the least
restrictive environment Senate
bill three nineteen with its
elimination of the practices
seclusion it's simple provision
that classroom windows being
covered it strong emphasis on
restraint as an emergency
intervention of last resort and
the requirement to review any
instance of restraint to pause
and conduct behavioral planning
really underscores the
responsibility of school
districts and the role of PED in
keeping students safe and
ensuring the behavioral needs of
students including and
especially those with
disabilities are met importantly
this bill starts from
understanding the educators and
school.
Thank you very much next up we
have Katie stone.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Katie stone
on the vice chair of the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning council
there are a lot of good parts of
Senate bill three nineteen but
I'm going to focus on two parts
specifically training school
staff in using restraint of
children appropriately and the
bills prohibition of seclusion
the DD PC supports this bill and
we want to highlight that the
training on use of restraint on
children only in emergency
situations is essential to break
the habits of manhandling
misbehaving children the
legislature needs to ensure that
the PED receives adequate
resources and is required to
dedicate these resources to
providing high quality effective
trainings to prevent further
misuse of restraining students
Senate bill three nineteen
beyond seclusion of students as
a punishment seclusion typically
only occurs with very young
children who are nearly all
children with disabilities as
miss Nesbitt pointed out locking
children in closets is abuse in
every circumstance including at
school and while Senate bill
three nineteen bands including
children as a punishment if
timeout is included in the
student's IEP plan as a
voluntary calming mechanism this
amended bill is requiring
monitoring of the child at all
times I myself have a twenty
year old with cerebral palsy who
was manhandled at school and
locked in closets and she
reports to this day she has
ongoing nightmares this is a
problem they can be easily
solved by you today thank you
for supporting Senate bill three
nineteen.
Thank you very much next up we
have sharing Berman.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
and committee members my name is
Sharon Berman I'm a strategic
civic engagement policy manager
in New Mexico first and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico first thank you for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
Senate bill three nineteen.
At our recent health town hall
issues came up around services
for students with disabilities.
We heard stories of being
restraint as children and how
traumatic that was.
In addition to impeding the
educational success the effects
of childhood trauma continue
beyond a given event extending
into adulthood cycling back into
families and communities and
spiraling on from there.
It is common sense to support
this policy by clearly outlining
specifics regarding school use
of restraint including
improvement of communication
with parents and increasing
transparency.
We support this bill and I thank
you for the opportunity to share
why please vote in favor Senate
bill three nineteen thanks.
Thank you very much next up we
have Joel Davis.
Morning chairman members of the
committee my name's Joel Davis I
am the policy chair for elevate
the spectrum we're a statewide
nonprofit advocating for the
autism community.
Well students with disabilities
make up twelve percent of the
total student population
students with disabilities
represent over seventy five
percent of the students who are
restrained or secluded
nationally and statewide those
numbers are are similar sadly
it's been Southern New Mexico
spell that students with
disabilities by not providing
accurate in some cases zero data
to the department of education
as we saw on the searchlight New
Mexico are article if the
schools if the districts do not
have to keep do not have a
category to report that data
they do not have to report it so
they don't have those categories
and we don't get those numbers.
this bill goes a long way in
ensuring that students aren't
just restraint but that they
that the teachers and staff are
trained in de escalation
techniques we have a dearth of
behavioral supports in our
schools statewide we're way
behind nationally on those
issues one point like ABA
therapy implemented by the CBA's
for behavioral redirection we
think if those instances
increase of the use of ABA that
that will have a lot less need
for restraint seclusion so we
fully support this bill we think
it goes a long way in addressing
some of the concerns concerns
about HB seventy five and that
hard fought compromise address
some minor concerns we had to
fight really hard just to get
notice when that stuff happens
so that we can address those
things at home it wasn't
required before that bill.
We think this bill goes a long
way in plug in some of the holes
from H. B. seventy five past
seventy thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Robert Bundy.
Okay okay.
Yes.
Rob.
The the staff as well to.
Yeah as well to
I think.
These.
When I was.
I was I was willing.
The house.
Size slow to I was.
Ceases which was
soon.
I was six.
Thanks.
Why is.
Thanks.
Thanks will show and when I was
in high school.
I was just.
Thank you very much next we have
to be in a clue.
Next up we have a list the deal.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is a Lisa de L. and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and a
member of the legal team for the
Yazzie he just maybe hasn't
Martínez lawsuit and then C. O.
P. and transform education New
Mexico strongly support this
bill is consistent with the
Yazzie Martinez ruling regarding
the right to students with
disabilities and center in
student equity thank you very
much.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wishes to speak in support
of Senate bill three nineteen
please raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you talk are are always
nice when that run so smoothly I
appreciate what you do for us
every day
Senator Lopez I always like to
go back to the sponsor after
public input for any comments
before we go to questions from
the committee now Mr chairman we
stand for questions.
Thank you questions from the
committee please.
Looking for hands up.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and you you
know I I think my concern is the
comments by
superintendent Roch that
evidently I
reach just agreement that.
Was brought forth last year I
think you said you're for and
and
It appears that may be the
advocates weren't satisfied so
we're coming around to as
someone mentioned that kind of
fill the gap.
That I since that
The superintendents association
schools have not been part at
this further negotiation and and
that bothers me
so I don't really have a
question that
when when an agreement or a
negotiations when when that has
occurred and the bill has been
passed.
And now the very next year we're
coming back and we're saying
we're not done yet we need more
and we're not including the
people that work because shading
in good faith the last time
they're not being included at I
I would like to take a step back
and maybe give them an
opportunity to participate
further so this is a test
subject and certainly we want
our kids to be safe and we don't
want bad actors out there we
don't want bad things to happen
but and I still have questions
that.
With regard to the amendment
and.
Dorsen and seclusion and all of
those things
I'm just not ready at this point
to say this is the the right
direction and so that's all I
have Mister chair I just it
concern that at the
superintendents association.
That what that they had reached
an agreement and bill passed and
now we're coming back around
saying that that didn't that
wasn't that everything that we
wanted so we're gonna come back
for second opportunity thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan of
looking for other hands mother
committee members.
Not seeing it is so I'll ask
questions I'll keep watching
someone else comes up with
things
Senator I I believe this goes to
Judiciary after that.
You're a member of that and I
think the joke in the Senate is
good luck.
But let me go through because
the intent of this I absolutely
in behind but I think there's
some very critical important
have had technical language type
of things that I'm concerned
with how it's written out
currently written and it begins
on page one at the bottom which
is a section eight it is the
policy and that very word you
know is going to get Senator
survive this to pull that out
because we don't put our
intention into the language of a
bill now there is disagreement
with Senator Sedillo Lopez but
she's not on that committee so
that whole first section which
is talking about the purpose you
know he's gonna want to strike
that and go and and it could be
yeah jokingly but it could be
you put those in so we have
something to get of the beach up
over that you know the other
parts get left alone I don't
know but.
You're probably very aware you
know what I'm talking about that
he's the likely take that whole
purpose section out that that
doesn't belong in law.
Down on the bottom of page two
and starts online sixteen.
And I just have a question
because you know I've I've been
a principal in schools and there
are times when I've had to
restrain a child through yo just
a bear hug because of a
particular situation or incident
it says that there have been
insufficient mitigation what the
because this is the first time
no there hasn't been in a prior
incident yet this indicates that
you have to a private things
before you're allowed to
restrain a child how would that
work on a regular basis let me
put the second part of the
question in there as well.
That when I used to do trainings
for
for substitute teachers and one
of them is kind of the four
times that you're allowed to
touch a child in any sort of a.
I said negative way is there a
danger to themselves their
danger to others the danger to
you or the danger to property.
Is restraint appropriate if the
child is a danger to property
there about the throw the brick
through the window for instance
and I'll stop at that thank you
Mr chairman Mr Baca.
Yes Mr chairman and senator with
respect to the first portion of
your question I think the intent
behind this language is not to
suggest.
Less restrictive over different
occurrences are different
instances but rather is to tie
and but that notion of de
escalation which is featured
elsewhere in the bill so the
idea being that is a school
person is that you know as the
situation is sort of of all
being have those types of less
restrictive interventions been
attempted
up and been found to be
insufficient and then at that
point then of permitting the
limited
a restraint techniques that are
are than permissible under the
bill as as.
As currently proposed
with respect to your second
question
you know I think ultimately
that's a policy choice for this
body is whether restraint should
be used to protect property
verses the health and safety of
another human being I can say I
think from our perspective at
the AG's office the answer to
that question is no that that
that you know really this focus
should be on the safety of the
person the individual to
students and anybody else that
might be harmed and
and so I appreciate the
circumstance that you bring up
but I think the idea that that
we should put people over
property is is sort of our
perspective but I would
obviously defer back to it
Senator Lopez is the sponsor you
know to to communicate that
well.
All.
Senator.
Mr chairman for me it's people
before property.
Thank you and I understand that
but and Mr Baki indicated you
have the intent it's very hard
to legislative tent and we've
got to go with what the words
are and at the top of this it
says school may predict pre
permit the use of restraint
technique on any student only if
all of the following apply and
it says less restrictive
interventions have.
I have been insufficient.
That indicates that you've
already tried something else
that I've got it your the
principal I've got something
going on right now I've got to
deal with I haven't had an
opportunity to try something
else to see if it was
insufficient.
I'm and.
From what you know Mr back in
your indicating is no get as the
principal of I've got to get
about the throw brick through
the screen window I'm not
allowed to go over and I did
just holding so that he's not
able to do so I let him throw
the brick.
Mr chair I I think from our
perspective in in the law
enforcement context we you know
train for this pretty regularly
in terms of noting of course the
exigency of certain
circumstances and I think that
some of the other language in
the bill when read together with
this would account for that but
you know you really see a
spectrum of response and I think
the idea with this language and
I appreciate your clarification
on the distinction between
intent and and just directly
stating it is to require that
there be that sort of spectrum
of attempts to de escalate the
situation outside of the use of
restraint and if that is
unsuccessful then it is
permissible to use the forms of
of restraint that are left
within the bill and so I do
appreciate that that sometimes
those things need to be those
decisions are made in a split
second but I think that you know
there are other examples as I
mentioned you know the law
enforcement contacts where we
trained professionals the state
even as things develop rapidly
you know the here is here are
ways in which you can measure
the conduct or hear ways that
you can approach the situation
so I do think ultimately you
know approaching it from that
framework and then using the
language both of this section
and the permissible use of
restraint in an exigency of
Constand's and you know sort of
accounts for the situation that
you're describing.
Okay.
Senator on that same page under
three it says the school has in
place and maintains an organized
and punctual method of
documenting and highly reporting
incidents restraints to
interested parties putting
parents government agencies what
constitutes justice interested
parties.
Mr Barker.
Mr chair and Senator up
interested parties I believe
would be anybody else under the
bill that is required to receive
notice so that would be PED
federal this the river requires
reporting to to the US
Department of that and then the
report to either both either or
both parents and law enforcement
officials.
So Senator is there a definition
somewhere for interested parties
that I didn't see.
Because with that this is
reading interested parties might
being that Larry Parker for the
the evening news wants to do a
special on this.
You certainly an interested
party and I didn't see that
there was a definition for
interested party.
Mr Barker.
Mr chair and and senator no
there is not a definition of
interested party you know I
think from our perspective again
when read in total up as you
know a court would do if called
to ask what an interested party
is.
They would look to the language
in the sections that that
required reporting and then it's
you know basically dictate that
from there so I I appreciate the
consideration and and I'll defer
back obviously to Senator Lopez
but that is something that could
probably look at clean up as it
moves forward to Judiciary
and Senator under that same
thing it says including parents.
Yeah we.
Go to child told them but had
nothing to do with it I mean
certainly I would think the
answer to be reported to the
parents of the child that might
have been restrained but this
just says parents which is all
the parents at the school.
Mr Chairman.
I just muted sorry Mr chairman I
know that there definitions
within our statutes that do is
list as to what parents who
parents are so it could be a
guardian
this also listed on there but if
this bill does move out of
course we will make sure that we
clarify with regards to it will
be the definition in other words
from in current statutes.
Thank you and your parents
certainly your and I understand
that needing to expand it to
make sure that it's guardians or
parent in Lok I or whatever that
the proper legal terms might be
for that but also includes any
of the other parents at the
school they have no right to to
see the particular incident
because of other privacy types
of things and probably ought to
get clarified as well as other
government agencies I.
I think I understand the intent
but you know I also see on the
wall where words matter and yeah
they often trying to to look at
the yes when the words are more
broad than that yeah and and I
sat in Judiciary long enough to
know that they fight over these
kinds of the exact issue so if
anything I hope I'm setting you
up to to get some of those
worked out before you get over
to that B. Kreider.
Yes.
Senator sure.
I guess on page four with kind
of the same thing about the
district safety plan explicitly
that that yeah after tried other
things first what the times this
may be the first incident where
somebody you've got to use
restraint right now because
something is happening where you
haven't had an opportunity to
try other things but moving over
to page five of section after
this is under the school
district safety plan
and the plan has to be designed
by and have a problem with
licensed behavior specialists
speech language pathologist all
members of the team have to be
trained in evidence based trauma
informed alternatives we
certainly need lots more that
training but under L. it says
school personnel shall be
trained.
Who constitute school personnel.
And and kind of where I think it
is Pacific with the guys about
mowing the grass.
No no we get we this requires
shall be trained prior to the
start of the school year.
Who falls under school
personnel.
That are here on this so if you
referred that we didn't hear it
I'm sorry Mr chairman Mr Baca
thank you for again we all play.
Sorry.
Mr chair and senator if you'll
excuse me I'm you graciously
trying to look at the section as
I think as I recall back to the
drafting and that as Senator
Lopez alluded to in the last
question I'm assuming that this
refers back to a definition
that's in the entire chapter and
would include school person
that's required to train in
other contexts so if you would
bear with me for just one moment
I'm fortunate not finding it
quickly enough but I think that
you raise a very important point
in terms of clarifying again you
know what is the what is the
intent behind that is it
everybody that that me interact
with the student or anybody you
would have the authority in the
school context whether it's a
teacher and administrator to
directly interact with the
student like that
so I would I would differ a
little bit back to Senator Lopez
and then of course to this
committee in terms of what is
the effective policy really
should only be a student I mean
a teacher and administrator or
really should this type of
training be given to anybody
that may interact with the
students.
Senator at all Mr back up you
know having been at school
administrator custodians are
interacting with the kids the
bus drivers are interacting with
the kids the cafeteria worker
the maintenance people interact
with the kids I might ask Mr
center with the with Head.
To the Peddie school person does
that anybody who works at the
school I mean the H. back guys
do and maintenance during the
school day who all would be
considered school personnel.
Mr chair I would as Mr as Mister
Baca referred to the to the
statues I have to go back into a
little bit of research just as
to whether or not there's an
actual definition but to your
point that could mean a lot of
different folks.
Thank you and I think that's the
concern is this is very very
broad as to who and this that
shall be trained prior to the
school year
and yeah that puts a huge burden
on schools and district in those
couple of days when they've got
staff coming back to get them
trained up in doing this and you
always very broad of of
everybody working in the
schools.
Out yeah I and I think there's
some other pieces that go
through with it and I think it's
the end of this bill.
In the last.
And.
Okay it might have been some of
the last aware that Justin
concerns about that that the age
for special education students
I'm and I think it was and the
last comment that that issue
came up certainly the
definitions that we've got for
of the different types of band
restraints you know I think
those are very appropriate I
don't think most people would
have but jobs concern or or
problem with those that those
two are more long term and more
punishing types of restraint
rather than very temporary ones
to to stop or the escalated
immediate behavior of.
Again I think it's very good but
you know as we all know words
matter and there are some areas
here that I think are both fully
to brought to to make this
functional or whether district
actually is expected to do and
have in place
I'll I'll stop with that anyone
else on the committee.
The table.
We have a motion to table that
is non debatable and million and
if you will call the roll
please.
State.
Senator Brandt yes.
Hickey now.
Senator Kernan yes.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla now Merion.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
No.
Sanders Sauls.
Yes.
I think that's a four four so we
are stuck is there an
alternative motion.
Has no intention the second
Senator Kernan I'm sorry yes I
my apologies please explain your
vote thank you Mr chairman and
it's not that I'm opposed to
some of the items in this bill
the problem I have is that you
have not included the the group
of people that were included in
the original the association and
I just think that's unfair and I
think it's it's important to to
get buy in from the people who
will be implementing this issue
and so that that's why I think
we need to because we need to
return to those individuals to
that those groups that and see
if you can't reach an agreement.
Mr chairman I'll move center but
it.
How moving wrecked we have a
motion for a no REC is there a
second.
Thank you Mr chair we have a a
second very and if you will call
the roll please.
Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan no Senator Neville no
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes pope.
Yes Sander Sauls yes.
So I'll move on to
Do Judiciary with a no
recommendation from the
Education Committee Mr chairman
and I want to explain my phone
also if that's an all purpose
that but it please go ahead I'll
be very very quick I have to
echo the comments of Senator
Kernan on the inclusion and are
all.
Point of the bill was include a
you know one of the big pieces
in his inclusion or so I I
really hope that the sponsor
will work with the groups that
Senator Kernan mention because
you know they did it sounded to
me as though they did come to
the table wanting to work on
this in the past and and I know
that I know Mr Roch to be a man
of his word and and others and I
hope that we will include them
as these conversations continue
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee and the
last time we dealt with the
restraints was in twenty
seventeen I appreciate it and I
appreciate the conversation
today and I are taking notes
thank you.
Thank you senator thank you for
being with us here in Senate
education that concludes today's
business percent of education on
Friday we have for House Bills
are on the schedule and also
Center for the bait if yes it is
worked out for Senate bill four
oh one would be on the schedule
as well for Friday any bills
that may come in today or
tomorrow or Friday will get put
on to Monday schedule because we
still have more meetings we will
continue to be at eight thirty I
brag about like it committee all
the time we get our work done we
do it well and thank you all for
all that you do it certainly
thank you merry and thank you so
Kara for making sure everything
runs smoothly of any other
comments from many committee
members.
If not thank you we finished on
time and I'll see you all on the
floor we are done.
