Charlie Marcus I guess he was in
the hospital for a while he is
out of the hospital now and and
doing better but and Senator
Hickey is actually out with
COVID also so please be careful
wash your hands don't breed on
people too much all those kinds
of things we have the windows
open to crease in circulation in
here also we've heard from the a
very as people that are watching
on zoom and on the webcast that
it's difficult to hear public
testimony what we're going to
try and do for public
testimonies please come in line
up and will hand you the hand
held microphone in order to do
public testimony instead of just
standing up so that everybody is
able to do that that'll also
give me a good feel for how many
people are interested in doing
public testimony of we also we
will not be hearing Senate bill
one twenty the sponsors Center
pope is asked that we roll that
over there some of things still
being worked on on that
particular bill.
The and I'll make the
announcement again at the end of
the school board association is
has their annual meeting during
the legislative session this
Friday and so on Friday we will
move back our start time to nine
thirty many of our members of
the committee will be over there
meeting with school board
members talking to them I think
I'm on the program with some of
that so our start time will be
nine thirty on Friday will try
and keep the.
The agenda slides out of the
commitment that our committee
will get to the floor on time.
Any other comments announcements
committee others.
Please close the state or or for
god about.
If not the let's Sir Senator
read are you ready with.
Senate bill one week for
technical education program
units.
Service Germany knew this.
Check and make sure money I had
it on ring Fund yesterday please
others if you'll remember.
Sometimes we turn them on and
off for the perfect time.
Well you'll Scott Scanlon for
calling me at this time of day
and we have to we're done while
you're getting ready at the
funny story I heard was of one
of the lobbyist was reading
testimony off of the phone so
when the other lobbyist called
while that was happening.
Which kind of really messed him
up and just kind of as a
practical joke I thought that
was pretty funny for the.
Them Senator please thank you Mr
chairman yeah we have talked
about the need for C. T. in our
state well hi start talking
about it when I was on the Rio
Rancho school board so that
would be you know fifteen years
ago.
ever since I've been up here
we've talked about it we've
talked about studying it and we
talked about studying it and we
talked about setting.
but we've never really done
anything to fund it so this bill
adds.
A point two five funding factor
in the SCG for students taking
of CTE courses.
What we know is that that's
probably not going to be
sufficient.
But it at least gives us a
starting place.
joining us on zoom is gene
Strickler Strickland to help
answer any questions that we
might have just committee down
in Hobbs I think he's got the
most robust and most functioning
CTE program
so I've worked with him on this
I've worked with doctor
Cleveland in my district on the
US and we really felt like this
two point two five was a safe
place to start
knowing that then we'll be able
to look back in the next years
and be able to just that as we
need to so that's really what
the bill does it's very simple
concept
and the I suggest that the
committee considered actually
putting our money where our
mouth is when it comes to CTE
and really helping with the
operational cost increases CTE
house thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you another the this first
week show has those in support.
In opposition.
The day before like the
government comments in the
lineup senator dole in the New
Mexico microphone.
That so.
Those.
Yeah you can find we will not go
over two minutes so that you
don't I don't have to there's
you were of the five W. down.
The she devil standout.
Thank you Mr chairman Stan
rounds for the college of
education leaders and school
superintendents we fully support
of this effort and we believe
this is the right way to do it
we're not sure of the metric is
the senator said the point two
five that was a plucked out of
the air the point two five is
based on studies that formed our
formula that's in place today
because what do you do an
indexing is index the additional
costs of certain kinds of
programs to believe it's a good
valuable starting point and then
we believe that will need to
study as we go through time but
indeed CTE is critical we ask
you to to support this approach
and we ask you to from this bill
thank you.
Yeah.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico a number of our
charter schools have started CTE
programs and run them for many
years it's hard to do under the
way the SCG as currently
structured without proper
incentives in place most of our
schools are small by nature to
be able direct these programs is
difficult without designated
funding and I think this bill
does that without putting
additional can restrictions on
the funds to limit what the
creativity behind these programs
for a charter school so we stand
and support and appreciate the
sponsor for taking this on.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman because wells on
register log is for it on to
public schools we stand strong
support of the business base of
legislation you have heard from
the throughout the you know it
was something that was debated
discussed and we appreciate the
sponsor bring this before this
committee schools public schools
is also working on CTE Mr
chairman you aware in your
communications with sprint and
Rommel's please support this
this legislation thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee lily more teeth the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico scored Association the
school board association for
many years to support our career
technical education and we stand
in support of this bill today
for the reasons that have been
stated because it also opens up
opportunities for students to
move it to pathways that gives
them a better six tenths of
success in this world so we ask
you to support this bill we
think responsive for bringing it
forward.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
associated general contractors
in New Mexico the mechanical
contractors association Mexico
in the sheet metal contractors
association of New Mexico and we
stand as far supported this
legislation for technical
education I mean it's really
important when we're looking at
again giving students multiple
pathways and developing our
workforce here in New Mexico
which we believe construction is
is you know exposing these kids
these types of opportunities as
more and to address a lot of
labor shortages especially in
construction of things one no I
just want to put out there to
two years ago sciences loss
which is the national foundation
of engineering and science
association associations put out
a study specific to New Mexico
and they found that six that is
ten stem professionals here in
New Mexico actually do not have
a bachelor's degree and that's
something that we need to
continue to build when we think
of the stem workforce we think
the labs and other stuff which
is great but we need to think of
our lecture shins and other in
oil and gas a lot of those don't
require a bachelor's degree in
CTE programs can really expose
them and create that carpool
careerpathways thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Chelsea Canada and I'm the
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce the chamber supports HB
went away which adds career
technical technical education to
the public school funding
formula it is costly to stand up
career technical programs
examples of these costs include
the high costs to recruit a
professional out of the work
force and also the equipment
needed for training the chamber
supports funding and strategies
to uplift our current programs
and funding to support expansion
of future programs thank you.
Is anyone else here.
Or anyone against.
We do have Jean Strickland on to
and so you can move him up to be
able to see.
Chairman members of the
committee good morning thank you
for for having me this morning
and I I appreciate Senator
Brandt working with us.
Towards a resolution.
I would have preferred to have
been there in person however as
as Santa fe's enjoying some
fifty degree weather pops is on
our fourth day of twenty degree
weather and so we're we're here
managing the leather as best we
can but with that said.
We do stand in strong support of
this bill.
Currently and taking some notes
from the analysis conducted by
LFC.
How schools is operating out of
our cash balance out of our
operating reserves to provide
the career technical education
that we are providing however
that is not sustainable and this
point two five is a start and we
recognize that and we recognize
the efforts of all the
legislators placing importance
on creating an educational
system that provides
opportunities for students that
are relative.
To their future jobs and careers
are also productive in our
society to maintain New Mexico
moving forward and continue to
be the great state that we are
today.
Thank you and look forward to
further discuss.
They can do though is that you
do for kids.
thank you for your question.
No chairman I I don't think we
need to do really argue about CD
I think all of us on this
committee and all of us on alias
the agree with the importance of
it what it means to our economy
we just need to figure out how
to fund it.
Thank you at questions from the
committee.
Their vote.
Thank you Mr chairman
Thank you Senator Brandt for
Bringing this forward
just a few questions looking at
the FIR looks like it's about
ninety four ninety five million
dollars that this would cost is
this in the budget right now or
is Senator this would would.
It's it's not been even
requested in the budget because
it's it's not a funding increase
it's a on page seo funding shift
as of right would put that Mr
Chairman it it's it changes the
funding formula that we
currently have so we didn't
aspirin increase although there
is an increase for specifically
for CTE being request in the
budget for fifteen million
that's one of those things we're
gonna have to come back and look
at as the years go forward to
see how much more we need
increases there will need to be
in the future some increases in
the budget going towards more
towards CTE but we run it
through the formula and so this
is a tweak to our current
formula
and and so it doesn't need to
have additional funding provided
to be great because then that
would push of the univallate for
everyone but where formula works
us that's why there's not any
money on this okay
thank you Mr chairman etcetera
so.
So I understand it is a tweaks
to the formula but doesn't it go
up though even though I mean
we're going to point to five but
we're not going down point two
five and in another area so it
does cost a little more
amendment of the budget.
Good could you so I have so I
can understand Senator I was
gonna try and jump in and and a
great night is much more the
extra and I so I want to
understand the movers use the my
or you can set and use the other
one.
I'll probably go back to this
later on on the webcast so I can
learn a lot more.
The funding formula keep okay
good morning Mr chairman and US
etcetera put members of the
committee it is a little bit of
a both end so in a and budget
recommendations in terms of and
how we've kind of historically
funded career technical
education has been below the
line so Senator Brandt is
correct it's a shift in how we
would approach funding career
technical education by
increasing and putting it above
the line in the SCG as a factor
there likely would also be an
increase in the budget because
of this because it's a much more
robust quite frankly
way of finding career technical
education and goes out
particularly not in a grant
important but to all programs
across the whole state that are
actually employing career
technical at.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator
next question I I you know I
think you're right I think we're
all on board and having more CTE
in our school districts in our
schools you know going down
Hobbs a few times he even going
up north and listen to the folks
in Farmington and what they're
doing as well
I guess the question I was have
is for some maybe school
districts that are really ramped
up to that level would there
need to be kind of a additional
funding to kind of get them
going or maybe some
infrastructure where as some of
the schools of already
established maybe this would be
enough funding to do that and I
asset because you know these are
some the same questions we
talked about with healthy meals
right having the kitchens and
the infrastructure for some
having a some dough and so I
guess how would how would we
deal with that New Mexico thank
you Mr chairman servos great
question you know we have
actually some other bills that
are dealing with that issue
directly we're looking at can't
member the dollar amount on
capital outlay hundred million
dollars that will go directly
into infrastructure for CT so
this one's dealing more with the
operational side
and then that one will deal with
more of the
Facility side the you know the
capital side to purchase the
equipment I personally have been
investing most of my junior
money every year has gone to Rio
Rancho public schools to pay for
some of the equipment to
actually even pick up some of
the staffing for the first
couple years to get started so
that's one way we can do it as
individual legislators for own
schools in our district
we haven't had start up money
even for schools in quite awhile
we probably need to look at some
of that even for the CTE
programs for new schools that
are wanting to bring that on
it's a great suggestion I'd be
more than willing to work with
you on a bill that would would
actually help do that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Kernan thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
for bringing this bill it
certainly does raise awareness
for the needs for CTE programs
and I know we've talked at the
with the L. E. S. C. director
and and and it really is I think
in the future if we help this
bill passes this year and then
going forward we can add the
appropriation so it doesn't
dilute the other program units
quite so much so because it
doesn't mean an impact when you
when you increased one place
it's going to go down a little
bit someplace else so it's very
important I think the main cost
is Mr strictly mentioned
certainly as you hire
professionals electricians and
plumbers I can make a lot more
money in the real world and they
they do but they're committed I
want to be there and I think
there is an opportunity for
districts to pay them more in
order to to get them to to come
on staff in the other major cost
is a replacement and that's not
going to occur in our community
for awhile but you do have to
plan for the cost of replacing
major equipment I mean if you've
been Senator pope you Madam
there you've seen the majority
Quitman you know that's not
going to be cheap to do and
fortunately I think we're we're
set up in Hobbs but on going
we're going to need some help in
this is a good first start not
really encourage the legislature
to to it too to say now is the
time we have been pushing this
down the road for several years
and if we are committed we need
to do it right now so thank you
that's all I have thank you
other members committee.
A couple of comments and and
senator we've talked about I've
been working on this is we both
got into the legislature I
actually have you beat I was
talking about doing CTE step
back with I was in the school
board Los crucis back in the
early nineties early mid
nineties out about the need to
to do more in the area of CTE
and and I think the times now
we've got opportunities to do
all of that.
Center.
Let us question then I'll jump
back to you and then I'll I'll
finish up if that's appropriate
One of the things you know this
is changing how the units are
generated in the SCG is that
correct yes so it's not adding
additional money into the SCG so
districts that have a large SCG
footprint will be getting more
and some of the districts that
are not ramped up to be doing as
much in CTE would potentially be
lessened a little bit it then
that's what you meant by it's
kind of a shifting of the money
rather than in addition is that
accurate Mr Chairman etcetera I
think that's an accurate up
portion there is fifteen million
dollars I'll tell you one of the
reasons we didn't put an
appropriation on this bill is
because as you know for the last
ten years we've not been able to
get a dollar amount Alex LFC as
to what it would cost now we
have one.
You know so if this committee
would like that appropriation of
ninety million dollars to go
into the SCG I would be more
than happy to do that we didn't
know what to ask for
so young I think that you know
we move this forward I can we
can try to all of us it's gonna
take all of us as a group effort
in this committee to go to the
chair of finance and say we
really need to fund this this is
something we didn't know how
much staff for now we do so it
may be time for all of us to go
and lobby certain chairman to
get that money put in we have
was it three point six billion
new dollars if we can't invest
in CT this year when doing if we
can't make this happen this year
when we make it happen and we
know that our economy in this
state needs C. T. we do not have
enough.
Electricians I don't know if
you've tried to call a plumber
lately I don't know if you've
tried to call a contractor
lately you can talk to any
builder in the state they don't
have enough workers.
We've got to solve that problem
and this is the way we do it.
We have the we we already have
the infrastructure to do it not
everyone but we got the system
to make this happen and that's
our public schools.
It's time to fund.
So that's what we need to go to
to
the finance committee and say
it's time to move a hundred
million dollars in CTE funding.
For the SCG so that we're not
deluding the SCG but I have no
idea how much that for.
And and thank you senator I
appreciate it and then we share
the same passions on on this and
and how to get things done
There's a whole lot of members
on that finance committee that
the we can get them bringing it
up and talking about it because
there is money in the budget to
do some of it out Senator would
this be this would be recurring
monies though and that's going
to be the the tougher ask from
the finance committee but I
would love.
Of the the even give them credit
is ask them and let them put it
in on their side and say look we
didn't think this was enough
instead of educators going to
woman saying yeah we want you to
do this promote them and let
them give all the credit for it
I don't care who gets credit
let's make it happen to to say
you didn't ask for any enough
money in the Senator yo and
here's the the money for the
budget but their master's I know
you had a question that I've got
one other comment I think.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator Brandt the.
In in looking over the statute I
just want to talk about that
that dilution one is
on page one.
Line twenty what is a capital M.
E. M..
Members.
And just for the folks at all Mr
chairman membership determined
by multiplying the.
And the M. in department of food
critic.
Do note that is
the certainly Mister chairman
Senator Maestas the way this
would work is Madam stands for
the membership or the number of
students who are enrolled in the
program thank you thank you and
then on the bottom of the F. I.
R..
You know what that the ninety
five million just jumps off the
page so I that's that that's a
concern but it talks about sixty
five you know sixty five
thousand plus students.
Forty four percent of students
in grades seven through twelve
participate in department
approve CTE programs.
At the point two five that would
generate the seventeen thousand
plus units in the school funding
formula so in other words the
students are already taking
these classes it seems like like
it's.
I'm not sure what would happen
if this were to become law what
I'm what I'm reading on page
three.
The part of existing statute is
talks about except as otherwise
provided in this section funds
generated under the public
school finance act our
discretionary to local school
boards and governing bodies so
how would this play out in the
real world with this simply
prioritize.
Schools teaching CTE and
students taking it or with the
simply funnel more resources to
those existing classes and
students.
Mr chairman and senator may
assist great question so funding
above the line that goes to the
schools the districts and
charter schools is usually
broken into two pieces actually
the first is just general
funding that flows what we call
the unit value that so a general
amount that's going out in
addition there's also what we
call unit or factors and those
are particularly to programs
that students our schools our
districts are participate
participating in for instance
bilingual programming so you
have students who get extra
dollars because they actually
participate in that program and
so the funding is targeted in
goes to those schools and
districts who have the that
member that population that that
goes to them in this case the
career technical education
factor would operate in much the
same way as a bilingual factor
that would go directly to those
districts are schools that have
the participating ma'am so it
would both go sort of those kind
of a it the complication of the
SCG as it flows out as all of
the dollars to but there's a
specific increase for those
participating in that particular
program I see so thank you Mr
chairman Senator Brandt so.
Schools and students are
participating there's just not a
tiny bump in this you need to
reflect that are to incentivize
that further secretary of state
or Mr chairman Sir I don't know
if I would use the word
incentivize I I think I would
use the the term funding at that
most of the CTE programs now
there's there's some programs
like I said there's a lot of
students currently in CTE.
Those programs all very in cost
so one of the things that we
need to look at in the future
because like I said this is
probably going to be lower than
what the actual cost is but one
of things we need to look at is
what is the average cost right
no one's ever done that in our
state they've done other states
with no one's done in our state
we talked about it for eleven
years they probably talked about
it before me and Center souls
came up here but I know for a
fact we've talked about for
eleven years but no one's ever
actually done the research.
The only way because we talked
about it for so long I got a
little frustrated I'm to be
honest and the only way I could
figure out to force people to
actually do the research is to
make it happen
and so by doing this we're
actually hopefully going to get
the reserves then we can come
back and make some adjustments
need to be but it's not to
incentivize districts to do more
it's to pay for the programs are
already doing.
fortunately you know you have
that money come from the federal
government the districts are
being able to use to supplement
to subsidize some of these
programs they're already doing.
It's it's time for us to
actually pay for the CTE classes
that have become so imperative
for us in our economy get
through those instructors like
Senator Kernan was talking about
there are more expensive if
you're a auto mechanic.
At the level that we want to
bring them in as instructors
you're making ninety two hundred
thousand dollars a year.
They're not going to come into
our school system fifty thousand
it's going to cost more.
And the so these programs cost
more especially for the
certification programs I have
two other bills one in the pipe
it's not even dropped yet trying
to fix some of the issues within
cities you're gonna see this a
lot this committee this year
thank you Mr.
Their current thank you Mr
chairman on that point I just
got a text from Mr Strickland
and currently houses under
funded it two thousand one
hundred dollars per student that
is now taking CTE and that
translates to about two point
eight million dollars that
they're using out of their
operating budget of which they
have discretion to do that
that's pretty much the cost
additional cost for city
students thank you thank you.
Kind of my last comment was a
little bit and and more for
people who are not down into the
weeds on all of this like some
of us who have been around for
awhile is money that's in the
SCG this point two five in the
money doesn't go directly to
those students the district
generates it in order to use for
that so it's not like the CTE
programs get this money directly
it's in the general budget and
then up to the superintendent
and the school board to to
support those kinds of programs
of going forward having a point
two five all of the
superintendents are always
playing the game of how do I
count the number of the students
and where can I count different
ones so going forward in in a
manner it doesn't set of eyes to
put in more CTE programs because
you generate more of the total
part of money towards your
purpose which is why it's
important that we start putting
additional money into the SCG to
support what we're doing now in
the money's that's currently in
the formula that I see my
various experts around nodding
their heads to understand that
that I explained that
appropriately so so anybody's
thinking there CTE program
suddenly the other districts and
have this money and and throw it
right at your program it doesn't
work that way it goes into the
districts pot and then it's up
to your superintendent and
school board and such to direct
those monies where they're
needed many districts as was
pointed out are already funding
it out of general operation this
recognize the is the additional
costs and ensures that we're
able to.
To provide for what we're
already they're already doing
within the current funding.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee.
It's not pleasure the committee
please.
Motion for a new path second by
Senator Kernan if you will call
the roll please Senator Brandt
yes Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan yes Senator Maestas.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto yeah Senator pope yes
Senator all yes.
Pass yeah unanimous do pass
Senator and thank you and will
continue to work on the for
these programs up as the as we
go forward and center if you can
just stay right there we are now
going to move to Senate bill one
oh nine which is the education
freedom accounts you senator
Ortiz Pino I don't see him yet
so he would be next up if he's
not here in center of the bill I
know you've got another
commitment and so we may try and
sneak you in after this one
depending on whether other
people show up if that makes
sense so we're going to do one
oh nine if senator Ortiz Pino
comes up one thirteen and if not
we'll switch down to just be one
thirty seven followed so Senator
thank you Mr chairman again this
one is simple concept wise.
not as simple in every other way
You know education outcome is a
Los ever in our history of our
state.
Twenty two percent read at grade
level.
Nineteen percent math.
I think we all agree that
education is the key.
To financial success.
Is imperative we all agree it's
imperative.
To bringing children out of
poverty.
It is the most important factor
in keeping people out of a life
of crime.
It is a constitutional mandate.
And it is not sufficiently being
provided in New Mexico.
We even have a court order that
says it's not in the Ozzy
Martinez.
The fact of the matter is the
wealthy already have school
choice.
This bill provides that same
opportunity.
To every child every family and
every parent our state without
affecting our current system.
Our children should not be
forced to stay in a failing
school just because of where
they live or their economic
status.
The educational freedom act is
the only thing that provides
real educational equity.
The educational freedom Act
empowers all parents to make the
choice.
What educational system is best
for their children.
Parents of the best one to make
this decision not the state how
do we do that.
The educational freedom Act.
Find separate funding so we're
not taking out of the SCG like
we just talked about the SCG.
So it has its own separate
procreation to pay for.
It provides.
A educational freedom account
for any family the plights for.
For a student.
That money.
Goes directly.
To whatever school those parents
decide to send their children
to.
It doesn't go to the parents.
It goes directly to the school.
That's student Dennis allowed
attend that school.
Yes that's the simplicity of.
It also the bill also provides
the funding for path to be able
to do it because we recognize.
As looking at some other states
that have done this.
That there's going to be an
increase costs to administer
this program.
So we've provided that in The
appropriation of this bill I
think it's six hundred eighty
thousand dollars that goes to
path to hire staff to run this
program and then to prop them to
put this program together.
It would actually set the rules
on what can be what's considered
education.
Educational cost.
We have some this once the
tuition but Pat if if there's
money available can decide that
the parents can use it to help
defray the cost of
transportation to get the child
back and forth to school.
this would work for everybody.
There's no limitation on who can
use it.
There's no limitation on where
they have to live.
We have many tribes that have.
Long for the ability to make
sure that they're they're
students that their population
their children are receiving a
proper education.
And we're actually Benny Shendo
has been working on a bill that
will do some of that.
Is is more directed just towards
up population this one is
directed towards everyone.
This bill will provide true
educational equity.
And make sure that every student
in our state.
Has an opportunity.
For the best education possible.
Without harming our current
system.
I know there's probably some
technical questions and
hopefully be able to answer and
I would yield to any questions
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator first out of the office
of those in support.
The opposition.
The microphone the the we'll
start with the opposition.
Still looking so what we're.
Mr members of the committee and
we appreciate Senator brands
forward to make education better
than we we recognize this work I
would point out to the committee
there a couple of things one of
first of all your constitutional
duty is toward a public
education system.
Within that system but
instructed relief valves as an
example for enrollment you have
an open enrollment act which
allows parents to determine any
school in the state of New
Mexico they would like their
child to go to that is a public
school and that's under your per
unit of the body and we find in
this particular act that crosses
a line that we believe is is
their constitutionally secular
Mr chairman we believe that
within these public schools we
need to do the change work
appropriate and we look for to
continue work was Senator Brandt
Mr Chairman as we move forward
in that regard thank you.
Thank.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee lily more tease
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico scored Association
and Mr chairman members of the
committee of the Legislative.
Analysis indicates that the
program would establish
contracts between parents and
the PED to pay for private
school and other eligible
expenses by creating these
freedom of education freedom
accounts in the analysis also
the office of the Attorney
General has indicated numerous
significant provisions in Senate
bill one oh nine that present
conflicts with the New Mexico
constitution and are likely to
produce a legal challenge.
New Mexico scored Association
membership discussed voted and
took a position against this
issue and placed it on its
priority list since back in
nineteen two thousand fourteen
and remains an approved
membership initiative regardless
of the title that it is given
whether it is called the tax
credit with it is called tuition
our freedom account it still
becomes a method of diverting
and moving money for education
away from public schools New
Mexico scored Association
strongly opposes tuition tax
credits tuition tax subsidies
tuition tax deductions or any
program that diverts money from
public schools thank you Mr
chairman for allowing us to.
Senator position thank you.
Yes Sir good morning chairman
Ramona tire former school board
here the state former school
board member I stand opposed to
this bill
regardless of the terminology we
use this will not benefit all of
New Mexico students majority of
our schools a rural New Mexico
private schools are not within a
few miles driving or walking
distance for these parents to
take their students to a private
school they would have to drive
miles or hours to be able to
provide that as we heard earlier
in the bill before C. T. I
congratulate the Senator bring
that bill four.
We need to continue to support
our public schools and not
continue to look at ways of
taking revenues away from
another factor is will there be
guidelines of control measures
to be implemented with private
schools to ensure they're taking
those schools with learning
disabilities or disabilities
that the public schools have to
ensure that providing those
services to so I ask you
strongly to consider this and
really look at the impact all
New Mexico's kids not not kids
just in Santa Fe Rio Rancho all
the perky Los crucis those kids
in rat tone New Mexico jail New
Mexico how this going to benefit
them will it benefit thank you
said thank you thank you we have
two people propose on them Emily
Wilson well that.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily well
Dallas New Mexico voices for
children and we oppose Senate
bill one oh nine this program
will ultimately take public
funding from public schools
which will always serve the
majority of New Mexico students
and provide state funding for
private schools most of the
recent evidence and research on
education accounts such as those
proposed by this bill indicate
little to no statistically
significant impacts on overall
student outcomes what the
research does provide is
increased instances of
discrimination increase school
segregation a lack of support
for students with disabilities
and in many cases a subsidizing
of private school tuition for
families who can already afford
it.
We believe that continuing to
focus on improvements in our
public schools in continued
support for charter schools is a
significantly better use of
public state funding the state
only been working on toward
addressing the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit for a short time and we
owe it to our students to
continue this work to improve
the public school system that
will continue to educate the
majority of our children we urge
the committee to join us in
opposing SB one or nine.
Thank you the lady Norse.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Dwayne
Norris vice president
Albuquerque teachers federation
speaking on behalf of over four
thousand union members to know
that public education for all of
our democracy.
Public schools are also the
cornerstones of our communities
they're the place where students
from diverse backgrounds learn
to work together we offer a
great variety of courses and
after school programs for all
students in our public schools
there's no need that private
schools can fulfill that are not
already being fulfilled by our
public schools this bill is
modeled on suggested legislation
from the American legislative
exchange council it's an attempt
to re route public money into
private hands and so public
education for profit.
by using vouchers it's about
your program rather than
encouraging parents to get
involved to improve their
schools this bill is telling
them to jump ship the ATF urges
members to vote against this
bill because public education
money is for the public thank
you and I'll send my cited
references to your email.
Thank you Mr Norris now go to
those in support of the audience
please and then the.
Your out of the lineup for.
Amid the system to yes Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Alan so I'm
just on the executive director
of the New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops the bishops
stand in support of this
legislation I think it's time
that we start getting even more
creative we don't have all the
solutions we know we've just
been through a big campaign to
get more money for public
schools in the vicious believe
in in the public schools that's
why they worked for the
constitutional amendment for
early childhood but I think
there's a trend happening we see
other states try to reinvent the
wheel let's see what these other
states are doing look at it
closely I it would just past one
and our children need all the
options that we can get for them
New Mexico is on a great path
now things are turning for
change and this may be some of
the change that we need even
though that the status quo isn't
so comfortable with it but I ask
you to examine it this dig into
this over the next few years
thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Jonathan
leave us a native New Mexican
I'm one of the people that has
had the opportunity to try
different options and education
I'm the oldest of seven kids one
income family but somehow my
parents decided that they were
going to see what other options
and as you can imagine there's a
lot of adversity with seven
siblings parochial school and
eventually home school give me
some options that that I was not
able to have and that I needed
to be because we're all
different and my parents were
able to be made some sacrifices
to make that happen.
Look the gentleman before me
said I believe there's some
things happening around us
there's some good change
happening in our education
system and I believe this is
something we should consider
that was fifty thousand fifty
thousand families this past year
in Arizona that we're able to be
helped by their their new system
and I strongly support this bill
and I know that we live in a
great beautifully diverse state
and I believe that our education
system to reflect that as well
thank you.
Yes ma'am Mr chairman and
members of the Committee.
Using my name is sergeant Allen
I've lived in Albuquerque with
my family since for twenty seven
years I'm a mother of six
children and I've served many
years on the PC leadership of
the PTA's at all levels of
education my oldest three
daughters.
our public school graduates and
I believe the I believe in the
public school system.
That being said well I forgot to
say for my children are high
functioning autistic and has
ADHD.
That being said while raising my
autistic children it is very
clear their learning styles are
different from the regular child
they are a classic case from my
my determination
experiencing a learning inequity
finding the right schools to
help foster their education has
been a genuine struggle I try
public schools online charters
and even home schooling despite
despite my best efforts my
oldest son dropped out of the
very high school my other
daughters graduate time.
More US school options need to
be available parents need to
have the resources and the
freedom to choose the best
education for their child and
the greatest way to do that is
to let the money follow the
child thank you.
Thank you for support.
this is.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Paul
guessing I had the Rio Grande
foundation public policy
research institute based in
Albuquerque we work on issues
across the state of New Mexico
including education policy New
Mexico desperately needs new
options for students our
education system and the current
players have not gotten the job
done for New Mexico students
this piece of legislation would
start the process of moving New
Mexico in a better direction a
direction that's as close as
Arizona in terms of states that
have achieved educational
successes through the use of
greater school choice I applaud
Senator Brandt and hope the
committee will support this
legislation report thank you
thank you.
And last Jody Hendrix.
Hello Senator chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing us to give
testimony this morning regarding
Senate bill one oh nine I am
Judy Hendrix and I am the
executive director with New
Mexico Family action movie we
are an organization that exists
to see families thrive in New
Mexico and we've representative
thousands of families across the
state I believe that the parents
and the children should have the
opportunity to choose the
education that best fits their
needs not every child is the
same every child is going to
have a different need and the
families of the parents are the
ones to be able to determine
that need yes and so we it's we
we urge you to support this bill
Senate bill one of nine because
it does provide the opportunity
for the parents to have that
safe for their children to be
able to recognize nice what
institution will best meet their
needs and then be able to
overcome roadblocks that they
face today as far as being a
will to fund or support
financially that choice to send
their child to the institution
that best fits their needs I'm a
parent myself of four children
and we have tried it all we have
done public school we have done
private school we have done
charter school and we have done
home school and with each
option we have found the
roadblocks that exist that make
it very difficult to choose the
best option for each one of our
kids and so this bill will
greatly help overcome many of
those obstacles for my family
and for many families across our
state and if we're doing what's
best for our children then we
are sending our state up for a
future of success and we're
sending this is complete for
success thank you thank you.
Okay center a thing before we go
to questions from the committee.
I'm sure I I think it's
important to understand that and
I appreciate the both sides of
the issue.
As you know I've been up your as
a strong advocate for schools
period.
Whether they be public whether
they be private whether they be
charter hello in our state our
parcels are public schools.
I think the one thing we
continue to forget about.
Is our children.
Our children are the ones that
are being affected the most.
We like to talk a lot about the
system we like to talk a lot
about the adults in the system.
We like to focus on the adults
the teachers administrators.
The big buildings.
But we don't talk a lot about in
LFC or even in here.
Is the children.
Who are being affected.
By a lack of quality education.
For anyone to stand up and say
that our schools are meeting the
needs of our children today.
Is laughable they're not.
They're not meeting this the
needs of every children and in
fact.
The poor.
And minority students are the
most disenfranchised in our
current system.
We need.
To provide.
The choice for the parents.
The decide.
Whether or not.
Public schools the best for
children.
Home schools the best for their
children charter schools best
for their children or private
schools bus route children.
That shouldn't be provided for
them.
Based on their age based on
their level of income.
Personally.
I had my children it every
system.
Most of my children for the most
the time with the public
schools.
But I've had my children and
charter schools I've had my
children in private schools and
I've had my children home
schooled.
The only reason my son was able
to go to private school.
Is because his grandmother who
passed away last August.
Eight fort because we can afford
it.
It's time to make that option
available for every student in
the state of New Mexico.
And for the parents to choose
what's best for their children
but we actually support school
choice.
Thank you Mr chairman I yield
questions from the committee
okay questions from the
committee Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Brandt for being in the
works and why do we know your
hearts and that
for the children of New Mexico.
But.
I think it was created in the in
the the inequality was already
created before and it got so far
to get especially when we talk
about boarding schools and
private schools and what has
happened to the native American
children in this not just here
in the United States but even in
Canada.
So with that in mind but also
you know moving forward in
trying to make a decision with
this.
Is the bill the only route are I
mean we totally try to.
A local control.
And I think that's where it
probably should culminate in
some sense I don't know if we do
have those mechanisms in place
for the school board in those
areas to have that it's already
to do this.
They feel it would commit dive
into this pool like a cannonball
by doing this
instead of piling the piloting
it arcing you know what the.
field is out there in some areas
especially when I'd like to
think that there was that much
choice in my area in my district
which I know we don't have that
ability.
She when we want to have our
children come home every day
that seems like the only
alternative is to send them
To to school somewhere else and
the department and I know people
in my family that's what
happened if they had that
ability economically to afford
private school that they were
either as a price or on that
will prepped at the time
and therefore you know and the
whole week and and even though
we can't we talk about
extracurricular activities so I
understand where you're you're
headed with this I know you're.
It's the to be made I just don't
know if this is really the right
fit to do it right now
Let me check my resources in my
area to to really go in on this
item.
So I I I do think that's a
really my questions is this the
only way to can implement
something like this thank you Mr
chair Mister chairman Senator I
I don't know of another way to
fully allow the people in your
community do you have the
choice.
You don't have a house to we do
that your we've we've had a
system in the state that you
know the one of the main reasons
I ran for the Senate was to come
up here and and work on the
education issues.
Two I'm passion about.
Most people know my story I
graduate from high school
without being able to read.
I graduate from public school.
But then again I put my children
in public school.
So I'm not against public
schools.
what I'm saying is.
That we.
Need to make sure that parents
who are the best.
And making these decisions the
parents in your community the
parents in my community.
That they have the resources
bill make those decisions.
The families in your community
shouldn't be forced to stay in a
failing school system if.
Your system is failing in your
community for your students.
They should be able to take the
resources.
And taken to another system that
will work better for them it's a
personal choice it's a personal
decision.
What we've done is we've said if
you're not rich within the state
you don't get that choice.
You don't get to make that
decision you're stuck where
you're at you're stuck where you
can afford to let.
This fixes that.
Is everyone to be able to take
part of not right away because
honestly most of the private
schools are full.
This is a start.
It doesn't hurt our public
schools that probably helps him
because you know value will go
up with every student that
leaves.
To provide more funding per
student in the public school
system.
Because this is funded
separately.
Doesn't touch the SCG it touches
not not a dime that goes into
public education is touched by
this.
What we know is in in APS.
Cost twenty seven thousand
dollars to educate student APS.
Albuquerque academy.
Cost twenty five the.
With this provide twenty five
thousand to pay for Albuquerque
yet no would.
It would take what that student
would generate.
Where they live.
Good provide that money so that
family.
To make the right choice for
their children.
I wish I could stay here and say
our school systems in a great
job.
But we're talking about twenty
two percent of our students can
read at grade level.
If we continue down the path
we're on I stand said.
You could say the same thing
over and over again and expect a
different result that's
insanity.
But we continue down the path
that we're on today.
And expect that to change.
Without making serious changes
within the system.
I'm so I would say that's
insanity.
I agree with them.
This kid's gonna graduate like
me without being able to read.
How many more generations are we
gonna flush down the toilet.
So the giving them the resources
they need to be successful in
our state.
Thank you for your the Santo I
appreciate Russian.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and
I appreciate your passion it's a
it's a bit contagious and and I
don't disagree with a lot of
what you said regarding in our
public schools I've that I've
been a public school teacher
both in the private Catholic
schools for five years and also
in in public schools and and
there is there is quite a
benefit to be honest to be able
to go to private school
so you know I've been here for
twenty years and as much as I
hate to say it I don't think
we've really move the needle
very much and I think that's
you know we tried we tried we
tried I don't know if it's not
because of money that billions
of dollars and education and I
don't know quite what it is but
but there is a there is a
problem that our kiddos are
coming out in can't read the not
prepared I think a lot of
students are many students to
take advantage of opportunities
that are providing public school
and they get out they go to
college to go into a vocation so
I'm trying to figure out where
is that responsibility you
mentioned parents I think
parents play a huge role and you
know kind of wondering well
appearance really were that
involved
maybe if we had more parents
involved with kiddos in the
public school maybe they would
do a little bit better and maybe
they would get out with those
tools that need my biggest
concern about this and as much
as I like to support my
colleague and we agree on many
things and education.
I I am first and foremost
committed to support the
constitution of New Mexico if
you have brought this in the
form of a resolution I would
have no problem supporting it
that in good faith I'm I'm not
going to support a bill that is
does not follow along with the
constitution of New Mexico and
so I really would like to see I
know it's been done before we
bring the resolution put it on
the ballot let people do what
they think is best like other
states to maybe allow these
funds to go to profit area that
until that is done I don't think
that that this bill is is the
route to getting to where we
want to be and certainly support
parents having
Some sort of help with private
schools if that's their choice
that first we have to change the
constitution order to get there
so we have a lot of work to do
in public schools I would like
to see.
Changes in policy that of maybe
follow some of the things
Mississippi has done but we're
trying to do that we try to do
that several years ago where we
say kiddos can't go beyond third
grade in the second right
couldn't get that bill through
but look at Mississippi who did
do that and look where they are
now they've gone from forty
seven to twenty ninth in
national rankings so as policy
makers we have an opportunity to
do a better job with our kiddos
it's not about the money.
It's about what we do with
regard to policy and help our
expectations need to increase
not only for educators but for
our kiddos so with that you know
I can't support this bill bring
the resolution of the fort that
I can't go against my commitment
to support the constitution of
New Mexico thank you Mr chairman
and senator if I could ask what
specifically does this bill
violating the constitution.
According to the FIR.
Do attorney to refer
me to a different section one
specific place because the the
the and I have the direct
analysis from the attorney
general's office instead of
having it feels wash in the F.
I. R. that really says this is
neither formal Attorney General
opinion Norton Attorney General
by our letter.
This is an analysis by staff.
We've seen a lot of analysis the
wrong this bill was specifically
written to not violate the anti
donation clause constitution the
Blaine amendment has been ruled
unconstitutional by the US
Supreme Court so yeah it's still
in our constitution but the
Supreme Court said it's not
constitutional I think Mr chair
the goal is to change this
through the proper channel
through a resolution and at that
point I think we could do what
we need to do if that's the the
choice of the legislature but
right now I think it's a I in my
view according to what I'm
reading that would be a
violation so we may disagree on
that that from this perspective
and where I am now that's that
would be much.
Thank you know the.
Senator bill.
Thank you Mr chairman I somewhat
disagree Senator Kernan I I
guess I would ask
Why this watery we're roughly
ten twelve thousand dollars per
kid now is that about where
we're at I haven't done the
number since we've added some
numbers to to the budget of the
last couple years are we've been
putting about on average about
ten thousand per student twelve
thousand seven okay Mr chairman
that's correct in that that's
just SCG funding right right I
understand that include all the
other stuff
If we had a RFP process for any
of these private schools or
online schools or whatever we're
we qualify them not necessarily
in a bid basis they may charge
twenty thousand.
but on the other hand if we had
some kind of an RFP process that
was in place for any private
school or parochial or online or
any of the various would that
not.
Meet the constitutional yes I
may still want to charge more
money but as long as they were
qualified under some process
with that not meet
constitutional requirements what
was chairman I think the fact
that we have you know they were
even within the attorney
general's office they to fee for
service all the time.
They hire attorneys directly and
pay those attorneys to do cases
that's the for service
that didn't violate the
constitution right apparently
that's the so we're going to
have you know allow fee for
service for anything then its
allowed for education
and I think the the the courts
would hold that up this hasn't
gone through the courts this
specific question is gone
through the state courts sorry
has gone through the U. S.
Supreme Court who ruled
unconstitutional
To.
Not not Fund.
Sectarian schools that's the
Blaine amendment I guess my my
opinion is is make sure you come
into the general thank you Mr
sort of my opinion is is that
If we are hiring education it is
public education it may be
provided by the source but on
the other hand we are paying for
a public education for the state
that's all I have Mister
chairman I just have a I think
it's way we interpret how we do
this and and the funding process
because we can I've been county
commissioners city councilor and
we did our fees for all the time
and we purchased all kinds of
private services even though
there might be some public
available but we have purchased
by the services because that was
the most expeditious and
efficient.
Quality wise and so forth that's
all Mr.
Thank you Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Brandt
For bringing this forward and
the passion and the work you've
done education throughout the
years
in this discussion you know
we're we're talking about
freedom and freedom of the
wealthy to send there's two kids
to private schools and with that
my concern is is that that's not
going to be a freedom for
everyone else just because of
access and capacity and would
they really be able to have
access to the schools.
And so my concern is while it's
not impacting the SCG we are
still pool using state revenue
to essentially.
You know offset cover really the
cost of wealthy people to send
their kids to private schools
by doing this.
And so one of the questions I
have to as far as private
schools just a short time I've
been here you know when we pass
some of our legislation here is
usually public schools and our
public charter schools we don't
really deal with what they do in
the private schools a they can
pretty much in a lot of cases do
what they like to do and so what
are students even have the
support systems like to buy a
piece access with folks with
disabilities and the other
issues that.
that they're dealing with are
they even going to get that type
of support from private schools
and I wonder if you could help
me and answer that Mr Chairman
etcetera I appreciate appreciate
question
I think that the ultimate
determiner of that is the
parent.
We already have parents are
suing the public schools every
day because their children are
receiving the needs that they
need for special needs.
So the parent would actually
make that choice within the bill
and is required by the federal
government the parents when they
sign this would sign a paper
saying that they're the
children's needs they believe
the children's needs are being
met and they take the
responsibility upon themselves.
Again the ultimate
responsibility should be the
parents what we've seen in other
states have done this by the way
this is not model legislation we
didn't go in any other state and
take their legislation and do it
and I've been out part of Alec
for ten years this is not a
model legislation.
we were our own because I
believe in this I believe it's
what we need in our state.
But in other states that have
done this you've actually seen
the the private schools actually
have a very large portion of
their student population is
within the special needs
category and they're meeting
those needs and they're meeting
those needs better in some
cases.
Then the public schools and we
see that with our charter
schools we have a charter school
actually opens for the specific
purpose of needing it needing a
need that's not being met
special needs is not being that
I have one of my district that
does bilingual because that that
need as far as those parents are
concerned was not being met and
so they put in the charter
school.
So this just provides another
choice for parents it just
provides another way of making
sure their children get the
quality education that they
deserve.
is their capacity.
I think that the capacity will
grow.
When we make it available.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
And so once again I just have
concerns with the access you
know in Albuquerque there are
plenty of options.
You know what happens to the
kids in Senator pantos District.
That maybe they're in the school
that's struggling what options
do they do they really have and
do we really have the system set
up.
I also agree there is a lot of
responsibility from the parents.
In some cases in our community
there's one parent.
Some situations it's a
grandparent.
Some situations it's just the
community we have kids living on
our own on our own right now
right.
So.
For me.
This discussion of private
schools and what we're doing and
how they're giving access and
giving those options.
I just don't understand why
we're not trying to make those
options available and our public
schools.
And funding those and and making
sure.
That we're meeting the needs of
our kids and I understand
history and folks are saying
that we're not moving the
needle.
So why are we why can't we do
that.
Why can the private school do it
but public school can.
Mr chairman I think that's the
million dollar question Sir pro.
and maybe we should call it the
multi billion dollar question.
Because since I've been in the
legislature we've for multi
billions of dollars of increase
into our public schools and what
we've seen as us go from forty
eight to fifty first.
So we continue to do the same
thing over and over again.
Expect different results.
But it hasn't worked for twenty
years.
Great to serve current.
I don't talk about the last
fifteen.
We can expect a magical fairy to
come down and fix it.
Because so far this legislature
has not been willing to take.
The proper.
Oversight that needs to be done
to make sure it gets done.
We have had no time to lose
talked about for ten years and
LFC.
Does not tend to eight about six
okay six years.
In L. E. S. C..
We've not done anything to
change it.
All we ever think about doing is
pouring more money.
You know that that's been great
for Rio Rancho public schools.
It's been great for Hobbs.
Three great for some of the
other districts that are already
doing a good job.
What we've not done is change
anything in the districts that
are.
Every state that has done this
is seeing a improvement in
quality in the public schools.
Because now they have to compete
for those students.
And as we know competition.
It makes people better.
So as far as Sir Bentos District
having to pass the today.
Are they going to do that.
There's no money available
today.
With this bill that money
becomes available.
That's where you start.
You can't start by saying it's
not there now.
How did they get it there now.
It's not available now.
Their private school in serving
those district I don't know I
didn't check everywhere.
She talked about that this the
the people in her district they
can afford it send their kids to
the Indian school.
And I've got the wrong term
sorry.
But the ones that want their
kids to be home every night for
dinner.
The ones want to focus on
family.
And the ones that can afford it
can't do that.
This will provide that
opportunity the ones that can't
afford to send them.
And the others to get together
and say let's open a private
school right here to serve the
needs of our students they don't
have to go Santa Fe.
And live in a boarding school.
This strengthens the family.
If we really want to change the
culture New Mexico we have to
focus on the family.
And do everything we can for
that single parent.
They're never gonna bill Ford
most of them.
Probably ten percent of single
parents to have the income to
bill for private school.
This gives that choice to every
single parent.
So for private school for their
children you think single
parents don't want the best for
their children I think they do
yes we have a few children that
fall through the cracks the
future when they're in foster
care.
You're right we do we have
children that are on the
streets.
We're coming their needs now.
That maybe with this we can't
get the questions and stuff
you're going to go over the same
things you've covered other
places so please keep the
questions thank you.
Chairman thank you.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Thank you
for the conversation I just
think
respectfully gonna disagree on
just the path I think we agree
on the issue regarding what
needs to happen I think we can
agree on that were.
Not doing right by some of our
kids here in New Mexico the
current system but I also argue
that we're not doing it to some
of our families as well because
it's part of that support system
that helps them in the public
school I also concerned with
what Senator Kernan brought up
on the constitutionality of it
I'm not an attorney I'm gonna
try to play one I just dress
like one sometimes.
so
I'm not going to be willing to
be able to support it
this legislation
But appreciate you bringing this
for thank you Mr chair thank you
yes this thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator rand then join
the conversation really
appreciate your.
Your words the
the first time I've seen a bill
like this in like eight years
the of the since the one you
carried the bills no of money
was fashion I want to say like
fifteen years ago but the house
party with these ideas just
right around the time the banks
question eight
and then I and then a different
version passed the house
squeaked past thousand two
thousand fifteen.
but you're right it was it was a
fascinating Policy.
Should have you know back in the
day it was it was initiated by
civil rights leaders you know if
I'm not mistaken after American
leaders in Baltimore and what
was in Milwaukee
back east it was interesting
that the here there wrap you
know
because of the failed failed
schools in their neighborhoods
the up and so they developed up
with like a the the the the
policy they were pushing was
more aligned with Senate bill
one thirteen which will here
here in a minute.
But
But I'm persuaded by the notion
that if if these kids can't do
it then these kids should be
able to do it you know I mean
like we can allow the quality
to.
To to create mediocrity and I'll
be talking about that with
regards to sports it with
another bill that's coming down
the pike but
But what what's weird about this
bill is it's not it doesn't go
through private nonprofit at the
department kind of manage this
money in the department
you know dole out checks and the
department kind of come up with
rules and rags it it really
doesn't.
it's not really targeted towards
those folks you're talking about
necessarily those folks that
have limited transportation
options under stocked in the
neighborhood school
And so it is it is a bold
initiative it it's really unique
and you're right it's not a
model is station is like totally
different than than than all the
others but it's but based on the
same premise but I mean a
hundred million dollars
You know during the the Great
Recession which last way too
long in the state was was just
on unbelievable I mean it would.
Unfathomable to to have a bill
that that would cost a hundred
dollars the it took us ten years
to.
Take a hundred and a hundred
million dollars out of a twenty
six five billion dollar matches
you know so so I'm I'm really.
Each of of the bold initiative
in the in the forethought of
like we are not fighting for
crumbs anymore you know our
general fund has money.
To do stuff like this there's
gonna be a lot of hundred
million dollar proposals to do
this than the other this one
actually is you know going to
towards students you know when
our kids.
But
But I just think you the up if
if we were to do some like this
I think I think the
constitutional route is the.
Is a private nonprofit private
sector tax credit through taxed
read not just checks from from
the department
But I think this this probably
would not be allowable but the.
But the up but the premise of
the budget initiatives sound I
mean how do we improve kids
lives in students lives that
that are in schools that that
are just not adequate from them
in the walk into Baltimore
they're dealing with the with
the
Was the terminology the.
The deficit the
Sucks the end.
I'm drawing a blank but in other
states the up the deficit of
some minority students is like
eight percent fourteen percent
here it's it's upwards of sixty
percent sixty percent of our
students are are suffering from
From a deficit within the
educational system in terms of
outcomes.
Inputs and outcomes so so it
it's fascinating policy
initiative I appreciate you
bringing four it's not it's not
an attempt to usurp anything
artists dismantling thing is
just kind of on top of it but I
think to do it this way
Is in fact unconstitutional
regardless of of what benefits
it may produce thank you things
chairman of a bucket as it
really quickly
At the time of the New Mexico
constitution article four
section thirty one US open to
get in this the constitutional
arguments more in the Judiciary
Committee but school voucher
program would violate this
present provision at the
legislature appropriated money
directly to parents or private
schools but the New Mexico
Supreme Court has suggested
however that a constitutional
issues not raised if the
appropriations are made to a
state agency which in turn
distributes the money that's the
reason we use this mechanism in
this bill is what you're
suggesting I believe would
potentially be the violation of
the constitution not this
because this is literally just
like when Pat hires an outside
company to do anything it is a
fee for service paid directly
from the department to the
person providing the service
it's just like when the Attorney
General hires an attorney.
They're paying for a fee for
service so if we are calling
that unconstitutional.
Then we're going to go back to
all these departments and so you
can't use outside money anymore
you can't use contract services
anymore because that.
Would be unconstitutional if
this is unconstitutional.
What's unconstitutional sending
it to a nonprofit organization
to then pay for fee for service.
The constitution clearly so it
has to go to state agency.
So that's why we went this route
is to make sure what is
constitutional that's why this
is so different than any other
state because we had to make
sure it fits the constitution of
the state of New Mexico.
And to do that we did it this
way and I I hate to say it and
we've seen a lot of FY ours that
are just flat out wrong.
The thirty general's office got
this wrong.
This bill is constitutional.
And I'm gonna support center at
the party's Pinos Bill.
Because we need to do something.
The change the direction of
education our state of swords
our souls I think about that so
I keep going sorry thank you Mr
misinterpret no that's great I I
get the argument it's great are
and we.
You know we will text people
last year.
That's that's a little different
than this maybe you know
we just literally wrote a check
and gave it to a person and so I
think up I think in terms of the
legislative process we should
ask ourselves is that a good
idea and that judges deal with
whether it's constitutional but
is it a good idea yes or no and
then deal with constitutional
question Alex so yeah you're
right I'm not opposed to this
because I think it's
unconstitutional I'm opposed to
just on the policy grounds but
that's a great argument thank
you Mr.
Thank you I've just couple quick
questions for things that I I
think there can get fairly short
answers.
What is the funding for this and
this is separate funding from
through the the typical educate
SCG and type of things what is
the amount of funding hundred
million.
Where does that funding comes
from the general fund.
What percent of the general fund
does public education receives
approximately.
you could including college or
just K. twelve just K. twelve
fine but up.
Forty six percent about forty
six percent and so many out of
the general fund that is going
someplace other than this
essentially forty six percent of
that is not available then the
public yet so this is money that
that potentially reduces that
I get other states for capital
outlay Mr what other states have
something like this I looked up
I know New Hampshire does and
recently passed one is that
correct Arizona has a get
completely different system but
does the same a fact.
Utah just passed one
what was the other side just
about to.
I also have any of those been
challenged in court.
I I don't know if they have or
not
I don't know what bases they
would be because this doesn't
violate the US constitution's it
would really depend on the
state's constitution as to
whether or not there's an issue
that in a real life states are
different but I believe New
Hampshire currently has several
challenges to theirs as I read
through sounds very similar
obviously I they're not written
exactly the same but.
What challenges are very
expensive for the state which
would cost additional money do
we have school choice in New
Mexico now.
Can parents send their kids to
any school they want no.
Any public school.
no.
No rent one not because our law
currently says that the only way
they can send their kids to to
another public school that's not
in where they live is if that
school has capacity and so that
limits that choice so they do
not have full choice to send
their kids and pull them out of
whatever school and let me let
me qualify that if there is
capacity in the school can
parents and their kids a school
they choose.
Well that accepted that letter
which is a whole different beast
with the exception of athletics
but.
No Mr chairman I think if you're
gonna qualify we qualify
anything.
The legislative there's capacity
compared send provided there's
capacity can the parents and
their children to any public
school they choose either
traditional or or chart.
It's it's not full school choice
and that was a question no my
question is can parents send
their children to any school
public school that has capacity.
I believe so okay
Do private schools the with
schools that would be able to go
through this are they required
to take all students.
Mr chairman no.
Our public schools required to
take all students regardless
even of capacity in general.
Mr chairman no.
No please explain why not to set
because of capacity they're not
required to take all students.
Okay yes you're correct find a
live in the district are they
required to take all students
yes regardless capacity that's
correct okay
Good parents of students in
special education sue one of
these private schools that they
did not find the for the needs
of a special education students
Mr chairman I don't know
probably.
For for not allowing them and
say we don't provide that
service what would you think for
the minute they were already
student of that school sorry.
Good understood question could
one of these schools say we
can't provide the services your
child needs they're not able to
come here I'm sure we do that
already I'm with that we do
other places you know are they
allowed to essentially
discriminate against students
with disabilities.
I don't know Mr chairman I doubt
it.
As we have anti discrimination
laws.
That would apply to everybody
not just to public schools.
Okay but our public schools
don't accept every student that
has a disability Rio Rancho of
it doesn't have the the ability
to meet in need they sent down
APS or they send them to Santa
Fe
it happens all the time with our
current system.
But it's within the public
school system correct.
Mr yes it is that of I didn't
know you probably tell from my
quest I I have serious concerns
I have serious concerns about
the constitutionality of
diluting the SCG for other
students of the.
The ability for private schools
do not have the same
accountability do need not have
a publicly elected school boards
of all of those types of things.
I cannot so I can't supported as
a result of that the the this is
clearly a way of diverting
public funds towards private
schools and institutions and I
believe that to be wrong within
not only New Mexico but within
our country that I I don't think
that is the proper way of fixing
things that we do to fix it from
within the system and I think
we've been working very hard
you've made some comments that
nothing is changed and that's
not true we have much more
robust early childhood programs
which we know assist in helping
children get ready we just
talked about CTE programs which
assist our students on the way
out all of those are going to
take a while to roll through
certainly COVID threw a wrench
into all of that
it's not accurate to compare
that we were at forty eight they
were now fifty at the other
states are waiting for us to
catch up we've got to do more
than other states in order to
change things and so I I think
it's an unfair characterization
that we've gotten worse because
our ranking has dropped.
We have not kept up with the
others I think we've made the
investments to to stay on track
and and with that I'll I'll stop
my my questions as well as
committee please yes I'm sorry
Senator you asked and I I
apologize thank you very much
and so.
Senator my Estes actually
clarified for me the difference
between the constitutional issue
that I thought was in the bill
where
the state distributed the funds
to a parent and in this bill in
can you clarify it goes to the
public at department which then.
Releases those funds to this to
the private school correct so
just clarify that because that
would not be we to the school
and therefore not go into in the
what we see in other states as
the educational savings accounts
those would be unconstitutional
in the state of New Mexico and
so because those go directly to
the parents so this money goes
directly to the school which is
a fee for service so Mister
chair where does this go next
Senator this year and I think Mr
chair that this might be an
interesting conversation for
judiciary to clarify the whole
issue because I think it's your
bill is written it it probably
does not conflict with
the constitution article.
section three article Leggeri Mr
chairman so that's an
interesting thing as I read
through it so might be
interesting to see it go forward
I I do have concerns about
shifting those dollars unless
there additional dollars that
would come in because I do
support public schools but
Mister chairman Senator that's
why we did not take it out of
the SCG thank you very that's
actually not to increase at this
okay thank you.
We'll committee please.
All.
to table.
Lotion to table that is not
available you'll call the roll
please Senator Brandt no Senator
Hickey Senator Kernan.
Senator my S. yes Senator
Neville.
Senator Pentaho yeah.
Senator pope yes Sanders Sauls
yes.
Able to bill the bill is Senator
thank you for the good
discussion.
Of Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and we
I believe are scheduled for the
floor eleven of and we have a
hard commitment to make sure
people can get their so eleven
for a ten forty five stop so as
we get through wonderful
otherwise we'll have you up
first on Friday and continue
from that point Sir.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
I'm.
So I'm Torren I'm not sure I
want to do this quickly.
I I don't think we can do it
quickly the questions will be
the to to extensive so what
we're proposing is this is a
very different approach.
The one you just heard of I
think Senator Brandt it took a
an Avenue toward dealing with
the potential constitutional
conflicts that involve private
education some of participating
in the public sector we took a
different approach and I would
like to give a full the not full
opportunity to explore so if you
don't mind will roll this over
till till Friday if that's okay.
Because if you're gonna if
you're going to do a hard stop
at ten forty five it does make a
lot of sense.
That's what you would like then
we're gonna roll Senator one
thirteen over for the but we
heard on Friday Senator on
Friday because of the school
board association instructs the
okay.
Seven
one or.
I of the growing up.
In senator bill is over the
other.
It is relatively short
otherwise.
The to the.
We'll be back in up just a
little bit but.
Our.
Functions that I can answer all
the.
Yes.
Thanks for was
the one that is both.
Was there yes.
Our.
Thank you hello my mic on.
This.
Okay and kind of the thing we've
got a very take your time line
so.
If I could have my expert
witness join us and then I will
yield the chair when service Sir
yes Sir.
That we've got a very short I'm
not sure we might be better just
to roll these over so we are
rushing in in less everybody's
looked at it they are in only a
few doors they are PSC
stevedores.
If we were to do just a quick
really up to the the the
committee and the men are there
any substantive consenus.
We we might want to roll over
there's an amendment Mr chairman
I don't know anything about the.
Okay.
Okay thank you it appears there
are a few more problems that
might be coming up and so with
that I think we are going to
close down for today we will
start at nine thirty on Friday
due to the school board
association and school board
members around the state would
be here and that morning
breakfast of which all members
are please welcome and is that
at the Eldorado again.
Prevention center at the
convention center this time okay
so at the convention center what
time does that start Friday
morning.
At seven.
