also. Uh, the first two bills
are carryovers from our
Wednesday committee, uh, the
good senator is back and uh we
will probably then uh do also
your SB 380, so you don't have
to go and come and then we'll,
we'll head down through the, the
list of the other bills. So just
kind of letting people know.
Also, um, this Saturday, and I
hope we have a crowd like this
show up also, uh, but we have a
film called Counted Out Bath is
Power.
Uh, it is brought supported by
the Lano Foundation, Northern
New Mexico Steam coalition and
also your Senate Education
Committee, uh, but that is going
to be Saturday at 11 o'clock in
room 322. It's about a 90 minute
film. By the way, that's the
Senate Finance Committee, I
believe. Um, and let me read
just briefly what it is in our
current information economy,
math is everywhere. The people
we date, the news we see, the
influence of our votes, the
candidates who win elections,
the education we have access to,
the jobs we
get all of it is underwritten by
an invisible layer of math that
few of us understand or even
notice, but whether we know it
or not, our numeric literacy,
whether we can speak the
language of math is a critical
determinant of social and
economic power, you know, and so
it's a very powerful film. I
hope some of you will, uh, mark
your calendars and plan on being
here tomorrow at 11 o'clock.
We're very fortunate to get a
pre-screening of this, uh,
funded mostly by the Lano
Foundation. So hopefully.
We will be here. Uh, it's what I
always used to tell my math
students is, uh, those of you
who aren't good at math, there's
a math tax. You pay extra in the
world if you're not good at
math, and this is trying to
encourage as a society that we
become more math literate.
Any other announcements that are
oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
like want to recognize uh Doctor
Blakey, Superintendent of
Albuquerque Public Schools and
she's brought some students
from, from Albuquerque Public
schools and to the and welcome
y'all into the.
Some are, some are over in a
house education so they're kind
of splitting.
And Senator, you want to
introduce your uh shadowing 2
weeks, two days ago.
I think we're good.
OK.
Uh, with that, then we'll start
off with Senate Bill 325, the
correction Substance Abuse
Counselor Education bill,
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, members of the
Senate Education Committee in
essence, as we've already gone
through the extensive discussion
regarding this particular
measure.
Uh, went back and we went ahead
and we also respectfully submit
a an amendment and uh so uh
before I get into maybe just uh
in brevity a little bit more
explanation on the bill, uh, we
have an amendment before you for
consideration and I'm ready to
go ahead and this convenience.
Mr. Chair, I move Amendment.
231120.2.
Senate Bill 3 Senator,
thank you very much about what
the amendment does, how it
changes things and fixes our
concerns. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee, uh, one of
the recommendations by the
committee was to go ahead and
change establishing to
implementing. We did that. Uh,
the other, uh, change that has
occurred as per some of the
discussions instead of shell
which would direct it uh
specifically to New Mexico
Highlands and of course uh Lunar
Community College and
the Department of Corrections,
uh, what it'll do is the
resources go directly to the
Department of Corrections, but
within that, it also says may
and the reason for that, if
these institutions need to go
ahead and uh expand to help to
develop the curricula and to
offer this within our
correctional facilities that may
be done, and then lastly, uh, to
go ahead and cover the costs on
page 2, line 21, after
counseling, insert, uh, and to
cover the cost for.
Contracts for services,
materials, and other necessary
costs. So instead of it just
being very specific possibly for
instruction. It also means how
to go ahead and equip, if you
will, for the full instruction
of the uh associate's degree as
well as the implementation of
the program. So that in essence
is what the Thank you and thank
you, Senator, for, for taking
that and taking our uh
Our concerns to heartening and
getting that that fix made. um.
OK briefly out in the audience,
I mean, I don't know that you
all have it. If you weren't here
on Wednesday, it might be
sounding like gibberish right
now, but we're talking about,
but anyone in support of the
amendment.
You went in opposition.
OK, uh, to the committee.
On the amendment
And we do pass on the amendment
pass and seconded by uh Senator
Ramos.
Uh, is there any opposition to
the amendment?
Opposition
Xing Nan, you have an amended
bill. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee just again
in in brevity in terms of what
we're talking about with this
particular uh bill. Uh, we've
had the opportunity to go ahead
and visit extensively, and I
want to go ahead and thank
Senator Figueroa for her lead in
terms of helping us to uh work
on this. We've spent many hours
after uh the previous meeting
regarding this, but in essence,
what it does is it does create,
if you will, that uh that
program, that associate degree.
Uh, so that we're able to go
ahead and move forward, uh, and
this would be something that
would be offered to those that
are incarcerated within that uh
gives them an opportunity to
help to become uh educated and
certified, if you will, to
provide uh counseling for
addictions, uh, once they leave
the facility and it helps to be
very prescriptive in terms of
the program itself. I, I do want
to go ahead and make mention
that uh the president from New
Mexico Highlands University is
here. The president from Luna
Community.
is here. Uh, we have a
superintendent from Santa Rosa
Consolidated Schools who was
here as well, and along with
that, uh, as you can see, there
is full support uh to go ahead
and help to develop this as we
move forward with behavioral
health and most importantly, as
we deal directly with the
addictions and to deal with
those individuals who possibly
have already gone through that
process, who have been
incarcerated, but whenever they
reintegrate back into the
communities, uh, they're going
to be the best, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Education
Committe.
I'm available. Thank you. We've
already done public comment on
this, so questions from the
committee.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Campos. I like I
really do.
Uh
And if we're changing people's
mindset on.
But they can and can't do and
the ability for them to be able
to help other way we need to
handle this.
But my concern is can
incarcerated people be licensed,
I heard that there was a problem
with that. Is anybody here from
the Department of Correction, so
Mr. Chair, and of course,
Senators for me, I would like to
defer to the secretary from the
Department of Corrections, uh,
or there may be someone else
here that can also assist us in
terms of uh responding you
would please and introduce
yourself.
Spence, my name's Alicia Tafoya
Lucero. I'm the cabinet
secretary for the corrections
department, uh, so we have been
working with regulation and
licensing department to make
sure that they will be able to
be licensed in.
This, uh, in this field and
inside right now we do quite a
lot of peer education and peer
mentorship programs where um we
also work with healthcare
authority and the University of
New Mexico to get people
licenses inside peer mentors and
then they're able to work on the
outside as an echo, um.
I'm, I'm sorry, not echo but um
Medicaid.
Ha
Peer to peer workers and so we
we just think this is a step
further where now they will be
able to specialize in, uh, drug
and alcohol counseling as well.
Chairman, I'm still kind of
confused for you.
Can they still be licensed while
they're still incarcerated.
Um, Mr. Chair, the process
hasn't happened yet, so we've
not gone to the level of
licensing somebody inside.
However, in our prisons, we do
have licensed professionals,
licensed counselors, and they
would be able to work under the
supervision of those people to
earn those practicum hours
inside.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and
secretary to Foya and.
Senator compost my concern is I,
like I said, I like what this
bill is trying to do.
Uh, this program is gonna be
under the auspices of the lunar
Community College.
For the associate's degree in
Highland, New Mexico, Highland
University is going to develop
the curriculum, provide
technical assistance. I
understand about the people
already being in there to work
with these inmates on a 1 to 1
basis, pure.
Counseling and everything.
But I've also done a little bit
of looking into this but.
If they are not able to be
licensed while they're
incarcerated and I don't think
they're gonna be able to. I wish
somebody was here that from
licensing.
would be able to answer this.
But once they complete this, if
they.
Say are out on parole, can't, I,
I would assume that they would
be able to get their license and
I'm seeing somebody over there
going like this.
So I hope that is the case here.
But as long as we can change
people to become
Walk the straight narrow now
instead of going back.
the way they were, so I, I've
got some concerns here. I do
plan on supporting this, but I
think there might be a problem
with.
A person that is incarcerated.
Mr. Chair and senator, to
alleviate your, uh, concerns, we
will get out to this committee.
Thank you very much for that.
That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Other questions?
Not a motion from the committee,
please.
Move it do pass on Senate Bill
325 as amended.
from that center Figueroa,
seconded by Senator Pope, you'll
call the roll, please.
Sander Boone.
Yes
Cinderel.
Yes. Figueroa.
Yes. Send her Hickey.
Centra Nova, yes.
Santa Ramos.
Sir Thornton
yes. Pope. Yes,
so
Sir Thornton, yes. Pope. Yes.
Yes. You have a unanimous due
pass 90 as amended.
Thank you very much Mr.
members of the Senate Education
Committee,
uh, again with uh your
direction, Mr. Chair. Are we
ready to move on to Senate Bill
354
members of the Senate Education
Committee,
uh, again with uh your
direction, Mr. Chair. Are we
ready to move on to Senate Bill
354354 Padre Antonio Jose
Martinez documentary. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Education Committee,
uh, the big question uh that uh
surfaced around this particular
measure was the, the name of the
institution, we went ahead and
we went back, did more research
and the understanding is.
Yes, uh, that it is the northern
New Mexico state school. Now
that is the original name and
that name has not been
officially changed. I want to go
back, uh, about two decades ago,
we had the same situation at uh
Lunar vocational Technical
Institute in Las Vegas, there
has to be legislation proposed
and approved in order to make
the change, and we did that from
LVTI to Luna Community College.
We're trying to uh establish
that communication with uh the
president uh Balderas uh to see
what their direction would be in
terms of the specific name, but
in terms of that for the purpose
of this particular piece of
legislation, uh, the name
Northern New Mexico State School
is the official name of the the
school in that.
That's
Clarification
Thank you, Senator, and I know
I've talked with Senator, uh.
Or Mijo about and everyone's
like, what, you know, the name's
not officially changed, so I
don't know whether he put in the
last minute legislation to
change that or not because I
think everybody
thought it was already changed.
And so sometimes we interesting
things come up as a result of
discussions. Um, but as a
result, this bill really doesn't
change from any of the
discussion we had the other day.
We did have public input on this
bill at that time and so we
heard questions from the
committee if there are any
further questions, and if not,
you know, a motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just,
uh.
One concern that I have here is,
is
Why wasn't this
Money submitted in the original
budget, as they are asking for a
particular documentary.
Uh, to make
For 200K.
It seems like a small amount of
money overall, but
My concern here is that
If we set a precedent here by
approving something like this.
Every other school who wants to
make any kind of movie,
documentary, report.
Will come to this committee and
we'll be inundated with requests
for individual documentaries.
As opposed to this being part of
their standard budget.
To align with whatever
activities you plan to do that
the following year.
So
Would you please help me out
there?
Sure, thank you very much Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much,
Senator Thornton, as we deal
with, uh, projects like this,
uh, they are constantly
introduced across the board.
Um
With uh regarding different
institutions. And in this
particular case, as the
individuals who are
constituents, but at the same
time who do uh this type of
work, uh, we're seeking, if you
will, an opportunity to enhance,
if you will, some of the history
of the area.
But to get specific to the
response, uh, with that, does
this set precedents? We've had
this occur uh throughout the
years on numerous occasions.
The second part of this though,
and you bring up a very valid
point and I don't want to get
too much into the diatribe in
terms of um the responsiveness,
the accountability and the
processes we'll just say uh or
ING in, in the case of higher
education.
Uh, as we deal with it, we have
a lot of the RPSPs or if you
will, special projects that are
consistently and constantly
funded uh to assist if you will,
as learning tools within our
different universities and and
colleges. Uh, so again, to let
you know, uh,
precedence has already been set.
These are considered to go ahead
and be uh RPSPs, uh, which
basically are community projects
and uh it
It's uh another uh proposal to
go ahead and offer something uh
for students, so that, that's
the explanation at this.
Thank you for that, Senator.
I have no problem with the
project. I have no problem with
the subject of the project,
just.
And again, since I'm new to the
committee, I see a precedent
being set because it's new to
me, and um so.
Because of that, I, I, I'm, I'm,
I'm wanting to put the
responsibilities back on these
higher institutions to think
about what they plan on doing in
the following years and to
include these types of things in
their original budgets when they
submit them to, to the states,
so.
For that reason and only for
that reason alone, I probably
will not approve this.
But, uh, but I agree with the
project itself. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Senator Thornton.
Thank you. Other questions?
Then boom.
Mr. Tay, members of the
committee, thank you, uh.
Sender, I, I just have one
question. There, there's a
question here on the, uh,
On the analysis that says does
northern New Mexico have
capability to produce a
documentary and I just, I just
didn't see a complete clear
answer there and not.
They are completely equipped.
They have all the capabilities
they need to do it.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair and Senator
Boone, yes, and the individuals
that are the documentary are uh
people who have worked on
hundreds of documents and
documentaries that relate to uh
historical data and in this
case, uh, specific to Padre
Martinez, so they will have the
expertise in order to go ahead
and uh utilize the resources and
put together. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Other questions Senna.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Senator Campos for bringing
this forward. Um, going off of
Senator Thornton's questions,
have other institutions received
such funding for specifically
documentaries.
Very good question. Thank you
very much, uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
and of course, Senator Nava.
Yes, they have, and not only
documentaries, but uh as they
put together, if you will, uh,
historical facts for different
projects, whether it be the
history department, whether it
be the anthropology department,
uh, this is something that has
occurred, uh, across the, the
state in different institutions.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
uh, Senator Campos. And is there
a reason why they didn't request
it with their, uh, overall ass.
Their annual ask
and of course Senator Nava.
One of the things in this
legislature.
As we go out and uh.
On to our constituents.
Constituents along
And in this case, this was
brought forward by individuals
from the uh institution be from
those people who work on
documentaries and then see how
they're looking to go ahead and
uh.
Create if you will, the value
added piece of preserving
history. So within this, as we
go forward, the one thing that
we do find is that institutions
number one, do seek resources,
and it's not necessarily
directly through, if you will,
the process through Board of
Regents through presidents, uh,
through, if you will, a vetting
team. It also means that
information can be brought
forward from professors from
people in the community and so
within that part
My responsiveness was to uh
former senator Jerry OTC Pino,
who had been working on this
project.
And I committed to him to go
ahead and continue to follow
through with that. So the the
request for resources comes from
a myriad of places as we deal
with it again through the
legislative process. Part of
that is to ensure that as we do
go forward, uh, that these are
vetted and uh.
And if there are questions or
there are concerns and thoughts,
we take it back and we continue
to work on the accountability,
the transparency, and then again
through the vetting process of a
project like this as an example.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
again and I've got just a kind
of a brief concern similar to,
to Senator Thornton that
Things like this, typically they
ought to be in the budget of
those institutions to move
forward if that's where the
money is going to be going
unless it's setting up.
Something, you know, an
institute that then just needs a
a public body to hang it on. Uh,
this sounds like the money is
going directly there. And so
I've got some of those concerns.
I don't want to hold it up.
Here it does go to finance and
they get a slew of these and
determine whether to fund or not
fund uh in the past we've had
growth funding where individual
legislators could fund something
of this sort with that kind of
money. I don't think we're doing
that this year, but, you know,
I, you know, it might be that
type of thing where if we get
any kind of say on particular
projects, this could be one of
those, but typically I don't
like when we get all these small
ass from the department in a
university or for a particular.
funding for a pet project that
hasn't gone through the vetting
of the university. Thank you Mr.
Chair and
Mr. Chair, um, I move, uh, no
wreck on Senate Bill 354.
The
There a second for on no wreck
motion.
It would move it on to finance.
Thorntons it
if you'll call the roll on a do
pass no recommendation.
A motion for a no move on with a
no recommendation.
Senator Boone.
Yes
Sinriel
Yes. Figueroa.
Yes, sender Hickey.
Center Nova. Yes, Center Romos
Senator Thornton Center Pope.
Yes, Cinder souls. Yes, so you
have uh no recommendation on to
finance committee. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Education Committee.
Uh, and then Senator Campos, do
you want to stay in the seat
there and do Senate Bill 380,
the physician graduate Medical
Education Trust Fund. Thank you
very much, a little bit more
extensive, but we kind of keep
things short and moving along.
Thank you, thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members of
the Senate Education Committee
and as you know over the last
several years we can continue to
do is to go ahead and put
together, if you will, uh,
various trust funds for uh for
numerous purposes and uh this
one particularly as I talk about
this is gonna give us a an
opportunity to hear about
another great need that we have
here in the state.
So in essence, Senate Bill 380
establishes the physician
graduate Medical.
Education Trust fund and the
physician graduate Medical
Education Program fund to
support residency programs in
rural and underserved areas. The
trust fund financed through $100
million appropriation from the
general fund will distribute 5%
of its average market value
annually uh to the program fund,
uh, to support graduate medical
education programs in rural
areas, just very quickly and
then I, uh, Mr. Chair, I, I do
have my expert witness.
with me today, Mr. Matthew
Probes, and with that, uh, he is
a PA and he'll go ahead and
he'll, uh, with your permission,
uh, expand upon this a little
bit more, but if I may, taking
the resources, putting them into
this fund, having, if you will,
after about 3 years having the
interest generated, that would
be the resources that we would
use to continue to focus on this
type of healthcare in the rural
parts of our state with that uh.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
Senate Education Committee, if I
can uh brevity asked Mr. uh
Probes to uh further elaborate
in terms of the great need that
we have uh for the resources
for, for uh a program such as
this. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I
And appreciate being in front of
you today and the education
committee.
I usually spend most of my time
in the health committees, but as
we know, the marriage between
health and education is an
inseparable and uh definitely
the case, uh when we're speaking
about residencies and graduate.
I've spent the last 15 years
advocating for us growing our
own health professionals, uh, in
the state of New Mexico,
particularly those country docs
that mentored me.
Uh, that invested in me as a
physician assistant and invested
in many others as I see that now
they uh set off into the sunset
of their careers.
And now I'm in their place
trying to mentor that next
generation.
Who will be next is the
question.
And for both uh health and
education and every other need
that we have in our great state.
That is the question, how will
we grow our next generation of
health professionals. Uh.
One of the biggest pieces of
legislation, in my opinion over
these 15 years to pass through
this legislature was RGME.
A council
And that House bill set the
precedent for this, uh, where we
are today to really establish
and codify if you will,
residencies in New Mexico for
growing our future physicians.
That being said, like everything
rural.
It is fragile.
It is based on a few.
is based on small agencies
working together.
As teammates and partnership to
create these rural
opportunities.
Uh, it is based on a few
positions that serve as faculty
to create this this uh ability
to mentor this next generation.
And as with that fragility, uh,
and specifically when we're
talking about funding streams.
It is before you as a committee
to set this path.
To shore up with this fund to
shore up uh within the ebbs and
flows that come.
Uh, of funding sources of of
individual agencies of
vacancies, uh, the ability to
ensure that growing this next
generation of physicians is is
we have the.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Education
Committee were available for
questions.
Thank you. Uh, first out to the
audience, those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
OK, do you have anyone?
Going on
Online questions from the
committee.
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Campos.
Uh
Witness, I
Uh
Appreciate the
Motivation behind the fund and
definitely we, we do need to
grow our own.
Cultural compatibility.
Very important.
I'm, I'm not quite sure that I
see.
How decisions are gonna be made
in terms of how that money is
spent.
I know that
That some hospitals in the
state.
particularly
I call out in a very positive
way.
The um
Nor Lee Hospital.
That is looking at creating
family medicine residencies,
psychiatry.
Residency and so forth.
So with
With this
With this 5% earnings, uh.
Go to someone like that. In
other words,
That's a very concrete program
and a very successful.
Rough Hospital in New Mexico.
Others may want to do it, but
may not have been building the
infrastructure over time. So how
are the decisions going to be
made as to
Where to
I that
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much, Senator
Hickey. I'm gonna defer again to
the expert to uh to.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Senator Hickey, as I stated
earlier in 2019 and House Bill
480, we created the GME
expansion and and with that is a
council and so those decisions
that again that uh
That precedent set that
foundation has been set with
with a board that can uh help to
ensure that the best use of
these funds for shoring up
residency expansion as well as
existing residencies, um, as you
mentioned, you know, we have
some that are very solid. We
have others that are currently
uh.
In trouble.
And so to best utilize that the
resources we have that already
in place.
Um
Thank you, uh, I'm posting an
expert in Mr. Chair.
Uh, one of the things I'm a
little bit concerned about is
that
are availability, particularly
in specialty areas.
Around the state and and family
practitioners, uh, internists.
Pediatricians and sometimes
OBGYN.
You know, do ENT to uh
Low back pain is one of the most
common complaints behavioral
health.
Um, are, are we going to be able
to get them experiences and
those other non.
Uh, I mean, they, they are what
make up a a general practice,
but um,
Are they gonna, will people
travel around to get those if
they're not available in that
particular area. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator Hickey
again to defer to uh Mr. Probes
for the response.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Hickey, that
is the idea uh again here we
have, uh, you mentioned the
primary care residencies that
this bill would support and, and
I want to add also psychiatry is
another one there and our great
need for behavioral health in
this state. And that is the idea
as you know, we've created a
very successful model and being
here before Senate education
with hub and spoke for
school-based health centers and
that idea that all these rural
schools can get access by us
working together.
Cooperatively and so that is the
same idea with these rural
residencies that we have to
create these partnerships across
agencies, uh, unlike uh uh
larger agencies like for
example, the University of New
Mexico that may have all those
resources in one place and all
those experiences that have
rural residencies, we have to
work together. And that's the
idea of this fund that when you
create the complexity of a
relationship that if any one of
those pieces in that tapestry.
Um, it becomes at risk or
falters that we need to have the
ability to catch a safety net to
catch that and to make sure that
we can continue that. I want to
point out one extremely
important fact.
When it comes to the health of
New Mexico.
Is that when we're talking
about.
Primary care physicians, which
are
The captains of all our
healthcare teams.
That in New Mexico, 80% of the
time where they do their
residency is where they'll
practice.
If we cannot offer these rural
residencies outside of
Albuquerque.
Then we can expect 80% of our
physicians to stay in
Albuquerque.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Campos, uh, I completely agree
with you.
Um, way back in the day and the
Uh, mid-seventies, I did.
Primary care residency and
internal medicine, the first one
in Rochester.
And
Um, it was amazing the number of
students from that program who
stayed in Rochester, New York.
I know the track record from Rob
Williams of the people who have
stayed.
In New Mexico who get exposure
and you build your mentorship. I
mean, it's really an
apprenticeship and you build the
relationships.
So
Um, I, I, I think it's, it's
really on the right track. I
just want to be sure that we
have the discipline to be able
to get all of the
Specialty areas that are really
make up of the core of a primary
care practice.
So that we attract
Individuals.
From all over.
To the state for these programs.
Because they, they can
definitely.
said,
Influence of people to stay here
and I think
We love New Mexicans, but right
now with the lack, we would love
to have anybody from anywhere in
the country.
To their residency and may be
overseas.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
up.
Anyone else want to be on the
list?
OK.
I
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, senator.
compass.
Appreciate you being here today.
The problem with our medical
care in the state of New Mexico.
Is not concerned.
It's the malpractice cost of
malpractice insurance right now.
And until we get that fixed, we
cannot retire you and I
everybody out in the audience is
doing this. We have to get that
problem fixed, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Whenever that insurance is
actually putting one doctor that
is very concerned about this,
it's cost them right at $700,000
a year.
That's that's out of control.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Campos.
I need some clarification on
page 3 of your bill.
This money is going to be
appropriated for each physical
physical year 2026 through 2028
up to 2.
$2,500,000 sporting.
The graduate program.
Up to $500,000 for a supporting
physician graduate medical
education programs located in
rural areas.
For uh for those programs that
are less than one year and then
the next one has to do with more
than one year. So can you kind
of clarify that language there
for me.
Thank you very much Madam. Thank
you, Senator Rael. Uh, I'm gonna
go ahead and respond after, but
I'd like to have the expert.
Talk a little bit about this
because oftentimes this seems
like.
It may be um.
Specific to maybe
just a few areas, but this, uh,
takes the uh the entire state
into consideration, but if I may
like to have the expert uh
further respond and possibly uh
a final response for me, if I
may please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee.
Senator
Yes, so this is all encompassing
for rural programs across the
state of New Mexico, um, uh.
New Mexico primary care training
consortium right now, um.
Supports many of these programs,
uh, all over this all over the
state, um, and, and so that is
the intent. And so there are
existing programs in the in the
language of this bill, you'll
see there are existing programs
that would be um these funds
would be available to, should
they again need that shoring up.
And there is also the ability of
any community in New Mexico, any
rural community in New Mexico to
say we are ready to start uh uh
planning a residency and these
funds would be available to
them. The, the two residencies I
can speak most to because
they're my home and I've been
working on these for for.
A generation, uh, one is in
Espanola, the newest, uh,
residency program is, is in
Espanola now they just placed
their first residence. But
again, even now as they just
placed their first residencies
due to some um difficulties with
partners, uh.
They're already at risk and so
they just got started. We're on
a one year on a planning grant
right now in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, and um,
And so, you know, looking at our
ability to be able to start up,
can we also add another rural
residency or the state of New
Mexico. So the, the funds, this
is a one year planning grant
that we're on now. These funds
would be available to those
programs, the programs in the
South, um, as well as any
community in New Mexico, Las
Vegas, New Mexico, to start
exploring, developing the
residency.
Mr. Pos
And Senator Compass, whenever
you're talking about, tell me.
A little bit and they don't have
to go into great detail.
What the makeup of that
partnership would be.
And thank you very much, Mr.
Cha, Senator Eel just very
quickly as piggybacking on the
past question. uh, so as we deal
with this, we're talking about
all communities throughout and I
was just thinking of a few um uh
raton, Roswell, Gallop, Silver
City, so it ties in then when we
talk about the relationships
within the community and I
believe that uh Mr. Probst and
others have worked diligently to
create, if you will, the
consortia uh within Northeastern
New Mexico, uh, that deals to.
directly with the question that
you're talking about. And so if
I may again, Mr. Chair, I'd like
to defer to the expert to uh
further provide a brief
explanation. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee,
Senator, the, the main core of
that partnership.
is between community health
centers.
And rural hospitals. That is
really the core, but within that
there is the ability to expand
again with hub and spoke models
to expand the many different
health centers, all of the
different settings that Senator
Hickey mentioned, um, with the
state of New Mexico. So for
example, in Las Vegas, we're
also looking at partnering with
the New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute, where we provide
psychiatry services and have,
you know, experts that can serve
in there as well and
So that idea again whether and,
you know, you know how broad
this state is, but some of these
specialties are very hard to
come by outside of Albuquerque.
And so the ability for uh uh
residents in training from other
parts of the state to be able to
do clinical rotations at at uh
agencies like New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute as
an example of furthering that
partnership. Chairman, thank you
very much. That explanation. I'm
seeing here that there was.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator Rosel, you're
correct.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator Mr.
Props, what happens if a person
So this isn't for me, I don't
like living out in the rural
areas of our Thank you Mr. Chair
and Senators just briefly the
the expert will respond to that
because he lives this every day.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator.
There is a different program,
loan for service programs that
would obligate students to serve
in rural communities that that
is not what we are speaking
about here. This is really the
training. So there is nothing
that would obligate them to
stay. However, I do want to give
another uh fact.
the the number across the
nation.
Uh, for residency staying in the
community, they completed their
residency is 40%.
In our great state, it's double.
It is our.
beauty of New Mexico, of our
culture, of our people and of
our land.
that when we can get them to
come and complete their
residencies here.
That's why they stay.
And Mister Chairman, I'm, I'm
thrilled to hear him. Uh,
there's a lot to be said for the
rural areas of New Mexico isn't
there. I'm from one of those and
I'm very proud of my area that I
grew up in and still represent
and I'm sure that all these
other people sitting up here
will say the same thing, they're
proud of their particular areas,
but whenever we have such a
A lack of doctors that are
Trying
Trying to stay in this part, I
mean, where I live, uh.
We have a choice of going to
Albuquerque or Lubboco or El
Paso, all of those are 200+
miles away.
So whenever we are taking.
This money and being able to get
a partnership in our
communities.
And those people are
One
My niece graduated from the with
artists from the nursing program
at New Mexico State.
I think it's 3 years ago, room
nurse and she was in.
Denver, she loved that job and
she's now a traveling nurse, she
is there for, I think 90 days.
So and then she's simper and
make another venue, but it's
getting those kids, not kids,
I'm sorry.
These
People that have been training
for this.
back
to their roots maybe.
And there's a loyal to chairman.
Thank you very much for your
responses. Thank you, Senator
Campos.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair sponsor, and
Mr.
This, um, my questions are
logistical.
I fully support this endeavor
and I fully believe building our
capacity for residencies in
rural areas will make a huge
difference.
In access to medical care.
Page 3, top of page 3.
The healthcare authority shall
administer the fund.
That is the only sentence in
here about how this will work,
and Mister Chair, the um expert
witness made a reference to the
graduate medical education
expansion.
Review board, I think is their
title board and advisory Group.
My concern is that is not in
this bill.
Um, we don't even in this bill
have the traditional language
that says the healthcare
authorities shall promulgate
some rules about an application
process and who is eligible to
apply and what's the criteria
for selection.
Um, are we gonna prioritize
specialties of high need.
Define I need.
Even saying here underserved, we
don't have a definition of
underserved in this statute and
maybe Mr. Terrets to find
somewhere else, but I think we
need those things in here to
make sure that it is our.
Graduate medical education
expansion review board.
That is making this decision and
that we have some criteria to
hold them accountable to, um,
and then, of course, we need the
line and they will report out
the results.
Um, but Mr. Chair and sponsor,
do you have any comments on
where that could be added or are
you concerned that it's not
here.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Figueroa,
a couple of things related to
the question, uh, and it, and
it's a good one because you want
the accountability as we move
forward.
Two things with the healthcare
authority, number one, they're
working on about 5 different.
Uh, programs that are related to
uh behavioral health specialties
and things of this nature.
The resources would go and be
administered by the H uh uh uh
CA and within the healthcare
authority they would develop and
promulgate if you will, uh,
rules the way this would work.
Oh, the underserved would be uh
uh be be dealt with, uh, the
resources and how they would be
spread across the state, uh,
particularly to take care, if
you will, of the residencies
with our state again.
With uh what uh Mr. Probes is
talking about is something that
is already established, but
again the connectivity that we
would work with would be.
The uh healthcare authority from
there the resources then would
uh go ahead and be distributed
to capacities, but with that,
um, Mr. Chair, if I may, and,
uh, and Senator Figueroa, one of
the things that
Comes to mind is if we don't
have the discussion, how these
things will work, how can we
further, if you will, enhance
and improve pieces of
legislation.
I, I would like to just uh
brevity again, Mr. Chair, if I
may ask the expert to further
respond to what his response was
when it came to how some of the
resources could be administered.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chair, remember, yes, and so
the healthcare uh authority
oversees board.
That being said, it is not.
Mr. Chair and sponsor, I think
that's a big amendment to do on
the fly, and I'm going to leave
that concern in your hands, I'm.
Just going to say I would feel
more comfortable when this comes
to the floor, if there are
guidelines in there to ensure
that the GME board is involved
in this process and some of
these terms are defined.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senna.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Hello, Doctor.
Great to see you. Um, I am going
off of a bit of what Senator
Figueroa, um, was asking on page
3, there's 5 times where rural
and underserved areas are
mentioned, but there is no
actual definition for
underserved areas, so can you
provide the exact definition of
underserved areas.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Senator
Nava again, deferring to the
expert so as he lives this every
single day, um.
Please help us to go and provide
that uh that particular
definition is, as you use that
uh in general practice, day to
day. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
Senator
Uh, so yes, so these are terms
that are I I agree that here are
listed without definition.
However, within the rules of how
funding works for programs, be
it the residency programs, be it
the loan for service programs in
the state and the federal, there
are specific definitions that
can absolutely.
And so those definitions and
those they are, they are
formulas that are based on uh on
population, uh, many components
to define underserved, uh, you
know, we've got pieces that say,
you know, per capita how much um
healthcare resource we have in
terms of workforce, um, there
are the socioeconomic factor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator and uh doctor. So
that means Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, and Las Cruces could be.
Also defined.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Nova, that is
absolutely correct. For example,
federally qualified health
centers like we have here in
Santa Fe and La Familia Medical
Center meet that definition.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, senator, thank you so much
for bringing this bill in front
of us today.
You know, $100 million.
We've
1015 years ago would have never
ever thought of.
$100 million this type of
program.
But thank you to our natural
resources that we have here in
the state of New Mexico.
We are so gifted to be able to
utilize our oil and gas monies.
That we receive on an annual
basis.
put into these type of programs.
Um
I, I just wanted to really bring
that up because there's so many
bills out there.
That can hurt the oil and gas
and mining industry.
And we really depend on, um.
Is there any type of
I know we mentioned earlier, any
type of clawback that we can add
to this.
To this bill to make sure that
if they go through this process
that they do stay in the state
of New Mexico.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Ramos, I'm gonna again
defer to the expert and.
Uh, and then if I may just
possibly close in terms of uh 11
part of the question that I, I
would like to respond to as
well.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee.
Senator Ramos, uh, not again,
not for this bill and not for
the education component for
their actual practice, uh should
folks in rural and they decide
they want to practice in rural
areas, apply for programs like
the state loan for service
repayment program of the federal
programs that exist, uh, yes,
there are those. I did that, uh,
you know, for me it was easy as
the rural cause that's where.
Born and left, born and raised,
never left, never gonna leave
was my motto and so that piece
was there. However, for my state
loan for service uh uh payment
program if I did not fulfill my
obligation, I would have had to
pay back that.
Loan 3 times the amount. This is
however different, that is more
about where I'm going to
practice. This is about where
you.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Senator
How many of our
students going through the
program actually.
Go through the state loan
program.
Well, yeah, I, that's true, Mr.
Chair, but I guess my point is,
is if there's only a few people
going through that state loan
program, but yet they're
utilizing this program, there's
no clawback to keep them within
the state of New Mexico.
So, I've, that's that's kind of
where I was going, Mr. Mr. Chen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Ramos just briefly if the expert
will, uh,
Respond to that.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator Ramos, I
don't have the exact figure in
terms of what percentage of
residents trained in rural
residencies in New Mexico
utilize loan for service
repayment programs, but I would
say it's the majority of them.
Uh, that are able to do that,
uh, either national Health
Service core programs or state
loan for service.
repayment program. Mr.
Chair and I, I just want to try
and do everything I can to keep
our doctors here. We've lost 30%
of our doctors overnight with
the bill that just drew people
away, and we just need to make
sure that we do not ever do that
again and try and pass any bills
that we can that's going to claw
people back to keep them here in
the state of New Mexico. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
I have a couple of questions,
comments and things, uh, first,
I think the amount is under, is
insufficient.
Um
If we put 100,000 in there and
are getting 7% off of it, that's
gonna provide only enough for
maybe 35.
Yo, once it's fully active and
funded, the initial numbers of
2.5 million that funds about 12.
Um, and where I get that, I, I'm
working on some other
legislation, but residencies run
from about 150,000 to about
220,000 depending on specialty.
Um, and so, you know, that's,
well, and they have to get
funded every year for a minimum
3 years in summer of 5 or 6
years.
And
What, you know, people hear me
say regularly, we're a wealthy
state.
Um
Part of the reason I've got to
build that with $60 million in
funding them right now, which
would cover about 100.
Residencies, uh, and outside the
federal system. That seems to be
where the bottleneck is, is that
accurate that the federal system
limits the number of residencies
we can have at hospitals and
other places. Is that accurate?
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and I'm gonna have the expert
respond to that. And again, as
we deal with that, particularly
with our rural hospitals in
terms of the numbers of uh
residencies or even uh clinical
sites uh were very limited, but
at the same time, uh the expert
I'm sure can go ahead and
further elaborate. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, um, I, I, yes, there
are limitations there, but I
would say the greatest
limitation for growing all
healthcare professionals in New
Mexico, all healthcare
professionals, members of the
healthcare team.
Is the ability to be
preceptored.
And to have those training
sites. So, um, I hear you loud
and clear, uh, regarding the
dollars and um that being said,
you know, we're we're in this
chicken or an egg, right? And so
again, the woes that we're
facing today with our newest
residency in Espanola where, you
know, the the the rate limiter
right now for those 4 new
residents which over the course
of 3 years will be 12 because
you had 4 every year, and so by
the 3rd year at 12, um, is now
the
potential of, of the hospital
site losing a faculty member.
And so when those things happen
in all of those components, now
you've also limited. It's a
farm. I'm just a simple country
boy, you know, and, and, and,
and in those components of those
farms, you have to have all of
those components. And so I think
again, uh the purpose of this
bill of this bill is
specifically to say that if any
of those components in existing
programs or in the creation of a
new program, become fragile, we
have the ability as a state to
shore that system up.
Thank you and, and you know,
I've talked with the lady over
at the
Healthcare Authority, who is the
one responsible for all of these
things. Um, and excited that
we're working on trying to
increase the number of
residencies, and we can do it
with state dollars outside the
federal system, which makes it
much easier to, to expand all of
those. Also want to point out
and please correct me if I
understand this incorrectly, but
residencies are not a cost.
To the state or to the person,
they really, they're providing
an extra physician in those
communities right now.
And so those are extra bodies
that are seeing patients that
are doing all of that and they
are still under one of the, the
long term docks there, but they
are physicians in our
communities. These are not, I
mean, they're providing
healthcare.
For people and so the expansion
of residencies expands
immediately the doctors in those
communities is
just
just for a brief response, uh,
the expert will go and respond.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, you are
absolutely correct. They
immediately are providing care
in these rural communities.
Supervised care.
do those faculty members that
are supervised supervising them.
So there's the immediate return
it is in part in their training
they already physicians, they
are resident physicians already
expanding care.
In our rural communities with
that ability that if things go
well, they become part of that
80% that once they complete
their residency, they stay and
then they do what I'm trying to
do and Senator Hickey and so
many before or now grow and
create that farm and growing the
next generation of physicians
behind them.
And thank you, and, and this
program really puts everything
on the carrot side, we don't
need a stick that might get
people to not want to do this
for fear they would not be able
to to leave later on. Uh, this,
you know, and again, where New
Mexico has an 80% retention rate
with residencies, the biggest
bottleneck that we need to break
is the lack of residencies in
New Mexico are two main medical
schools, Burrell College and
UNM, we don't have enough
residencies in New Mexico for
all the graduate
It's coming out. They go outside
the state, which means that 40%
or 80% where they do their
residency, we're losing them.
And so, having the residencies
in New Mexico kind of helps us
double, you know, both it
provides immediate physicians,
but also provides for the long
term docs that are, are more
likely to stay here. Um, and
again, my biggest concern, I'm
not concerned about the, the
rules or regulations. It's
already in the healthcare
authority. There's already a
person there who's an expert on
how to do this. They do
all of that. They know how to
use the money and make it flow.
It's the insufficiency that it's
only going to turn out 12, uh,
we ought to be using not just
into a fund that's gonna be
using the interest, but I would
like to see and, and, uh, the
sponsor, you are on the finance
committee, but some direct
funding right now to start this
rather than just slowly as this
fund builds up, we need to do it
now, uh, when we've got money
in, in the treasury, so to
speak.
We don't need to put more into
Wall Street. We need to put it
into education, education
committee, but also, also health
care and uh and uh residencies
right now, because we've got the
need.
Um
With
that is there a motion from the
committee or senator, Mr. Chair,
I move a do pass on Senate Bill
380.
Second.
and and the second Senator
Hickey, we already went around
so very quickly.
Very
I'm glad to see that we're
talking about higher education
in this committee, even though
this is post, there needs to be
a form in the legislature that
is really digging.
Thank you very much, sir. Thank
you, Senator. We have a motion
and a second, if you'll call the
roll, please.
Sender boom.
Andriel.
Yes
Ciner Figueroa.
Yes.
Lier Hickey.
Censored nova. Yes, Senator
Ramos.
Senator Thornton
No, explain my vote.
Pope? Yes. Senator Souls.
Yes.
OK.
We have, you have a do pass 8 to
1 and center.
There
Oh, were they pass, I'm so
sorry.
We said yes.
I'm
That the Senator.
Yes.
The result
Yes.
OK, so now we officially have it
is 8 to 1 Senator Thornton, if
you would, would please explain
your vote.
So I, I go back to Senator
Figueroa's comments with regards
to the bill. I think it's a
great bill, and I think it's the
intent is is fine. I think I'd
like to see the promulgation of
the rules of promulgation of
determining the selection
process, all that to find, make
sure those responsibilities and
a reporting back so that we
understand how successful the
program is. So none of that is
included in this, and so I'd
like to see that added to the
bill.
Other than that, that's, that's
brought it forward on the floor.
I'll, I'll probably vote
positive for it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator and so you,
you have a due pass.
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members of
Senate Education Committee.
Thank you. Um, we're now gonna
go to Senate Joint Resolution 6.
And Pa, you see.
If not, uh,
And we call him and uh Senator
Figueroa, do you want to do your
Your bill while we get to the
end here, I think.
OK.
Let's go to Senate Bill 387.
So Senator uh said Bill 387
Community School Fund and
framework.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, there's a
committee sub being handed out.
I assume you would rather move
that for discussion than waste
time on the,
uh, and Senator, you're a member
of the committee. You're welcome
to do that yourself if you would
like. I would, Mr. Chair, but I
need it handed to me because I
don't have a copy.
Mr. Chair, I can do it. I move a
do not pass on Senate bill.
387
They do pass for discussion
purposes on Senate Education
Committee substitute for Thank
you, Senator. So we are on the
committee substitute bill. So
Senator, please go ahead. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. The committee
substitute bill does two things,
the original bill did 3, the
committee sub cuts it down to 2,
and at the top of page 4.
You'll see the first thing it
does, which is adds the words up
to.
Right now our community school
fund is structured so that
grants must be given in the
amounts of $150,000 and when the
pot is low.
That means some schools don't
get anything.
So allowing up to.
gives flexibility to give grants
in smaller amounts when the fund
doesn't have enough to grant a
full 150 to everyone.
The second item it does is at
the bottom of page 4, and this
is uh name change.
To honor someone who has been a
tremendous contributor to the
community schools effort, not
only in New Mexico, but across
the country.
Um, and our fiscal impact report
does a good analysis of her
contributions.
So it would rename the community
schools fund the Doctor Jeannie
Oaks.
Memorial
Community schools fund.
Those are the two things done in
this committee substitute. The
third item that is no longer
part of the bill was an effort
to update community schools
defining language, and we
decided that section needs more
time and input and we'll work on
it in interim.
And Mr. Terrell introduced my
expert witness, uh, deputy
secretary Candace Castillo.
From PED in case we have.
Technical questions, but that is
it for us right now.
Thank you, Senator, after the
audience, those in support of
Senate Bill 387.
Thank you. Anyone in opposition?
Couple of you would like to come
and and make comments. You're
welcome to, for up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Andrew
Montoya and I represent NEA New
Mexico's Center for Community
Schools.
I stand in support of, um,
Senate Bill 387 for the very
fact that Ped has been extremely
um open to collaboration um
throughout the revisions of this
and um
Um
Jeannie Oakes, Doctor Jeannie
Oaks is the godmother of
community schools here in New
Mexico and it's a great
recognition of that, um,
community schools is that um
locally driven strategy that
continues to focus on the
specific needs of students in
rural communities as well as our
major um communities here in um
the major metropolitan areas and
um the great part of this bill
is it continues to hold up the
language that supports this as
more than just a.
Grant program. This is a whole
school transformation strategy
and that's something that we're
completely excited to continue
to support within any in Mexico
and beyond. Thank you.
Thank you
Honey?
Good morning, Senator. Members
of the committee, my name is
Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm the
president of the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational Leaders
here on behalf of the coalition
uh NEML Superintendent
Association and sand rounds,
who's in Portales today. We
stand in support of this bill
because we are already doing
community schools in our state,
and we support the permissive,
not mandatory nature of this
bill and, and I think the
sponsor for putting it forward.
We encourage it to pass.
Thank you.
Lily, good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Lily May Ortiz, the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico School Board Association
and the school board Association
has for many years supported
community schools. We feel it's
very beneficial for our students
and creates an excellent
learning environment, and for
the reasons stated by our
superintendents, we also support
it. We ask you to move the
legislation forward, and we
thank the sponsor for her
efforts.
Ro ber t
Good morning, Mr. Chair members,
um, of the community. My name is
Robert Apoaka consultant with a
community schools in Mexico and
also with SWIFT and uh we
totally support Senate Bill 387,
uh, the community schools bill,
um, and the funding that gets
put forward to is uh, you know,
we provide wrap around services
that's not only um important for
education but also when we're
looking at a number of the of
the crime prevention bills
moving forward, you know, this
does a lot to address some of
those public safety issues in
our
needs and helps the families,
um, wrap around services and
whatnot so we totally support
this bill and look for your
support. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Matt.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico,
um, charter schools in our state
have been at the forefront of
the community schools movement,
um, and we appreciate the
sponsor bringing the bill to
provide more flexibility. Um, we
wish you were considering the
first bill, which provided
ample, um, um, uh, flexibility
for the program, um, but we do
appreciate uh the community sub
and its current form and hope
that we take up more topics of
striking language in statute.
For more flexibility in the
future. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
Online, it looks like we have 5
people, um.
Again, you have up to 5 minutes,
don't have to use all of it. Uh,
the first one, Brian Garcia.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee
And members of the audience, my
name is Brian Garcia and I am
the community schools
development specialist for
Albuquerque Public Schools.
Uh, with community schools
identified as one of our 6
promising practices, reflected
in our district goals,
guardrails, strategic plan and
budgetary priorities, we stand
in support of Senate Bill 387
for the following reasons.
The naming of the community
school fund in honor of the work
and contributions of the late
Jenny Oaks, who was a force in
the development and evolution of
community schools.
The substitute bill promotes the
spirit of collaborative
leadership, shared power, and
voice by protecting the
integrity and value of
research-based practices. In
addition, this bill preserves
the voice of the New Mexico
Community School Coalition that
should serve as a collaborative
decision making body on behalf
of practitioners and communities
statewide.
And with the language change of
up to this bill provides added
flexibility within the grant
program to provide equitable
distribution of funding to
grantees.
Here in APS we are seeing
tangible results in our
community schools that range
from improvements in attendance
and chronic absenteeism, growth
in students' skills, mindsets,
and habits, as well as increased
family and community engagement
and partnerships. This
demonstrates that when schools
address barriers holistically,
outcomes improve. Thank you to
Senator Figueroa for sponsoring
this bill to the pet for their
openness to input and
collaboration, and to all of you
on this committee and the many
legislators who support our
collective efforts.
To positively impact our schools
and communities. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. And we have Michael
Know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members, and Senator
Figueroa. My name is Michael
Knoll, and I'm the community
schools coordinator at the
Penasco Independent School
District.
This is our 6th year of being a
grant funded community school.
Community schools is directly
responsible for much of the
success that our district has
seen in that time, as so many
schools have done, we've used
the practice to meet our
students' basic needs. We've
created a food distribution
program, created an expanded
partnerships with the school
clinic and with mental and
behavioral health providers.
Found financial supports for
many, many students and families
who have found themselves in
dire need and we've created
partnerships with tutoring
organizations to help our
students get up to grade level.
The community schools in Penasco
has been about more than just
beating basic needs. There are
highly successful after school
programs, we introduced 3D
printing, media arts, and
welding, not all three of those
classes are integrated into the
school day curriculum, the CTE
courses.
We've also created a culinary
arts CTE course that has been
directly supported through
community schools. As a result,
our students are developing
pathways into careers that will
not just support them and their
families, but also allow them to
remain in and be true resources
for our community.
We've also created what is
probably the largest skiing and
snowboard program in the state.
The program doesn't just teach
our students a lifelong healthy
activity, which is really
important in the community where
our greatest fears that our
students will develop no
passions, no interests, and
inside in a harmful behaviors.
But it also introduces them to a
career field.
One of our ski instructors this
year is uh 2024 graduate of our
high school and a current UN MMA
student.
And she's already made plans to
work at Tuskegee Valley next
year and is working on plans to
open a business. Our ski program
opened those doors for her.
The results are measurable for
community schools.
The hard reality is that most of
our families have direct
experience with substance abuse,
incarceration, suicide, and
violence.
Yet by the time our students
reached grades 34, and 5, they
were liking school.
Having a strong group of
friends, feeling motivated too
and believing they can learn.
By the time they get to high
school, they attend a spotlight
school, which means it's in the
top 15% of all schools in the
state.
In the past 3 years, our high
school reading proficiency rate
is nearly doubled.
Uh, next we have May say Bean.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico out of school time
Network, and we standing strong
support of Senate Bill 387, as
well as the name change for
Jeanny Oaks, who has been a
major champion for many years in
New Mexico for um community
schools, and this is a critical
strategy for whole school and
community transformation across
the states, and the vision would
be that
school was a community school,
so we hope that this is passed
by all of you. Thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you. And last Dianna.
Hi, good morning. Thank you,
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Deanna
Creighton, and I am here to
speak on behalf of the community
school innovation and strategic
Partnerships department in
Bernalillo County, and as the um
director of the ABC Community
School Partnership Board, um, in
Bernao County. Uh, we are in
strong support of this bill. Uh,
we urge you to pass it with the
language as um substituted in
this new revision. Um, this is
part of our
collaborative effort work within
the county and across the state,
and we absolutely support the
changes in up to $150,000 as a
more um equitable strategy for
providing unique opportunities
for schools to um use their
grant funding wisely and uh we
absolutely support the change of
renaming the fund in memorial of
Doctor Jeannie Oakes. Um, we
recognize that the community
school strategy is a
transformation strategy and that
is uh what we work toward across
our state. Thank you so much for
your support.
Thank you. Uh, was there anyone
in opposition in the opposition
online?
If not, we are questions from
the committee.
Mr. Chairman, I move with you
pass. Motion for a do pass.
Senator Pope, if you'll call the
roll, please.
Yes
Century
In Figueroa.
Yes.
Sender Hickey.
Nova, yes, Ramos, yes, Senator
Thornton,
Pope, cinder souls, yes.
You have a unanimous 80 with 1
absent.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
committee.
Let me see what we've got on.
Senator Gonzalez.
Probably stuck in finance as
well.
And Senator Padilla indicated
he's still stuck in finance, so
if you'll take over, we'll do
SJR 3.
For those online and in the room
we're now gonna go to SJR 3.
Constitutional amendment by
Senator Souls.
And whenever you're ready,
centers.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
this.
Is uh
Resolution that we come up the
last couple of years. Last year
it was sponsored, the primary
sponsor was Senator Neville, um,
and I, the idea is there has
been lots of turnover in
leadership, in education,
education does not do well when
leadership changes regularly.
Um, what this would do is
instead of having a secretary of
Education, as we've had, it
would go back to the system we
had prior to that.
Where they 10 member elected
Board of Education and 5 members
appointed by the governor, um,
and essentially just unwinds
that back to when uh Governor
Richardson pushed to move it
under the cabinet secretary, a
little bit of the background on
that in the 40 years prior, we
had about 3.
Superintendents of school. Uh,
we've had numerous more
secretaries of education and in
the last
Um
Iteration of the with this
current governor, we've had 5
different secretaries of
education. That makes it very
difficult for programs and
policies, uh, education needs
consistent leadership at the
top, uh, pointing out people we
used to always be compared with
Mississippi and Mississippi has
had 10 years of consistent
leadership and policy and
education and have moved up
substantially from the bottom
end. It's not just because of
that stability.
But certain and it had to do
with reading programs and other
kinds of things, but it stops
the the whiplash of changes in
leadership in education and
allows education to function
more securely, um, and with that
I'd be open for any questions. I
would point out it moved out of
the judiciary on a no wreck.
Thank you, Senator, I believe.
Senator Romo.
I believe has an amendment.
Yes, I'd I'd like to move
amendment 231210.1 for
discussion purposes.
All right, we've moved that.
The
Uh, Senator, uh, Ramos, would
you like to explain your
amendment?
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator,
uh, I believe this was spoken
about in
In the last committee about
going to make sure that we uh
uh.
Protect our charter schools by
keeping the public education
commission.
And what this would do is on
page one.
Um
On page 1 line 13, strike,
replace and insert in lieu
thereof continue and after
commission.
Strike the remainder of the line
and insert in lieu thereof.
As the chartering authority for
state charter.
charter schools and create.
The state
Uh, on
Number 2 on page 1 line 14.
After board,
Insert of education.
And on number 3 on page 1
through 3.
On pages one
Through 3 strikes, subsection A.
Through F in their entirety and
inserts in lieu thereof?
A, the State Board of Education,
the public education department
and the publication commission
are created. The State Board of
Education shall determine public
school policy and shall have
control management.
And direction, including
financial direction of
distribution of school funds and
financial accounting for all
public schools pursuant to
authority and powers provided by
law.
The board shall appoint a
qualified experienced educator
to be known as the
superintendent of public
instruction to administer and
enforce the laws and board
policies relating to public
education and related matters
and supervised operations of the
public education department
under, under the direction of
the board.
The Public Education commission
shall serve as a state charging
authority for state chartered.
Charter schools and have other
powers and duties as provided by
law.
Yes. Do you want me to keep
reading the other side, yeah, if
you'd like, if you could just do
a little synopsis, um, yeah, the
synopsis is we definitely want
to add this language to make
sure that the charter schools
are still taking care of and
they still have the PC.
That's basically it, and I hope
this is a friendly amendment. I
know this was discussed in the
previous previous uh committee
and hopefully we can do that
because we do, I mean, it's a
whole other page.
I think we won't have you read
it, but I will ask uh Senator
Souls, is this a friendly?
The senator, uh,
I would not call it a friendly
amendment, though it's not
unfriendly. Um, my biggest
concern, and when this bill was
first uh
Being introduced and had a
conversation with the
I think the chair of the current
commission my biggest concern is
it would now set up that we have
2 educational elections going on
simultaneously one for the state
commission and one for the state
board, both within the same
districts, um, and the state
education commission, most of
those elections have been
unopposed ones. There are not
numerous candidates vying for
those positions that now we're
going to have two elections at
the same time, and I think that
would be very confusing.
To
The, the voters as to which one
they are electing, at which
time. And so this does not move
it to where one is in the
nonpartisan off elections and
one is in the partisan
elections, they would both be
during the partisan elections. I
think that's unwieldy and don't
think that that's an appropriate
way of managing and doing this,
uh, certainly, and I have always
been committed that the current
commission would serve within uh
we don't want to get rid of
charter schools, you know,
there's no mechanism for
wanting to do that, but would
need to be under the
superintendent and could be a
subcommittee of the state Board
of Education and certainly I
would, you know, push for, for
that with whoever is the new
superintendent sets those up.
But for that reason, I do not.
I think it's a friendly
amendment. I think that would be
very confusing to voters to be
voting for an education
commission and a state board
both at the same election in the
same communities.
Thank you, Senator, and with
that, we'll go to comments and
questions from the committee,
Senator Risel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. And Senator, my apologies.
This this will be questions and
comments on the amendment.
Yes
Mr. Chairman and uh Mr.
Chairman.
Can you tell me what the changes
were suggested to you in the
prior committee?
The in the prior committee, the,
the discussions, Mr. Chair of
the discussions were around the
The charter schools and would
they be cut out of the
The process of both I and stand
rounds committed to continuing
to work with the charter schools
that this was not going to cut
them out of different things.
But the commission would
probably be under the newer.
Section
Uh, but it, the commitment was
to continue to look at how we
would make sure that the charter
schools still have the, the
chartering authority and such.
And Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate that
explanation.
But I, uh,
Unless it's written in.
In here
I can't support it the way it is
written if you do not like the
amendment here, you said it was
not a friendly amendment, and I
cannot support it unless there
is written in here including the
charter schools, so.
We would there be any way that
you could bring this back where
it would, where it would be
inclusive of that as well
because I do want it.
Stated in this joint resolution
right here that they are being
taken care of. I do not want
them left out and I know that
you are very.
Uh, strong in your word, but
sometimes through the course of
history, sometimes we forgot
about that. Now it doesn't
matter anymore. Yes, it does
matter.
And I would like to see that
addressed in this particular.
Joint resolution.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Did you have
All I can see, you know, it, it
would really be up to the next
superintendent of schools as to
how that would be formulated,
but my guess is, you know, the
board that is elected and
selected and, and my guess is
probably many of the current
commission members would be
running for this state school
board and makes sense to be
doing so, maybe not, but it
really would be under uh that
new superintendent as to how
that was formulated, and I would
think that that would be a major
question.
uh during the interview process
for it.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions or comments from the
committee on the amendment.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, you know,
I, I
I, I can't, I really cannot vote
for, for uh for this bill if, if
we cannot come up with something
that's going to protect the
charter schools. I understand
where you're coming from about
waiting for the new secretary,
but if the secretary is not
favorable for charter schools,
then we could be in trouble
because I know I have one of the
best charter schools in the
state down in southwest New
Mexico and I definitely want to
do everything I can to keep
them. Also, I have another
charter school in in Luna
County, that's a great school,
and I want to make sure I do
everything I can to protect them
too.
So, um, I, I would really like
to see something put in this
bill before we move forward.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Hickey.
Mr. Chair and thank you, Senator
Soles for.
Your observations, I agree,
confusions are very confusing.
Uh right now and uh
And the education part, this
would be.
Adding to that confusion, but
any way you want, they're
confusing.
And I think it's up to us to
help.
Each the public that there are
these differences and so forth,
and so.
Um
I
Again, I, I, I get the point,
but I, I do feel that, I mean,
the charter schools are real
value and if it, and my question
is, did you say it's the and,
and here's some more confusion,
um, superintendent of
schools are the secretary.
Um, of education appointed by
the governor.
Um, which
Is your proposal that the that
the superintendent of public
instruction.
Um
And is that an appointed
position or or how I can get
that clarity.
Mr. Chair and, and Senator and,
and that is some of the
confusions. Uh, if this joint
resolution were to go through
and be adopted by the voters, we
would no longer have a Secretary
of Education who is appointed by
the governor, we would have a
15 member state Board of
Education, 5 appointed by the
governor 10 elected.
From around the state that would
then hire and supervise a state
superintendent. Um, very careful
and similar to the way our
current school boards operate,
their job is not to run the
schools, but to set broad policy
and to higher supervised fire,
the state superintendent of
schools. So there would no
longer be a secretary of
Education.
Earth
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator So,
thank you.
For that clarification.
Um
But uh but this amendment does
assure and perhaps this is a
question that this amendment
does assure us that there's
still.
is a commission.
That is overlooking the
interests of the charter
schools. Is that correct in this
in this amendment.
Uh, Senator Ramos and.
Is that your understanding,
Senator?
Ramos Mr. Cha, yes, that is,
that is my understanding.
OK. Thank you very much for
that. So, and Senator Ramos, Mr.
So and chairman.
Um, so you're proposing that we
adopt this amendment today
rather than kind of leaving it
up to someone, whoever that
might be later on, that kind of
leads maybe am I interpreting
this correctly, your
interpretation, that kind of
leaves the, the commission
hanging out uh until things get
formalized versus this amendment
which locks it in today, Mr.
Chair, yes, that is absolutely
correct.
Thank you for that
clarification.
Mr. Chair, if I might, and it's
really important on page 2, and
it's, it's an area that I do
support, but is uh section B
also instead of as is in the
current resolution as it's
written of a 15 member board,
this amendment would reduce that
to an 11 member board, 10
members elected from the same
regions, areas of the commission
and one appointed by the
governor. So it would be an 11
member board instead of 15, and
that's I
like that part of it, 15 member
board in the past was unwieldy
and huge, but that's an
important piece of, of what this
amendment does as well and that
we haven't talked about that
directly.
Senator Hickey,
thank you. Um, thank you for
pointing that out. I couldn't uh
agree with you more.
Long time career in management.
In addition to this, and I
think, thank you for that
elucidation.
So that kind of reinforces, I
think, I think the amendment as
it stands, I think I will be
voting for it because it secures
the charter schools, which I am,
I, I won't go into my stories of
this last summer at the health
education leadership high
school, but wow, amazing. So
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
and senator.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other comments or questions
on the amendment?
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
and thank you, Senator Ramos for
bringing this amendment forward.
Um
I wouldn't been receiving emails
from my own charter schools.
And they were concerned as well
about
The, the lack of
Specification of what's going to
happen to them.
If we were to assume the bill as
is. And so with this amendment,
Um
I would feel more inclined to
support the
Support the act. However, um,
So I, and I did not catch the,
the 10 member issues, so I think
actually reducing the number of
members also helps as well.
And and giving the governor just
one appointment as opposed to 5
or whatever. I think it's also
important so that the
The state board can be
independent.
Um, so with that, I, I, uh,
If, if, uh, allow me, I, I would
support a you pass on the
amendment.
Uh, Senator, just because you
were asking questions, you have
someone else that motion.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I so.
All right.
have a a due pass from Senator
Boone.
And we have a second from
Senator. We have a
A motion to adopt the amendment
to Senate draft resolution.
I
Cinder Boone.
Yes.
And
Yes, Cinder Figueroa? No.
consider Hickey.
Center Nova, no sent to Ramos.
Yes, Senator Thornton.
Yes.
Sender Pope.
No. And souls.
No
Senator Souls, you haven't
amended bill, uh, 5, yes.
So, um, before we go to public
comment and to the committee. Is
there anything else you'd like
to say?
your amended bill.
You know, and I, I think I made
it clear the, the main reason I
was voting against it, I
believe, you know, that
confusion, but we are now moving
forward on an amended bill and
happy to answer any questions or
move forward with that.
Uh, with that.
Uh, in the committee room.
Do we have any supporters of
Senate joint resolution 6,
that's been amended, if you
could raise your hand.
Um
Do we have any opposition.
All right. So those in support,
if I could have you line up.
Or public comment.
And uh you will have 2 minutes.
And please uh state your name
and if you represent uh an
organization.
Uh, please let us know about
that or if you're, if you are a
lobbying.
Once again, you have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, uh,
uh, Lilia Ortiz, I represent the
New Mexico schoolboard
Association, and the New Mexico
School Board Association
maintains over 70 separate
legislative initiatives. This is
one of our top 10 initiatives
for the 2025 legislative
session, the membership from
across the state at our annual
conference in December, voted to
support passage of a resolution
asking voters to approve a
constitutional amendment to
re-establish a state board of
education as an independent.
body with the authority to
appoint a state superintendent
of education with funding and
oversight for a robust and
accountable education system for
all students, educators, and
communities. We support this
legislation, we ask you to look
at it favorably, and we thank
the sponsor for bringing it
forward.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, again, my name
is Bonnie Lightfoot, president
of the Mexico Coalition of
Educational Leaders and speaking
on behalf of NEMA and as well as
Stan Ros and Superintendents
Association. um, first of all,
I'd like to point out the NEMSA
board is made up of business
managers, technology educators,
facility managers, New Mexico
Activities Association, and
others. We believe LEA's
legislature and the department
can collaborate better via a
model of the state board of
education as opposed to an
appointed secretary. In
addition, we'd like to remind
you that
This heads back towards the
original state constitution of a
state superintendent, we firmly
believe, as you heard earlier,
the turnover is too high. 7
secretaries in 14 years versus
3, the previous 40, um,
consistency of leadership is
important for New Mexico schools
and our students. And lastly, as
you are aware, recently NMSSA
had a, uh, a lawsuit filed
against PED and in the current
model, there was no appellate
opportunity. So we believe a
Board of Education would provide
an appellate opportunity in
those cases of rule. We urge to.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
I am Martin Madrid uh
superintendent of Santa Rosa
Consolidated Schools, and I'm
also the current president of
the Mexico School Superintendent
Association. So I'm speaking
today on behalf of the other 88
superintendents and over 90% of
the superintendents support SJ 3
SJR3. So, and for the reasons is
that we just want um some
consistency, as we all know in
schools, I was superintendents,
it's very important that a
superintendent go beyond 3 years
in order to enact change within
his district.
It's no different at the state
level, matter of fact, it's very
much more important in my short
tenure as the president since
June. I've had to build a
relationship with two separate
secretaries, and I will say I've
done it uh have built a good
relationship with Secretary
Padilla and look forward to
continuing that and I hope she's
around for the next couple of
years. Thank you. You do uh
support it uh uh do past things.
Thank you.
Patty Gibson Public Education
Commission, District 7. I want
to thank uh Senator.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I want to thank
Senator Ramos for his
thoughtful.
Um
Comments on charter schools, the
National Association of Charter
Schools recommends an
independent chartering authority
when the PEC was created, there
were no charter schools. There
are now 60 charter schools.
And we have developed a
commitment to strong and stable
authorizing practices, making
the
Commission of subset of the
state school board.
Does not honor the independence
of the authority of the of that
chartering authority. It will
also bring any number of
potential conflicts of interest.
To that, to those members. In
addition,
At this point in time, we are in
staggered elections, so it is
highly unlikely that there would
be
Two members being elected at the
same time and.
Kind of dismissive of the
electorate that they're gonna
get confused by that, but I
don't think it's going to be a
problem.
We appreciate.
The amendments and look forward
to future conversations about
our chartering practices, thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I echo Commissioner
Gibson's thank you um for the
amendment and listening to our
issue. I do want to
I have not seen the amendment,
so assuming it's doing what,
what the discussion, um, I won't
be able to read it in my 2
minutes, but um uh we appreciate
keeping the PEC independent.
That independence allows for
focus on our charter schools.
Every single charter school sits
down and creates academic goals
for their school with their
authorizer. Every school gets
visited every year to see if
they're they're performing the
elements of their contract and
being
uh focused on their mission. And
the results of that.
focused oversight is that
We're getting results. State
charter schools in the, in New
Mexico have 45% of their
students reading on grade level
and 36% of low income students
are reading on grade level.
Those
That kind of academic
achievement is not indicative of
a last place education system.
So we thank Senator Ramos and
the committee for adopting the
amendment and keeping the PEC
independent.
Thank you.
And online we have Ellen
Bernstein.
And you have 2 minutes.
Um, good morning, members of the
committee, um, my name is Ellen
Bernstein, and I am
The president of the Albuquerque
Teachers Federation, um, on the
original bill without the
amendment, I am enthusiastically
in support of it. I, um,
I want
Uh, to go back to the Secretary
of Education appointed by a
sitting governor, um,
Sorry, the Office of Secretary
of Education appointing a
appointing a secretary was an
experiment, sometimes
experiments don't bear the
results we hope for. As
educators in our classroom, it's
like when we plan a lesson and
the lesson doesn't have the
impact that we hope for.
We recreate that lesson and move
forward in a different way. We
reevaluate our methods. I think
it's time to re-evaluate the
Secretary of Education. Um, this
really destabilized our public
education system with the
constant turnover. I see a state
school board as it was, uh, that
would set policy managed
finances and select a
superintendent for public
education. This reincarnation of
a state school board should very
simply approve and or deny
charter school renewals and
proposals. I don't see any
reason why we should have as a
said to different boards.
Our districts, schools,
educators, students in our whole
community need the transparency,
stability in the future that we
had in the past with an elected
board, and I fully support going
to the voters and asking their
opinion. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Opposition in the
room, if you can line up for
public comment. Once again, you
have 2 minutes.
As well. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I am Amanda Aragon from New
Mexico, Kids can, and I would
just like to know that there are
49 states that rank above New
Mexico in education outcomes,
and they all have different
governance structures. And so, I
will go on record and say that
I'm not sure any organization
has been as frustrated with the
turnover at PED as New Mexico
kids can, and we still stand in
opposition to this today because
it has been a limited issue over
the last few years.
And I don't think it is an issue
of the governance structure we
have in place. It truly is an
issue that we all have as a
collective society to prioritize
education and come together in a
nonpartisan way, regardless of
who's in the governor's office
or who we've elected to sit in
your seats to say, what is our
plan to make education in New
Mexico better. And I don't think
that this change addresses any
of that, and I worry it will
include more chaos as we make
all of this transitions. And I
think you need
look no further than the local
school board elections in your
own districts to know that
school board elections are
becoming really, really
political. And if we elevate
those elections to a statewide
level and start arguing about
the culture wars that are
happening in all of our
classrooms across the state at a
statewide level, I fear we're
not gonna get qualified people
on that board, we will get
culture warriors who spend all
of our time talking about those
issues and not whether or not
our students can read and do
math, and I would like to
Um, shout out.
Senator Sewell's math bill and
Senator Stewart's reading bills.
Those are proven interventions
that we know really will yield
results versus this one which is
like, should we go back to what
we already did and didn't work
20 years ago. I don't know,
maybe let's try it. And I hope
that you all read um some
testimony that you received from
the former chair of the state
Board of Education. It was
really compelling to me to hear
someone that sat on that board
and chair it say it was a mess.
It was too big, we can never
agree. Sure it was.
stable, but we just never did
anything. So a stability good at
the expense of moving progress
forward, we would urge you to
vote no. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. With all due respect
to the sponsor with whom we work
on many other bills. I do stand
today in opposition of this CA.
We respectfully oppose the
legislation because.
We just think simply it will
inject more politics in public
education and that's the last
thing we need. We've been there,
done that on this um form of
governance.
So we think it brings more
politics and public education.
Local school boards across
America are under fire for
governance issues. Many local
boards are hotbeds of political
chaos, and they routinely lose
focus on student needs and
outcomes. Why would we want a
similar situation at the state
level. Please recall New Mexico
once put an elected body in
charge of utility regulation in
our state.
And for many of the same reasons
we're talking about a state
school board today, we ended up
with a daily cocktail of
dysfunction and poor decision
making, and rightly so, we
retreated from it. So finally,
the number of adults decision
makers and not driving students
unacceptably low academic
performance. This resolution is
not going to fix what's broken.
Let's not advance a so-called
solution that hasn't worked.
for and won't again. Please vote
no. Thank you. Thank you.
Good morning. She members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here to oppose SJR 3
changes our state's education
governance. And while I
understand the intention is to
improve our education system and
solution lacks thorough vetting
and raises is not a viable
solution for the challenges past
failed solutions does not
address our current issues.
We also Mex goKids can in the
Albuquerque chains really get
into culture wars or open
discussion during the interim,
given the proposal's magnitude,
it is crucial that we have an
extensive debate and analysis
before making any decisions.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Mandy Torres, Education
reform director for Think New
Mexico and a former elementary
teacher. New Mexico stands in
opposition to this resolution
simply because it pulls the
focus away from where it is
needed most, at the local level.
While we have shared in the
frustration of PED leadership
turnover, it is far more
frustrating to read regularly
about another superintendent
stepping down or being fired.
And the same with principles. I
think the latest one is Demming,
uh, we had Los Lunas again this
year. Um, it
Is this local instability that
most affects our students, um,
and our classrooms. As a former
classroom teacher admittedly, I
was often unaware of what was
happening at the state level,
because only a handful of things
trickled down to me directly.
But when a new superintendent or
principal came in, I had to, um,
change what time and how I did
my reading and my math. I had to
change my focus professional
development, my preparation for
PLCs had to change, and even
what I had to have on my walls
had to change. If we want to fix
education, the focus needs to be
on ensuring that our LEAs have
support, stable leadership,
long-term vision, and
accountability with how they are
spending money, and how that
spending plan is working to get
results for students. Amid the
PED leadership
turnover, which we believe will
soon be much less of an issue.
Great work has continued at the
state level, such as with
educator quality division and
programs like educator, fellows
and teacher residencies. There
are people like Ken Stow,
Elizabeth Peters from the
Priority School, Shafiq
Chaudhury with Math and Science,
Anthony Burns and high quality
materials, and many more there
who have still been doing the
great work.
New Mexico moved away from the
state board because it invited
corruption, was inefficient, and
simply added another layer of
red tape to reform efforts,
stifling innovation and progress
for our students, and we are
still trying to catch up with
other states as a result. Moving
backward to an already tried and
failed bureaucratic process is
simply not the right answer.
Instead, we should focus on a
future of quality data, targeted
accountability, and processes
that encourage stability at the
local level. Thank you. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the Senate Education
Committee. My name is Lauren
Scott, and I am here as a Teach
Plus fellow and also as a
kindergarten teacher at Mount
Mahogany Community School, which
is a charter school in
Albuquerque.
I'm here to speak in opposition
to SJR3, um, because although I
appreciate the amendment, I
cannot support the legislation
on the whole.
I oppose this piece for two
reasons. A charter schools need
consistency, and they have been
making a lot of progress. The
numbers are clear. When students
attend schools that speak to
them, achievement is increased.
Data shows that on the whole and
within high needs subgroups,
students in charter schools are
outperforming students in
traditional schools, in reading,
math, and science. The state
should be considering what these
innovative and forward thinking
charter schools are doing right,
and that has led to these
outcomes, even in the
challenging post.
COVID educational landscape.
My second reason for opposition
is that having an elected school
board would further politicize
education.
In Albuquerque, I had the
experience of helping organize,
um, candidate forums for our
local school board. As much as I
value the experience, it left me
feeling that as a teacher and a
member of an educational
community organization and also
as a citizen. My efforts would
have been better spent thinking
about and advocating for systems
that could change to make the
lives of my students better.
That is why I'm actually here at
the Roundhouse this session.
Uh, we need to make changes to
how our math programs work, our
reading programs, and that's
what I'll continue to advocate
for.
I witnessed when I was helping
organize those forums, how much
time candidates, even on this
small level had to use their
energy for electoral politics.
The focus in New Mexico needs to
stay on our students and the
schools, not on what can get
someone elected. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, my name is
Mariana Padilla. I'm the PE um
having the opportunity to to
share a bit about my concerns.
There have been already really
incredible um points made which
um which I agree with, and I
will not um restate.
Um, the first being that there
is no body of research.
That indicates that as as a
better governance structure.
In addition, the time.
And the resources, the important
resources of the state change
would be much better spent.
on
the educational initiatives and
needs of our students when we
last held a state's childhood
education and care department,
nor the higher ed department,
education department works
incredibly closely as well as
workforce and many other state
agencies um pulling the
K-12 educational system outside
of the executive would greatly
hinder many of our efforts,
including our efforts in our
summer reading program, the
Office of Special Education and
are having a multi-member state
board would simply.
Not support innovation and would
not support Cher together for
education for our students. I
truly appreciate this bill
sponsor, I respect his
leadership and education and I
really appreciate our ongoing
partnership, however, I
respectfully thank you.
Thank you.
And online
Um
We have Eli Cassau.
Good morning, Mr. Good morning,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Eli
Cassau, and I am the manager of
policy and programs for Teach
Plus New Mexico.
We work with hundreds of
teachers across the state, and
there is deep concern about the
potential consequences of SJR3
and how it may negatively impact
students, educators, and public
education as a whole.
Last week we heard up from we
heard opposition from a variety
of individuals that share
different perspectives that
called out some of the
challenges, including the
strategic collaboration and
longitudinal data sharing
between state departments.
And the gridlock and dysfunction
that we've seen from similar
board systems that would slow
efforts down in a time when we
need urgency.
There was also concern from both
political parties in that
committee. Many teachers share
these same concerns. We have
shared a letter that includes
our concerns with the name of
teachers who also oppose SJR3.
While the high number of
secretaries over the past
several years isn't ideal. It is
not an issue we've had since
2003 when we transitioned to
this new model. In fact, if you
look back to the systems created
under the the current PED model
after 2003, we
have had peaks of educational
achievement.
Increased educational funding
and the opportunity for deeper
engagement with educators and
stakeholders.
Now is not the time to focus on
educational governance, but
rather solutions for students. I
urge you to oppose SGR3 and
instead support initiatives that
focus on students, empower
educators and uphold our
commitment to a high quality
education for all. Thank you for
your consideration.
Thank you. That's the end of
public comment.
I'll go to comments and
questions from the committee.
Senator Nova
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I have a
couple of questions, uh,
chairman and uh Senator souls.
I am concerned about the
politicizing of elections. I.
I think we all can agree that
elections have results and um I
don't necessarily believe that
students should be engaged in
that. Um,
But because of that,
I am specifically concerned
about the
Organizations that fund many of
these campaigns and my concern
comes from the kind of impact
that they could have on these
types of elections. So,
I want to understand.
In your perspective, do their
early childhood K through 12 and
higher education secretaries,
uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator, do
they currently work together on
strategic initiatives, uh, to
serve New Mexico students.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes, I
believe they do. I mean, they
work together fairly well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. And do you think
there would be a negative impact
if we treat K through 12
differently than early childhood
and then a higher ed.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, I
don't think so. I know two of
the prior secretary or I mean a
superintendents of schools we
had in the past. You know, I was
an educator at the time, um, and
if we envision someone of
similar statue running or being
appointed as our superintendent
of schools, I suspect there
would be great collaboration
with both early childhood and
higher education secretaries at
that point. I don't envision
that there would be a wall
between them.
in any way, and that they would
continue to be great
collaboration.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Um, my other
concern comes from an angle of
representation and who would be
able to run for these positions.
So in terms of specifically
representation of Pueblo's
tribes and nations also. Um, do
you think that these types of
elections could have a negative
impact.
On the representation of Pop's
tribes and nations.
Mr. Chair and and Senator, no, I
don't, uh, because the elections
are held around the state with
different areas that they're,
you know, in areas where there
is a large native vote, I
suspected that person and I
think that's what we saw in the
past that they would elect
representation that that matches
them. Uh, I'm thinking
particularly in the Northwest.
That the
The state and with this it's
both the state commission and
the state board would have
representation if they organize
and make sure that they're,
they've got a candidate good
candidate and support that
candidate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. But do you believe
that private um funders, local
organ I mean investors in these
elections. You don't think that
would play out in the election
of these folks.
Mr. Chair and Senator, that
already occurs everywhere.
And I believe in elections. I
don't always like the outcomes,
um, but I think it's incumbent
upon the education community to
make sure that there are quality
candidates running and that they
get supported, um, and I think
back and I told in the rules
committee a story of down in Las
Cruces, we had election for the
state board of which there was a
very well respected educator
with lots of experience and what
might be considered by some a
more extreme candidate.
it
Everybody, including me, thought
that it was kind of a done deal
that of course the person with
experience would get elected.
He lost by 4 votes.
Uh, and so, you know, I at that
point realized that I could have
swung that election if I had
been more engaged and involved
with
The
Getting people out to vote and
telling them why it was
important, even though people
thought that, of course, the,
the quality candidate is going
to get elected. I think it's a
real lesson that each of us have
an obligation to education to
ensure that we get quality
people elected.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
one last question, is there data
that suggests that a state
school board provides better
student outcomes than what we
have right now.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I don't
believe that there is direct
data, um, all of these things
are correlated. They, it is a
huge number of things that
affect weather, uh, states are
moving forward and to parse out
that it is this one thing or
not. I think there is fairly
good evidence, uh, particularly
in the amount of turnover, uh,
and there's lots of evidence at
the school level that when there
is a large number or turnover of
superintendents in the district
that things tend to stagnate.
and not move forward as much.
Uh, we've seen lots of
turnover, uh, when it's been an
appointment by the governor and
can switch with whoever is in
the governor almost certainly is
going to switch with whoever is
in the governor's office. Um,
this is to move back to where we
have lots more stability at the
top. I was a principal at the
time and I remember at the time
it was very much the situation
that if there were concerns and
problems, you called the State
Department of Education in order
to get help with what you
needed, where now I think lots
of principals, superintendent.
feel like, oh, what's going to
happen to us next, uh, and not
that real help and support from
the state level because of the
politicization that can occur.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, and I too am
concerned about the turnover. I
certainly believe that stability
is critically important, uh, for
our schools and our students and
our educators, uh, but I have
to, uh, just reiterate that I'm
very concerned about
politicizing the elections, but
I appreciate it. Thank you.
Center of Chairman, may I make
one other comment and, and those
comments are not aimed at our
current secretary. We do have a
great relationship. We do very
well with each other, but just
in general that uh that turnover
and, you know, and trying to to
change policy.
Senator Hickey?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Thank you, Mr. Sols
for bringing the the bill
forward. Uh, the concerns about
it's hard in this very polar of.
Walk away from from that
concern. On the other hand, I do
agree with you. We elect school
boards all over the state, and
yes, sometimes some, I'm sure
that that things get
politicized.
But
I'm, I'm reflecting back.
And like
At least the time that I've been
paying attention 20 years or so
in the state that
Um, we just haven't moved
forward.
And education.
We are maybe we are moving into
some programs that I think are
going to be beneficial. I would
think that those are going to
continue.
But, you know, my sense is, and
even though there may not be
some other states to directly
point to, um, that this is
certainly something worth a try
to work it out.
So
Um, do you have any other
observations on the made some
good comments to Senator Nava.
But um,
I, I don't want to.
Uh, negate the concerns that
were brought up by the people
who opposed the bill, but
Again, my sense is.
If you do the same thing over
and over again, you know that's.
The definition of insanity,
expecting different results and
We haven't, we haven't gotten
them,
so it's worth it.
Good. Any other, um, Mr. Chair
and senator, the only
observations is, you know, I was
a principal, uh, when
We switched from having a state
superintendent to a state school
board. It narrowly passed uh
with lots of money and publicity
behind it from uh Governor
Richardson at the time and I
voted against it.
Uh, and I told others, please
vote against this, right now
it's on the Dem side, it's a
governor, that's kind of on our
side with things, but it won't
always be that education's going
to get whiplash depending on
who's in the governor's office.
Um, but it did pass at the time
and I think we've seen some of
that. Uh, we had a few that were
a bit more stable, but they
always change when the governor
changes as to who is going to be
the Secretary of Education, even
if it stays within the
same party and that means, you
know, at best, you're typically
gonna have someone for 8 years,
the prior superintendent of
schools lasted on the order of
15 years each, which provided
stability across administration.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Thornton.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Sol for bringing this
forward.
I just have a few questions, um.
Do you know what our current
student pro proficiency reading
rate is.
In the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair and senator, um, I
believe it's somewhere around
30%.
Uh, well below what any of us
would like.
I believe it, then there's
actually 30, 39% of students are
proficient in reading.
Do you know what our math
proficiency is.
And, and I don't know the exact
number or the number somewhere
around 25% sticks in my head.
It's 23%, so very good.
I'm gonna ask you one last
question with regards to our
science proficiency. Do you know
what that is?
Mr. Chair and and Senator, it's
a bit higher. It's, it's
somewhere around the 40
something%. It's actually 37%.
Not too far off, you know,
that's good. And so I bring
these numbers up because um
I agree with the representative
from New Mexico can uh kids can
where she said that
restructuring.
May or may not necessarily
improve our, our, our current
student proficiency rates.
I'm, I'm concerned, however,
that
We know that the current system
isn't working.
And it's, we've been in this
sort of
Malays for probably on the order
of
567, 10 years, I'm not sure.
Um
So we know the status quo isn't
working. There's concern that
changing over is going to be
taking a lot of energy to make
this a reality.
But uh, I guess the the big
thing what I'm hearing from all
this, that if we were to pass
this out of committee, um,
The only thing that we're asking
is we're gonna be taking this to
the people. They're going to
make the decision as to whether
or not they want to take the ED
down or not. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair and and Senator, yes,
this is being a resolution, it
would go on the ballot for the
people to move and would ask if
they want to move back to a
state superintendent of schools
rather than an appointed
secretary of Education. So I
guess what we're saying is, in
this resolution would come about
when in in the 26 election, when
would this resolution be?
Mr. Chair and and Senator, I
don't think there would be time
to put it on the 26th election,
it would probably be on 2028.
Got you. OK, so thank you, that
helps me also.
So
So, if we were to pass it out of
committee and if it were to get
out of uh on the floor and pass.
Then, then they have 3 years to,
we'd still stay under the
existing system, and
People would have 3 years to
figure out whether or not we're
making an additional progress.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair and center, yes, I
believe that. So I understand
that and that, that, that helps
me and those were the questions
I had to clarify. I just want to
make sure I understand what will
happen if we were to prove this.
Um, my sense is right now that I
think people are clamoring for a
change.
They want to see a difference.
They want to start educational
system improved.
I agree with that. I think it's
very, very important that our
kids have an opportunity to
succeed in society.
And um, and clearly the current
system is broken. I don't know
exactly why it's broken.
Uh, and I know that we're all
attempting to figure that out as
a as a group. So, so with that,
I, I get my time back, but
thanks for answering.
Thank you, Senator.
Their comments or questions. I
have a few senator and this is
me just more information. How,
how would it work having a state
superintendent.
As far as the process of working
with us and would it be similar
to what?
EED does now, I guess, wondering
how that would, that would
operate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I was
president of the New Mexico
School Boards Association, um.
I think it was about that time
or thereabouts where it was just
off of that. So I was watching
very carefully, you know, how
those things worked and how the
Superintendent of schools and
regularly made presentations to
the school boards association.
To the superintendents
association and my
understanding, I was not in the
legislature at that time and
wasn't watching that carefully,
but was not hearing from
legislators that the
superintendent was cloistered
away in an office and not
presenting. They would be
presenting the education budget
to the finance committee, uh,
lobbying the finance committee
for funding in the various
different areas. So very similar
to what an appointed secretary
does.
Thank you, Senator, and, and I
think you've answered this
partially and not to get on that
um.
Just trying to understand.
Right now, and I agree with you
there's been too much um, how do
we ensure that does
Mr. Chair, uh, there is no
guarantee that that wouldn't
happen. Uh, it really becomes
incumbent upon the various
voters to hire, higher, I mean,
elections are like hiring to
elect quality people to serve in
in those roles of um oversight
of the superintendent and what
would be then the Department of
Education.
Thank you, Senator and uh
You know, this time around, I'm
struggling with this a little
bit just because
Just the turnover bin.
During
there's this
Really part of how
I'm willing to
Give it a try and a change.
Happens
But
That what you're proposing would
provide there, provide that.
Less
Folks have concerns about a
like.
Divorce or something.
kind of.
With that, I don't have any
other.
And I will give you a chance to.
I don't see any other comments
or questions.
Uh, what is the will of the
committee on Senate joint
resolution 3 that are.
Ramos with a new pass on Senate
joint resolution 3 as amended.
Do I have a second?
You have a sex.
In her excuse me, Cinder Boone.
Yes.
Sender Isel.
Center Figueroa.
No
Hickey
Center Nova
No, I explained my vote.
Sender Ramos.
Senator.
Yes.
Cinder Pope
Yes.
And fact.
Yes.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Again, just wanted to thank you
for bringing this forward and
wanted to amplify my concerns
about politicizing education,
um, and really politicizing
voter turnout. I think we have
issues with all of those things.
I think it's important to remind
people that folks in the
education system, students in
the education system don't
necessarily have people, parents
or families who all vote. So,
uh, for those reasons, I am not
voting for the bill. Thank you,
Senator.
And Senator, I voted yes.
Still
Have concerns, and I'm gonna
continue talking with you and
other folks, and that might
change on the floor, but I do
want to see this move going
forward and
Continue to have the discussion.
C
I'm sorry, Senator Ramos.
And, and, uh, yes, I voted yes
and uh.
You know, one of the biggest
reasons I voted here, I still
think back to 2019 when my very
good friend Matt was the
secretary.
Uh, and, uh,
You know, she, she was, she was
in office for about
At least 6 months.
And
You went in with some good
comments and try to negotiate, I
guess, uh.
But we're gonna do it in
different steps that are gonna
take to work with these
children.
And all of a sudden she got
terminated. May she rest in
peace.
But uh
You got terminated.
There is a moment.
And I think if we go to the old.
A way of utilizing.
Our, our board and our
Uh new superintendent.
I think this would take the
politicizing out of.
The
Equation. So
That's one of the main reasons
why I voted for this.
And uh hopefully,
We can get some stability.
And make sure that the people in
in in that.
Strong position and actually
speak their voice and try to do
what's right for the state of
New Mexico, not just what a
governor wants in the state of
New Mexico.
Because having the governorship
and having a superintendent
education, there's, there's,
there's a lot of different
thought processes and usually a
governor isn't usually the
expert in education in the
future. And again, it's no
offense towards our currency or
Uh, it's nothing like that. I
think we just got to make sure
we have stability for our
children.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator, you
Committee at at the start of
today, we had talked about the
floor sessions supposed to start
in about 5 minutes. Um, and
being done now, uh, we have two
members who were in finance and
got stuck there. I guess I wanna
ask the committee about being
down on the floor and heading
down there or do you want to
stick around, um, and one of
them is a fairly large bill.
Is
If people want to stay, you
know, because again, I will
uphold my
My commitment of being on the
floor if, if it's kind of not
unanimous among committee
members.
You wanna roll.
Till the next meeting, OK, and
with that, you know, the.
Those two other bills will not
be heard today. Uh, we will be
trying to put those on first
thing on Monday. Um, again, want
to remind people.
That the film count counted out
math is power this Saturday 110
a.m. to 12:30 in the finance
room, which is room 322. I think
you will find it worth your
