We missed you the last couple of
days.
The what we're going to do
today, the order of the bills is
we're gonna do SB 147, then
we'll do the two Senator Maestus
bills 160 and 245, and then
finished with Senator Stewart's
bill on 238. We do have a hard
stop at 10:50 today. I, I expect
we should be able to get through
all of these and hope to, to do
so.
Any questions? I think we've got
a whole lot of guests here
today, a lot of, I've heard
charter school students to learn
about the process and things and
so certainly appreciate you all
being here in the education
community that senator.
Hope, if you'd like to start on
SB 147 and Secretary Greginsky,
welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, committee
members, I'd like to also
acknowledge my co-sponsor,
Senator Trujil, who is not here
today. Uh, we have the secretary
here and some of young children
in preschool and childcare
programs are suspended or
expelled at rates 3 times higher
than school-age children.
These expulsion rates are much
higher for boys, children of
color, and those with
disabilities. Exclusionary
practices deprive children of
opportunities to learn and grow
during their most crucial period
of brain development.
Early childhood education and
care department has invested in
early care and education
programs directly and continues
to develop supports to help
educators and early childhood
professionals better support
families and young children.
These resources include
professional development,
coaching.
Infant early childhood mental
health consultants, inclusion
coaches, and the recent
transition of the preschool
special education coordinator
from PED to EC ECD.
Additionally, the department
administers home visiting and
early intervention services that
support families and young
children.
SB 147 addresses the needs of
both children and early care and
education providers by allowing
children the opportunity to
learn.
And grown a supportive and
nurturing environment.
What this bill does.
SB 147 would limit suspensions
and expulsions for children
under the age of 5 and licensed
childcare facilities and in the
New Mexico and in New Mexico
pre-K programs.
A planned transition to a better
setting for a, for a child's
needs is not an expulsion.
Disenrollments unrelated to a
child's behavior or discipline
are still permitted.
A child's parents or legal
guardians may still voluntarily
will draw a child.
Licensed early childhood in New
Mexico pre-K programs would be
prohibited from expelling a
child due to behavior or
discipline reasons.
SB 147 would also prohibit
providers from suspending a
child for behavior or
discipline.
Reasons except
When it, when children cause or
attempt or threaten to cause
bodily injury.
In which case, the maximum
length of out of school
suspensions is 3 school days for
incident.
And the exception for this would
be self-defense.
Request from a provider to a
parent or guardian to remove
their child for any length of
time during the day counts as an
out of school suspension.
Providers will be required to
report a disenrollment.
Expulsion or suspension of a
child to the early childhood
education and care department.
SB 147 applies to publicly
funded community-based New
Mexico pre-K and early pre-K.
Publicly funded school pays.
Publicly funded school-based New
Mexico pre-K and licensed child
care facilities.
Um, also want to highlight that
ECECD.
Um,
Other programs and initiatives
that they support our early
childhood professionals. There's
a social and emotional early
development initiative, which is
collaborative and relationship
focused approach to strengthen,
strengthening caregiver's
ability to promote and enhance
children's socially, emotional
development.
There's also coaching and
consultant supports.
Children's children enrolled in
New Mexico pre-K have the access
to coaches and consultants to
help work on classroom
management.
And classroom environments to
help support a conducive
learning environment for
children, which challenge which
with challenging behaviors.
There's also professional
development for educators
through New Mexico or the New
Mexico Early Learning System,
otherwise known as the NMELS.
And quorum, online training
resources, including topics such
as uh e-pyramid training, the
pyramid model and early
childhood education, which is
based on evidence-based
practices that promote social
and emotional development.
It's also been a placement of
the Part B 619 early childhood
special education coordinator
within the early childhood
education and care department.
Part B 619 coordinator is
responsible for coordinating and
monitoring and reporting on the
requirements of individuals,
individuals with the
disabilities Education Act, Part
B, section, uh, with that, Mr.
Chair, I want to give the
secretary an opportunity uh to
say a few words.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, and I
wanna thank uh Senator Pope for
sponsoring this bill again. Uh,
we were here two years ago and I
think in that time the
department has made tremendous
strides both in funding directly
increasing the amount of funding
that we're supporting.
um, education, uh, providers
with as well as developing more
of the resources that the
senator, uh, so well articulated
in terms of being able to
intervene early, this is the
most critical period of
development in a child's life.
It's important that as our early
care and education providers
across the state, there are eyes
and ears, they can help connect
those families and those
children with an array of
services, not only the ones
offered through the ECECD, but
possibly through the healthcare
authority or through the.
Department of Health, things
that we know families need if we
just expel them with no
supports, then we know that
those children are
re-traumatized, those families
are re-traumatized, you'll see
on the back of your fact sheets
statements from two parents who
had this happen to them, and we
also know that understanding the
prevalence, being able to
collect this data is going to
help us be an even better
department and a collaborator
with our providers and with
families and children. This is
an an important part of our
building.
this universal family centered
high quality early childhood
education and care system. So
with that I'll stand for
questions and.
Anything else, Senator?
No, we're uh ready for public
comment. Any questions from the
committee, OK, very good. Uh,
first out to the audience with a
show of hands. How many are in
support of this bill?
Those in opposition to this
bill.
OK, um, and then we, I do have
some online in each way. Those
in support, if you would like to
come up, you have a maximum of 2
minutes to speak in support.
Please give your name and if
you're representing a particular
group. Good morning, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Jonathan Salazar,
research and policy analyst any
Mexico voices for children, and
we stand in support of Bill 147.
Over a decade of research and
data tells us that policies and
practices of suspension and
expulsion in early childhood,
uh, which disproportionately
affect children of color or
causing harm to children and
families. These practices
deprive children of learning and
growth during their most crucial
period of brain development and
results in immediate disruptions
and stress for family.
Exclusionary practices often
also results in long-term
negative outcomes, including
academic underachievement,
school.
this connection, high school
dropout and incarceration
outcomes that we can ill afford
in a state that is already
seeing the impact of these in
our statistics on crime. We
thank the sponsor and the
experts for this important bill,
and we urge your support. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Whitney Holland,
president of AFT New Mexico.
Research consistently shows that
suspensions and expulsions at
this age do not improve
behavior, but instead set
children on a harmful
trajectory, according to a study
by the Yale Child Study Center,
pre-school children are expelled
at a rate more than 3 times
higher than K-12 students.
Children of color, especially
boys, are disproportionately
affected, reinforcing systemic
inequities before they even
enter elementary school.
Suspending or expelling a child
at such a critical developmental
stage.
disrupts early learning,
increases stress, and undermines
the foundation of social and
emotional growth. Let's give all
New Mexico children the chance
to thrive by keeping them in
supportive learning environments
rather than pushing them out
before they've even really
begun. I urge you to support
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alice
Lou McCoy. I'm the executive
director of the Developmental
Disabilities Council here in New
Mexico. We have programs such as
the Special Education Obed, as
well as uh adult guardianship
within our agency. So we see
people living with disabilities
here in New Mexico from birth
all the way to end of life. And
what we see here in New Mexico,
the reality of it is that this
period makes all of the
difference in their success.
throughout their lives. And so
when they have, when families
have the choice of being able to
access all of the services
provided in early childhood.
They do better in schools. They
do better in later in life. We
also have a, uh, leadership
program, um, that for people
living with disabilities. It's
one of our first programs and it
was uh a premier program across
the country. We have lots of
states who now have the same
kind of leadership program, all
of the fellows in our program
had an incredible early start.
And that's why there are where
they are today, leading New
Mexico. And so we need to ensure
that everybody has these
opportunities, not just a few
people who may be lucky through,
you know, whatever circumstances
in their life, but that every
single New Mexican child has
this opportunity. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Please vote for this
really important bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Doctor Marker Cage. I am the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
Office of Special Education at
the public education department.
I am here this morning in
support of this bill, because
children are our specialty.
In our office, we focus on
students and families alike from
birth throughout career and even
past that. I've had the
opportunity to work with early
childhood and care department
since I've been here, and we are
establishing protocols and
structures in place, along with
the 619 B and C, so that we are
able to ensure that our students
have a smooth transition from
birth into K-12 education.
Our foundation begins as early
as when we are born, but
especially when we enter into
the doors of public education.
So we need to make sure that we
ensure that our students are
receiving our very best and that
we are attending to their needs
in a wraparound services
restorative practice kind of
way. Please support this bill.
Thank you
Can you hear me? There we go.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines representing the
disability coalition and as the
name indicates, we have a
particular interest in children
with disabilities and as the
sponsor pointed out, they are
one of the group's
disproportionately affected by
these disciplinary actions. Um,
I'm not going to repeat
everything the people in front
of me in line said, but we agree
with all that, and I do want to
highlight for you that according
to the LESC analysis on this
bill.
enacting this bill would align
New Mexico with best practices
in this area. So we urge your
support. Thank you very much.
Ah, madam, uh, excuse me, Mister
Chair and members of the
committee, um, thank you for
this opportunity to present, to
testify. My name is Doctor
Badger Rankin, and I have worked
professionally in early
childhood for more than 50
years, um, I, I do consulting in
early childhood, um, pedagogy
and advocacy.
I am here to support with
caution and suggestions, uh,
Senate Bill 147. I believe that
children have a right, high
quality education and care and
understand that it takes a
skilled and competent workforce
to uh to be able to to provide
that high quality care and
education, especially working
with children with challenging
behaviors. These children
deserve teachers.
Who have competence and
capabilities and have the skills
and the know-how to work with
these children and bring out
their potential. While ECECD and
early childhood advocates such
as myself and many others who
are in this room and others are
doing everything we can to build
up and support the early
childhood workforce. We are not
there yet. There is still
substantial turnover in early
childhood workforce.
Teachers being paid far too
little even though we've made
progress
without enough training,
education, and without time for
reflection and planning this and
the low pay keeps the cycle of
of turnover going, a child with
challenging behavior can disrupt
a whole classrooms
of turnover going, a child with
challenging behavior can disrupt
a whole classroom
when there's not enough uh
support. So in uh solutions
include providing more support
for teachers and I support the
things that ECEC doing, easy,
easy doing is doing now and we
need more of that. Thank you for
your patience.
Hello everyone.
My name is Valeria Holloway. I'm
a child care about here in Las
Cruces, New Mexico, and I oppose
the SB 147, not because I don't
want children to
Have the ability to be expelled,
but the, the unfair burden on
providers without additional
support.
We need funding on behavioral
specialists and training, not
restrictions that make the
classrooms unsafe.
This bill makes it harder for
small and in-home providers like
myself to serve children
effectively. According to
licensing regulations providers
must implement procedures to
minimize expulsion, which is
used only as a last resort.
Um, after all, I'll have other
resources have been exhausted.
Currently, we do not have the
necessary tools or, and we're
working on that, um, with the
educational department,
effectively to support children
with aggressive behavioral
issues while ensuring the safety
of child staff and other
children.
Although the um the C program is
designed to help therapists only
spend an average of one hour per
week in each classroom. We need
a behavioral therapist who can
work directly with the child,
the teacher, and family on a
daily basis.
There are not enough
developmental preschools. The
existing ones have long waiting
lists for child valuations and
after evaluations, the
behavioral issues often do not
qualify for services, even
though they fall within the
social and emotional development
area. Insurance companies are
canceling coverage or failing to
renew childcare policies in New
Mexico across the nation. This
mandate will further aspirate
the lack of childcare insurance
for not keeping a safe
environment.
For employees and children.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, and I think that
was uh against, but there were
some positive things in there
too. Uh, we have one other one
says 4 low.
Go ahead, please.
But
back in this room, those who are
against if you'd like, I
apologies.
Robert Chavis was on a Dera
Baca.
They do not show up on my list,
so.
Let's put Laurel on and then
we'll go to those against.
Go ahead, Laurel.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair.
Committee members, uh, thank you
for the opportunity to comment
today. My name is Laurel
Nesbitt, and I'm an attorney
with disability rights New
Mexico. DRNM supports SB 147.
We know exclusionary discipline
correlates with poor outcomes
for students with disabilities.
Exclusionary practices like
expulsion and long-term
suspension are particularly
inappropriate.
For very young children.
challenging behaviors should not
read automatically as
misbehavior, but instead may
signal a need for evaluation.
for special education and
related services, especially
appropriate and effective
behavior supports.
Very young children with
disabilities. Whether or not
their disabilities have been
identified.
Need the chance to engage, adapt
to, and thrive in school. SB 147
helps provide this opportunity.
Thank you again, chair and
committee members.
Thank you. Um, now the end of
the room, those who are in
opposition, if you'd like to
Please go ahead.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Ruth Porta. Uh, I'm an immigrant
from Mexico and I have my
citizenship back in 2006. Um, I
am an owner of two preschools,
one in Albuquerque and the other
one in Rio Rancho.
Um, I come here to pose.
As Senate Bill 147, no its
As Senate Bill 147, no it's
practice, where I think it's
premature.
Um, first, we need the data, New
Mexico data, because the data
that has been said by our
sponsors is a national data. So
we are 66%.
Uh, composed of color, you know,
we are the majority, of course,
the expulsions are going to show
the demographics of New Mexico.
Uh, other things I want to make
a distinction is that um we are
not, we don't this all children
with disabilities. The issue
here is children with
challenging behaviors that pose
a risk
to themselves, to the other
children and to the staff. So
right now in New Mexico, a child
with extreme challenge of
behaviors doesn't qualify for an
intervention if they don't have
another delay like language,
physical, or um, or cognitive.
So they don't have any help.
Um, the other thing I went to
Um, say that if they qualify our
uh early intervention
preschools, they are already,
they have a way, a waiting list.
And they don't have this
service. By the time they get
the service, there's already
um it's already, you know, it's
too late. It's the end of the
school year. I don't um they
don't get that service. So it's
so that we don't oppose, we, the
practice is good but we don't
have the tools currently.
Thank you.
Bueno dias
hombres and Cecilia Magoomirante
de Venezuela
travajo deochoanos and
preschool Esperanza in central
la politicamotolos padres er
locatamos todo recursos tea
ninos
uh no sotros uh
no.
Contras samos.
And in my pusquetambien cuando
tenemoso safisotros neuro porque
es est estinos in la Mayoria
spore necessitariamos
poo uenten marapitalebrinda on
ninos gracias.
glasses.
I, um, my name's Erica, and I've
been an early childhood
administrator for more than 15
years, and I can count with less
than one hand the number of
children that I've had to expel.
Um, and it really has been after
exhausting every single resource
out there available, and of the
very few children that I have
expelled, I say I don't, I did
not expel the children. I
expelled the parents. Um, it's,
I heard everyone in favor, a lot
of um special education and
disability groups.
Speaking in favor, and I'm all
for that too. The children that
we have had to expel are usually
um families that are reluctant
to get evaluations to see if
there's an underlying cause.
It's not our kiddos that need
special education.
And I feel that until the state
is prepared to actually provide
the resources that we as early
child, uh, educators need, then
it is a little unfair to pass a
law that prohibits us from doing
so. Yes, we have the seed
program, but the consultant
comes to the classrooms one hour
a week and observe all the
children, not just one. We also
do have consultants for children
in New Mexico pre-K, which are
usually only 3 and 4 year olds,
and those consultants come to
your program. They're supposed
to come once a month, but
sometimes you go.
months without a visit.
And so, um, in theory,
everything you're doing is
great, but in practice, we're
still not having the actual help
that we need to see a
difference.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Pala Buenos diasinbres isla soy
migrante Mexicana vaperanza por
cinco anos estteo mara the early
pre-stres anos
estemo maestra
nemosque guid
todo losinos.
Cuando tenemos osmos and
anosotros yellows and mass
porque no podemos tener
una uno estarillos mass and
quera and says and on the
yotrabajo loquesemos primes
the travajamoss padres uh
familia
Iasibemosque is the mosqueos
Bayana.
Paraquepospodemostravaja
conesos ninos.
Go tambien so mama
aria salon de mijo este
oviera uninos in a
polo.
Lo quero de que primero isimosa
gloss.
Gracias.
Glasses.
Hello, my name is Carolina
Camargo. I am from Mexico City
too. I've been working from, uh,
with Esperanza for at least 8
months and with this experience,
I'm, I, I want to share this
with you guys. So after trying
with the families, I truly
believe that all the kids
deserve a chance and
opportunity, but when a kid has
a behavioral problems that need
extra help by allowing them to
stay in the class and continue
with that behavior.
it allows the parents.
To avoid the responsibility to
get that help that the kids
need.
Also with other kids and us in
risk.
Also allowing kids with
disruptive behavior to continue
in the class takes valuable time
from the other kids. Thank you.
Thank you.
A companeras travajo and
lasperanza.
Yes, Doyen contra de la la
porque.
Tambienzo mama er.
Maestra lossalon the class
paramirelos.
The
era des quince ninos.
And your toy and a contra de la
la iquisierra quera provada
recursos parala maestra
gra.
Good morning to everyone. My
name is Rosa Ruiz. I have been a
teacher for 3 decades. I have
encountered many situations
related to dealing with
challenging behaviors.
In school
I'm in a position of this bill.
Even though I know that we have
to promote um for the children.
We are here to promote for the
children.
Um, sometimes we don't have
support from the principals or
directors, um, and, well, when I
was working in the public
schools, um, now that I'm
working with the daycare as a
preschool teacher, I have
received even more training,
more classes to deal with this
situations, um.
With that said, we have been,
um, my, my, um, sorry.
Um, the first reason I have here
is we need to implement and
provide more services to
teachers and parents to learn to
support in the required needs of
the students consistency and
liability for both.
Um, because sometimes if you
approve the bill, then the all
the choices are out of the
window. So we need to work
together.
Social emotional well-being for
other students. Other students
also come from.
Homes domestic violence, and we
need to provide safety for them.
Uh, number 3, parents sometimes
they are not completely involved
or they, they don't follow the
VIP. We are left with dealing
with the situations. Teachers
get injured in the work, and all
the children's get get hurt in,
in this kind of situations. And
then when all the resources are
exhausted, there is no other
choice. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am.
Um, greetings, legislators. My
name is Gabrielle Wheeler,
executive director of Eastgate
Kids. I have a nonprofit center
located in Albuquerque near the
International District.
Taking a stance on this bill has
been a very difficult decision
for me. I agree with the intent
of this bill, but with
conditions, because I agree in
principle with the intent, but
also have some concerns about
aspects of the bill. Yes, it is
true that public schools do not
expel at the rate of early
childcare programs, but we must
note that public schools often
have on-site specialists, one on
one care staff and rooms
dedicated for children with
special needs or behavioral
challenges. It is not our
desire.
And I could, it's heartbreaking.
For us to disenroll a child.
It's never an easy decision.
It is after we have exhausted
all resources.
Ultimately, we must ask, should
the learning environment of many
children be disrupted due to the
aggressive actions of one
student. Should young learners
be subjected, subjected to
violence in a space meant to be
safe and nurturing.
Being in a classroom with a
classmate who hits, throws,
screams, and destroys the
classroom.
And add additional trauma to
children who have experienced
trauma at home. We must consider
whether other children's
progress will be hindered and
delayed. New Mexico must improve
its rating for child well-being
and having young children under
5 in classrooms with students
exhibiting these behaviors in
classrooms will not support that
goal. If we remove the right of
childcare providers to refuse
services to children and
families showing aggressive
behavior, we risk compromising
the quality of education for all
students. This
It also increase liability for
child care centers, as we may
face legal challenges from
parents concerned about the
child's safety, we must, we
might also face workman's
compensation claims from
employees harmed by children.
Furthermore, we might see
disenrollment from families who
do not want their children
exposed.
Hello, my name is Adriana. I'm
come here as a mom, as educator
and as a director. We love our
kids and we want them to be
safety in safety environments,
uh, because of challenging
behaviors, sometimes it is not
possible for every kid in the
classroom. Sometimes it is
really disruptive to have kids
and as my colleague here says it
is.
housing problems with the
teachers when they get injured.
We have a lot of staff because
of these things. So we are
voting against this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Barbara Tedro and I'm a provider
in Farmington, New Mexico.
First, I wanna thank you and
appreciate and see all of the
support in the room for this
bill and acknowledge that I am
one of the people that support
this, however, we have to do it
in a way that childcare centers
can work together with ECCD come
to the conclusions that need to
be dealt with in a viable way.
I've been doing this work for 25
years with a vulnerable
population of over 60%.
Native American children. I know
better than anyone what the real
impact of this legislation will
be without the proper supports
in place.
I've been providing New Mexico
pre-K since 2005. We already
follow expulsion policies
outlined in our pre-K standards.
So why do we suddenly see an
urgent need for legislation when
we don't even have the data to
support it.
This bill asks for data, but we
don't need a law to get it. We
simply need to have the ECCD
work on gathering the data to
find the root cause of the
problems.
Rural areas like mine do not
have access to behavioral
specialists or the true supports
that children and families need.
The seed program that ECCD has
while helpful in theory, is very
unreliable in practice with
providers unavailable when we
need them the most. We cannot
properly help these children if
we are left without
intervention, without guidance,
and without daily behavioral
support.
While New Mexico pre-K does
provide some of those supports,
we are left with consultants
that come to see us once a
month, once every 22 or 3
months, have multiple sites
throughout the site and often
don't live in even live within
the same city that we do.
We are asking that you please
step back, gather the data and
look at the root cause of the
issue before pushing through a
blanket law that ties providers'
hands. Instead of rushing into
legislation, let's allow
providers to collaborate with
ECCD and create a real solution.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Viridiana, um.
So I
mean my roll is director and
pre-K program, um.
And me say Sanos practicanor
pre-K program to be mosque
descent Rolao Nino e e yoko
person respons
And me say Sanos practicanor
pre-K program to be mosque
descent Rolao Nino e e yoko
person responsi
um i pasaport
tra s personas es
tra s personas camino gracias.
Glasses and the last one.
Good morning. My name is Leo
Porta. Um,
I am not wholly opposed in
principle to what this bill is
doing. However, I think we're
putting
The cart before the horse
because the infrastructure to
help these kids is not on.
Um, the therapists are not on,
they're.
Show up every now and again, uh,
the funding isn't there, um.
And from the looks of it, it
sounds like ECD doesn't really
understand the behavior data
that is being seen in the
classrooms, uh, to
Data points from parents who.
Suffered something is not enough
to pass by law.
I think you need to understand
the full data. The parents whose
kids have been injured, teachers
who've been injured.
Uh, that's what you need to look
at.
But, uh, the place to start
maybe to uh have the university
in New Mexico rerun the
behavioral study that they did
uh 7 or 10 years ago to at least
begin to understand the
behaviors that are being seen in
the classroom and then build
infrastructure once you
understand the problem and then
once you have the
infrastructure, then you start
putting this, these bills
because.
Like I said, I'm not in a post.
I, I think that the secretary's
heart is absolutely in the right
place. You know, we shouldn't be
throwing kids out and we
definitely shouldn't be talking
about criminalizing, you know,
behaviors at this age, but we,
we should be looking at helping
these kids.
Uh, but we have a lot of work to
do before we, uh, we get to
where we start, uh, please get
the data before we pass bad
laws. Thank you.
Thank you.
Please, not in the room, thank
you, we don't do that.
Um
Online, Brianna Henry, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Brianna Henry and I'm
the director of the Gold Star
Academy in Farmington, New
Mexico. We are a nationally
accredited program and have
proudly served in Mexico pre-K
since 20005. My goal is that
every teacher in my program is
to support children and families
in addressing behavioral
challenges in a way that ensures
success for everyone involved.
However, in Farmington,
resources are extremely limited.
When we reach out to the seed
program, we are told that no
providers are available or that
services are delayed.
Meanwhile, children with
behavioral challenges rarely
qualify for an IEP because their
issues fall within the social
and emotional development area,
rather than a diagnosed learning
disability. This leaves our
teachers with no professional
guidance, no assistance, and no
viable solutions to ensure the
safety of all children in our
care. According to licensing
regulations, providers must
implement procedures to minimize
expulsion, which we do.
Expulsions is always uh the last
resort used only after every
available
resource has been exhausted, but
right now we do not have the
necessary tools to effectively
support children with aggressive
behavioral issues, while also
ensuring the safety of the
children, staff, and other and
other children in the classroom.
We need behavioral therapists
who can work directly with
children, uh, with the teacher
and the family on a daily basis
to provide real support and
intervention. Without this
support, child care centers like
mine struggle to meet the needs
of these children. Before
passing legislation like SB 147.
I urged you to collect the data
on which programs are expelling
children and why. Understanding
the root causes before imposing
a blanket policy that disregards
the lack of resources available
to early childhood educators,
particularly
in rural communities like
Farmington. We want to help
children, but we cannot do so
without the necessary tool
training and support. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you, uh, Donna.
Donna, go ahead, please.
Good morning.
Members of unity.
OK
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Oh, sorry. OK. Good morning
members of the committee. My
name is Donna Fletcher, and I've
owned a preschool in Albuquerque
for 31 years in April and uh
probably disenrolled maybe 10
children in that 31 years, but
like many people are saying,
sometimes that's our last
option, and it's the last thing
we want to do, but we need, we
need more support. We need the
parents' support, they need to,
and we need a
We need a lot before this
legislation passes, you're just
asking us that we can't
disenroll or expel, and that's
just not right. So I agree with
everybody that's been against
this legislation because
There's a lot to be said and a
lot to be done to support uh
providers with the and, and I'll
be honest with you, it's, it's a
lot harder than it was when I
started 30 years ago, discipline
and behavior issues are pretty
big time. Thank you for
listening.
Thank you. And last,
exaunsinger.
Go ahead, please.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee. My
name is Marissa Sheehy and I'm a
parent of a child that was in
New Mexico pre-K and a New
Mexico pre-K classroom last
year. I do strongly oppose the
SB 147 when my child's classroom
was disrupted daily by
aggressive behavior, I raised
concerns. The director assured
me they were working on a
solution and had asked in in
pre-K consultants for support,
but the process was slow and
strict guidelines limited.
what they could do. Well, I
wanted the child and family to
get help. Why did my child and
the entire classroom have to
suffer because ECECD couldn't
provide the resource they
promised.
I love a Gold Star Academy and
waited to enroll my child
because of the reputation. I saw
the stress on my child's
teacher, the director stepping
in when possible and extra staff
being added when available.
But when I asked why nothing was
changing, I was told that
behavioral support in Farmington
is scarce and non-existent.
This bill ties the hands of
teachers and directors without
giving them the tools they need.
Mandating rules without
resources isn't a solution. It's
setting up more children,
teachers, and families for
failure. Please oppose SB 147.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, that ends all of
the public comment, um, Senator,
if you'd like to respond.
For a few moments. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'd like to give the
secretary comments.
Mr. Chair and, and Senator Pope
for this opportunity, couple
things I want to clarify that
you can expel a child for
parents' behavior, so that it's
not um considered an expulsion,
so parents are aggressive and
um, have bad behaviors, uh, that
they, they can be, um, the child
can be um expelled from the
program.
Rather than, you know, I just do
for those, some of you because
you're the education committee
so you know about human
development and when we learn to
um.
Attend a task when we develop
our executive function when our
social competence and our
emotional maturity is developed.
It is in this period of life.
So the work that we do to
support our early care and
education providers, the work
that you all as a legislature
have done and the governor has
done to invest in this field. We
have a, we have an interest in
making sure that where those
children are, that those
settings are supporting them
because if they don't get the
support now when they're most
malleable, when we have the most
opportunity to help young
children, we know that they're
gonna come and they're gonna
continue on their educational
journey, and they're going to
either be in special ed, they're
going to be a dropout, they're
gonna be all kinds of things as
you heard from the great
testimony day of the research.
Rather than expel a child, you
do a planned transition. That's
what Senate Bill 147 puts in
place. You sit down, you call in
the ECECD. You bring in the
special education, you bring in
the family, we make sure that
that child and that family is
supported. The governor's budget
this year includes a $74 million
increase for early childhood
providers, childcare providers
to move the floor of those wages
from 15 to 18. $10 million ask
for a wage scale and career.
Gladys to recognize educators
who have taken the time to get
the education to improve their
credentials. 7 million for
quality improvements in our
pre-K and childcare. There's a
real interest that we have as a
government, as a state, as a
legislature to know that when
these dollars are invested, that
the people doing that work are
helping our families and
children develop their social
competence, their emotional
maturity, their executive
function, they're getting the
professional development that
they need.
ECEC do you do more? Absolutely.
That's why we have invested in
these processes, but children
can't wait. We have to invest in
making sure that when this is
happening we know and we can
bring all the resources to bear.
So I don't want to minimize the
fact that these things happen,
but we know that these are all
of our children and that we have
to bring our supports and our
resources to bear to make sure
that they get on a good
trajectory and a quality
education comes after that, so
thank you.
Thank you, Senator. We're ready
for questions?
OK, questions from the
committee.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this very, Madam Secretary,
thank you so much for all that
you, you know.
Being involved in government for
so many years, I've seen.
And, and uh right here in the
fiscal impact that states that
It would cost external consult
consultants needed.
Ass ranged from 5000 to $50,000
a piece. Where's that money
gonna come from since I didn't
see any funding within this
Senator,
I'm gonna have Mr. Chair,
Senator Ramos, that comes in the
terms of federal federal
resources that we get into the
department also funding that we
have um through the trust fund
and then again, as I said in the
governor's, um, budget this year
is another 7 million for quality
support. So it's within the
governor's exe it's in the
executive budget to be able to
continue to build these
supports.
And make sure that
Children and young families are
supported and the educators who
care for and educate them. Mr.
Chair, Senator, so many times
here with all the people that
testified today, even on both
sides. I heard exhausted
resources.
Or I'm sorry, exhausted
resources and measures.
Can someone give me the example
of the exhausted.
Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, I
think that oftentimes a young
child has experienced a lot of
trauma, the family may also have
experienced trauma and not have
the supports and the um, uh,
skills that they need to help
support their child, so it's
making sure that um all the
investments that the state has
made in home visiting in early
intervention in our preschool
special education as well as the
other supports come to bear for
that family, so the early
childhood childcare center calls
their.
Licensing regulator, they call
their pre-K person and they say
we have a child, um, that we
feel that we have not been able
to help and we make sure that
all of the resources that we
have in the state come to bear
to help support that child and
that family, so I think what
they're saying is that they've
maybe tried strategies, um,
they've tried different things,
they've moved them in another
classroom, I mean, they, they
can speak to the different ways.
I ran 6 Head Start centers in my
early years and early childhood
and so we did see areas of
behavior.
that challenge adults, young
children are developing all of
these skills, the things that we
come to know as adults, start
here.
prenatal to age 5. And so it is
important that our early
childhood professionals have
training and skills and
credentials to be able to
understand young children's
behavior and what they're
communicating to us through that
behavior, so I think there's a
lot more we need to do to help
our early childhood workforce,
become knowledgeable, and
skilled in helping support young
children's development, and in
some cases, families and
children need a whole lot more
than what an early childhood
program is gonna offer. They're
gonna need behavior.
health may be substance use
support, and that's what the
department can do when we know
these things are happening, we
can bring not only our
resources, but the resources of
the state across many agencies.
And this might be a uh Mr.
Chair, Senator might be off the
wall question, but how many?
Uh, consultants.
Do we have throughout the state?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Ramos, we have about 200, a
little over 200.
And, and Mr. Chair, um.
Senator, or
Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, I can
get that exact distribution to
you, but we have hubs for our
childcare focus system. We have
5 regional hubs that support
they have about 150 consultants
that support both childcare and
pre-K, those programs that are
actually working through the
state's quality improvement
system, uh, that's who those
consultants, um, support,
however, we're working to have
them support all programs, um,
and then pre-K, uh, we have
another about 50 to 60 that are,
uh, funded through.
The Central Regional Education
cooperative, and they also go
out and so they, they also span
around the state and regional
hubs.
But I can get you the exact um
distribution. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, uh.
What are we going to do or
what's being done to help the
centers that already have
behavioral health specialists.
Are, are we teaming up a
consultants. How does this work?
Senator Ramos, it's an excellent
question. I think those are the
ways that we come in as a team
and we make sure that we're
supporting the family and the
educator in the classroom and
the director or the preschool
administrator, the people who
are working to make sure that
all the children um have a
quality experience. So it's
gonna vary depending on the
resources that each of the
programs have, uh, but we again.
We strive to be very
individualized and make sure
that the resources that the
state has wisely invested in are
being used to serve those who
are most mature of senator. Many
times I heard about the other
students and I think many times.
We forget about the other
students and how important
comprehend and learn during
this, during the day and.
I, I, I experienced many times,
many of us have.
That uh to the other students
that are there also a a a good
bill, but I, I just.
Is wrapping my head around this
one. But thank you so much Mr.
Chair and Senator Ramos, all I
would say is it does allow for
those out of school suspensions
up to 3 days, so if there is a
situation that needs to be
immediately um resolved because
there is a concern, then that
that's that opportunity to bring
in the extra resources so that
we don't just um.
Passing children onto other
other places and then and then
here they are, they come into
our our kindergarten program
where they're required to be
served, uh, and we had this
opportunity in their most
critical and rapid period of
development. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, thank you. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have a.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Senators, uh, can you clarify
what reasons outside of a
discipline of a child's behavior
would justify suspending,
expelling.
Or disenrolling a child.
Mr. Chair
Um, Senator Thornton, can you
repeat the question? So what
reasons outside of a discipline
or a child's behavior.
Would justify suspending
expelling.
It appears that you're what
we're saying right now is one
cannot expel a child for this
kind of or discipline or
behavioral problems.
So what would require
What would be the,
um, Senator Thornton, thank you.
That would be if a parent was
very aggressive or a parent, you
know, that they, um, that that
would not be.
Um
So, my second question then is,
how does SB 147, Mr. Chair, how
does SB 147 account for
situations where parents are
unable or unwilling when
requested.
And what recourse do providers
have in Senator Thornton,
another excellent question, and
that's why we provide for that
planned transition so that there
is a time where you say this
setting is not the right setting
for this child, the resources we
have here are not adequate. We
know of another place we're
gonna work again with the
department with other childcare
providers with the resources and
have that child, um.
Transition to another setting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
So the the next question.
Mr. Chair, the next question is
referring to.
Safety concerns, um.
as they go through, especially
if they have a a child in the in
the in the room that's
disruptive and misbehaving.
And so the, the concern I have
here is for the employees, uh,
forcing them to work unsafe and
unsupported.
Increases their stress and then
you end up with burnout. So I'm
assuming most of these.
Most of these facilities end up
burning out their teachers and,
and lose them. So,
The question I have is, uh, how
does SB 147 propose to reduce
job stress for those providers
who have to experience chair,
Senator Thornton, I think that
is always a concern of the
department, which is why the
investments you can see in our
department have doubled, um, in
the time that we, we were 5
years old, where we're the
newest department and again with
the governor's executive budget
to put these resources into
play. I think that that the 3
day up to 3 day suspension is a,
is
another tool that they have to
support the teacher and then all
the resources that the
department is investing in the
quality supports, the coaching,
you heard about the seed
initiative and people saying
they come in for one hour a day,
that is a growing cohort we just
started our second cohort of
infant early childhood mental
health consultants. I'm sorry,
could you repeat that? I'm not
sure. I'm not familiar with
that, it's called uh it's called
um the social emotional early
development initiative, which is
where we have infant early
childhood mental health
consultant.
ant s who are going into our
childcare programs, you heard
people reference it here um in
the opposition saying they only
come in one hour, they're
helping, but it is about helping
the adults in the early
childhood programs, build their
competence and confidence around
supporting children. So it is we
just had our 2nd round, so we've
about 30 of these consultants
that are not everywhere in the
state, but this is our goal and
this is the system building that
we're doing and so those.
educators have resources, um,
uh, we can continue to focus on
that and also with their um
focus consultants and their
center directors and their
assistant directors who are also
the instructional leaders in
those programs to help support
them in.
Developing children's behavior
and having to, you know, better
strategies in the classroom so
that all children can um.
Have those quality learning
environments that this state has
made huge investments in making
sure that they are there, that
we're supporting our children in
the earliest years. I just want
to make sure you said there were
30.
30 of these folks available.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
So in the bill, there is a
definition of
Wilfully caused or attempted to
cause bodily injury.
Uh, that's when a child could be
removed if they're.
Willfully caused or attempted to
cause po. So who will determine
whether that
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Thornton,
I think that will be the
provider and there could be
additional rulemaking that
happens, you know, when the bill
passes, um, that would help
define that, but that's the
opportunity for them to suspend
the child because they, it's
just not safe for the child to
be in the classroom and so they
have that time out uh while they
work on a strategy to improve
that or work on a planned
transition. Thank you very much.
A couple more questions, uh, Mr.
Chair, um,
So how will this bill impact
insurance rates on licensed
childcare provider if a child
who's misbehaving is allowed to
remain in the room, uh, people
are at risk.
Toys are at risk, other children
are at risk, and so.
Do we have any idea how this
might impact the child
provider's insurance rates.
Has that study been done?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Thornton, it, it has not, I
think in some ways the state
having this helps protect
childcare providers because they
know that this is part of the
law and that they have to be
able to support and educate all
children so um we have not done
the study, but I think in fact
it actually protects um early
childhood programs by having it
as part of the state mandate.
And I wanna correct, I'm sorry,
we have 21 seed consultants, the
infant mental health
consultants. So I thought we had
30, but we have 21, so apologize
for that.
Senator
So, I guess you may have already
answered this last question is.
is ensuring that teachers have
access to behavioral
consultants. Um, it's, it's,
it's clear to me based on some
of the testimony from the our
audience and from Crossess that.
This
These
apparently.
We heard someone from
Albuquerque mention that they've
They've had
10 expulsions in 31 years.
It's an event that occurs on a
regular basis, um.
So, so my concern here and, and
maybe this is more of a
philosophy. It appears here that
the law might and and maybe it's
not, but.
And, and then since that uh we
heard this argument from the
last gentleman who was up here
said, we need to study the
problem first.
Develop the infrastructure to
support it and it sounds like
you are doing that, you're
starting to develop that
infrastructure to support.
And then we can follow up with
the walls.
That would help implement. But
it sounds to me that we're still
not there in terms of the
Support structures that these
that these and I see a lot of
head nods are asking for.
And so, so it appears that the
state could still help, and I
think early childhood can be
very supportive in that manner,
but what, what I'm hearing from
the crowd here is that the.
The law is is being ahead of
support that they're getting at
this point. So there's not
enough support in place.
Help me if I'm misunderstanding.
Thank you, Senator Thornton.
There are 1000 licensed
childcare facilities across the
state of New Mexico. So if one
of them is spelling 10 every 30
years. Um, there's a lot of
children being expelled and
suspended um from our early
childhood centers. We hear this
anecdotally, we hear it, um, all
across the state when I travel
we hear it from families, we
hear it from childcare
providers, we hear it from
school districts. So we do not
think it's premature in any way
because of the investments that
this.
legislature and this governor
have made in early care and
education with that almost $1
billion ask in front of the
legislature for our department.
It's time that we.
Prioritize the children and the
families and the adults in those
classrooms also and this budget
asks for the governor does
exactly that. It continues to
expand these resources and
supports without this bill, we
will not have the data because
the bill asks for us for them to
report it to us, so we'll have
better data, we'll have better
resources and supports to
families and children and the
educators in the classroom and
their directors who are the
instructional leaders in that
building. We all have to work
together.
But now is the time to do that
because more children going
through the pipeline.
Preschool to prison pipeline
when they get expelled and all
of a sudden it just continues
down their educational career.
The research is clear. Um, this
is time for New Mexico to be the
leader that we are.
Research may be clear on, on
those impacted who are expelled,
but I'm wondering about the
research on those who are
remaining in the class.
are impacted by
An environment that doesn't
allow them to learn. And so, I'm
more concerned about the 80 or
90% of students who
Who are already there, who are
there to learn, and, and by
allowing the disruption to
remain in the class, that
impacts the rest of the
students, and I'm not active.
So with that I, that's, that's
my end of my statement. Thank
you very much. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, thank you, Secretary. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
bill forward. Uh, thank you to
the advocates and everyone who
stood in favor or opposition.
Mus gracias Benidos.
Uh, I have several questions,
Mr. Chairman and Senator and
secretary. There's.
This is a complex, uh, bill.
It's very clear to me, um.
But
I think it's important that we
also take into accountability
that we live in a post COVID
COVID world, Mr. Chairman, and
there's a lot of things, uh,
that are engaged there from
behavioral to mental health
issues in terms of. Um, and I
want to refer to, uh, the FIR
where it says in terms of sus
suspension and expulsion and is
strongly discouraged in New
Mexico, except in rare cases
where a child possesses a
serious safety risk, which the
bill addresses. So it says that
the bill addresses this, so.
I believe on page 2 of the bill,
line 24. Mr. Chairman, um, it
says an enrolling entity shall
not in school or out of school
suspend a child for a.
Reason related to the child's
behavior or for disciplinary
reason.
Unless it is determined by the
enrolling entity that the child
was willfully caused or
attempted to cause bodily bodily
injured or threatened serious
bodily injury to another person,
except in self-defense. So this,
Mr. Chairman gets to one of the
concerns that one of the um
One of, uh, the educators here,
um, addressed, she told a story
in Spanish about a child who
Attempted self-harm.
I and that's very concerning.
I understand that we don't have
the data.
For everything that we're trying
to address here.
But in thinking about this
specific, uh, part of the bill.
Um, following that on line 5,
page 3, it says the length of
the of an out of school
suspension given pursuant to the
subsection shall not exceed 3
school days for any individual
incident.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, secretary,
uh, senator.
I uh have a lot of questions
about this in terms of a
situation like uh lady, uh,
shared with us here.
How does that
Hold accountable in terms of a
situation where a child does
something like what she
mentioned.
How does the bill address those
situations by
Including exceeding 3 school
days for such a chair, Senator
Nava, um, thank you for that
question. I think our, our
biggest concern is for the
health and safety of that child
in that situation, children's
behavior is their their way of
communicating with us that
something is very wrong. And so
the the hope there would be that
they would be connected with um
behavioral health either infant
mental health program through
the Children, Youth and Families
department, uh, because the
child is clearly in need of
support and the family may be as
well, so they would take the 3
days.
um, to make, and I would hope,
you know, to get them the
support. Um, so I'm not sure if
I answer your question, but that
would be our idea, they would
let us know that this child had
to be suspended because of
self-harming behavior, and then
we would make sure that that
that educator and that family
and that child were connected to
the resources the state has. Mr.
Chairman, thank you, uh,
secretary.
I'm concerned that in a
situation as that, I don't
necessarily believe that 3 days
might fix the issue, so that's
I'm having problems with the,
the text, um, in terms of
addressing.
A deep concerning issue that
probably would be extensive in
terms of addressing it. Um, so,
Mr. Chairman, secretary, I
would.
Appreciate, uh, sort of
re-looking at that portion
because it's just concerning,
um, in terms of the
accountability and
Seeing it from the lens of the
student and their wellbeing.
That portion, um, concerns me,
Mr. Chairman and secretary, and
um,
I also wanted to.
Uh, ask if you are in your
planning, you all shared that,
uh, this bill was introduced 2
years ago.
Uh, Mr. Chairman secretary.
There was there any studies done
in between that time frame and
was their engagement with
providers. Um, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Nava, I think our
engagement with providers is
ongoing. We have a active early
childhood education and care
advisory council with
subcommittees. We've been
involved in a a focus redesign
effort, so specifically around
this, um, with the seed
initiative.
Further developing that resource
and also more recently with an
executive function assessment
with pre-K, so did we engage
specifically on this bill, know
what we engaged in was how we
were supporting early childhood
professionals in improving their
competence and competency in
working with children and their
social emotional development and
on the 3 day suspension, I think
what I want to say is that it's
not that the child has to come
back if that child needs extra
support. That's what our
interest is, is the health and
safety of children.
children. So, um, it's just
saying that if you're gonna just
suspend them for two weeks, uh,
you know, that's, that's a
concern, how do we bring the
child back into a learning
environment in a way that's
safe.
So we never want a child to come
back in just for the 3 days, so
I want to clarify that, but the
ongoing engagement with our
childcare professionals happens
through our advisory council
through our subcommittees and
through our focus on improving
the overall resources and
investments in the field.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary. um, on that
note, you mentioned uh planned
transition versus expulsion. Can
you provide an understanding of
the difference between,
uh thank you for that question.
I think you see the examples on
on the back of our fact sheet,
you know, a 2 year old on day
two was expelled. Don't come
back tomorrow versus sitting
down with the family.
First of all, 2 days is short
for a 2 year old, um, to adjust
to to most environments, but
that there would be a a sitting
down and a plan with the family
with the educator with the
director of the facility or the
pre-K administrator and talking
about what was not working well,
what had been tried, and then
finding a setting, um, or, uh,
again, a transition that was
planned for and supportive of
the family and the child and to
everyone else's point, to all
the children in the classroom,
we're concerned about all the
children, um.
In New Mexico. And so I think
that's the process that would
probably be more laid out in
rule, what that exactly looks
like. But the idea is rather
than just a parent comes one day
and says don't come back
anymore. um versus actually
having it be in a in a
conversation and a planned.
Transition.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary, and I completely
agree. I think we are here for
all children, um, and clearly
the data shows that children
with disabilities are
disproportionately affected by
this. Um, so on that note, uh,
does ECDC have plans to support
early childhood and education
providers with social and
emotional training consultation
or coaching. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Nava, yes, we do that um
in many different ways.
Online in person coaching and
consul. Mr. Chairman, uh,
secretary.
Are there any new plans given
the sentiments addressed by a
lot of, ah, the folks here
today, um, to provide that extra
support that is needed.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, Senator
Nava, as I said in the
governor's budget, there's $7
million increase in quality in
that vein, uh, and also in the
work that we do, um, with our
local Early childhood coalitions
and the seed consultants. So
continuing to grow that both
through federal money.
As well as um state dollars.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much, Secretary. Thank
you, Senator Pope. Greatly
appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions. Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsor and Madam Secretary.
I don't know if I've ever been
in a room where there is so much
agreement.
About what agreement about.
Expulsion is bad to
oversimplify.
Um, intervention is needed.
We hinged a great deal.
On the
Um
We built it in the true belief
that in children is what will
make for public safety outcomes
for better health outcomes, for
better educational outcomes for
the people of our state.
And here's a room full of
people.
Do all agree with that.
And so it's
Frustrating to find this point
of opposition that we can't find
a way to make this work.
We're
So close.
Um
What would it take, Mister Chair
and Madam Secretary.
To double down or triple down
and make sure that those
behavioral specialists.
We're not there for one hour a
week.
But we're there within the 3 day
time frame that we're.
Saying is the maximum a child
could be suspended.
Uh, what would it take for us to
be able to guarantee as a state.
That that specialist would be in
there to support that teacher.
And um support those families.
In that time frame.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Figueroa, excellent question and
um we can absolutely do that,
that's when we want to be there
with those specialists, that's
why we're building that
subspecialty of early childhood
professionals in our state, we
have 31 opening still, but we
have 3 inclusion specialists
that work inside the department
that also can come out that
center director with the family
and talk with them about what
the options are with our 619
coordinator or our fit um bureau
chief. Have they been screened?
Have we identified? Is there a
hearing, is there a, a vision
issue, is there a uh um uh
cognitive. Have they been
assessed and screened. That's
exactly what we want to do, and
that's why this bill is so
important because we have the
resources now. We didn't 2 years
ago.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary, I
guess that that is the core of
my question.
It seems like we're hearing from
practitioners that it's not
working out that way in the
field and you know I'm, I'm a
high school teacher, so I do
hear practitioners with a a
special heart.
Um, because they're working it
out on the ground, and if we are
not getting to them, Mr. Chair
and Madam Secretary, these
supports.
Then this piece of legislation
isn't gonna have the results we
needed to have.
Um
So you're saying we do currently
have.
Enough
Of these specialists to reach.
All of the children who are in
this situation and all the
providers and all the geographic
areas of our state, Mr. Chair,
Senator Figueroa, um, can I, um,
what I can guarantee you is that
we have people inside the
department who can take that
call and say we have to, and we
will have the resources there to
support that provider regardless
of where they are in the state,
but if we don't have this law.
That says that you have these
limitations and that this
process has to happen. We will
continue, we will not happening.
And we have to know as a
department to your point, this
was a big monumental decision we
have to be responsible for those
exact situations or not just
that child, but all the children
in that classroom and the
director bringing those
resources because the other
thing I heard is this doesn't
really happen.
Very much. So if, if that's the
case, then I think together by
us working on this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. We need to find
a way to make this work and
figure out where the disconnect
is between what's happening and
what what the department is is
thinking is happening.
Uh this whole bill, the data
piece is the immediate.
One
Because we don't know where or
how much or why it's happening
in New Mexico.
Um, and we need that piece
immediately.
I might hope it will continue to
work with the practitioners as
this moves forward to try and
see if there are other elements
that we need to write into the
bill.
That says this is our
responsibility with the state's
gonna provide, it happens.
Um, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary, everybody was
speaking about they go through a
plan, there are steps.
Which doesn't match the
information on the back of the
info sheet where it happens in 2
days, somebody's expelled. So
again, we have to find where
those disconnects are. We have
to support the early childhood
facilities that are following a
plan that are doing all of these
steps and using expulsion as a
last resort.
To protect the other, so I hope.
You will continue to work with
them.
As this bill moves forward to
add in here about what we will
provide as a state.
In this situation.
Um, I am not, I'm.
It's too important.
To cut off this conversation and
kill. I wouldn't be ready to
pass it as it is on the floor,
but I'm gonna support it today
in hopes that this conversation
continues and there's room full
of people who all believe.
That we need to handle this
better.
That expulsions need to be
reduced or eliminated in the
long run, so many people just
said we're not ready then the
question is.
What do we need to do to be
ready?
Within the next 12 months.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Senator, Senator.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Azel,
yes, we also though have the 200
plus coaches and consultants who
go in and work with educators in
the classroom and directors
around general classroom
management and other supports.
So you're right, this is a
subspecialty that is for those
situation, um, for helping.
Build that social competence, so
the goal is to have 50 of them
across the state. It's about
what Arizona has in their
subspecialty of infant mental
health consultants. I find this
appalling. These numbers I just
read off is appalling.
Our kids are just as important
out in the rural areas as they
are in Albuquerque, Santa Fe, or
Las Cruces.
Can you tell me where the
majority of these 21.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I will,
I'll get that to the committee
and get that to you. OK, well,
I, I.
Don't think that they're located
in childhood centers in the
state in the southeastern part
of the state.
And you know what?
Therein lies the problem.
Whenever we are talking about
the private providers are these.
Behavioral consultants going
into those private.
Mr. Chair, are you saying are
the consultants going into the
private businesses. Yes, they're
being asked to come in by the
private businesses and Mr.
Chairman.
Senator and secretary, I'd be
real curious to know how often
they do show up whenever there
is a request from the private
providers.
That that to me is very, very
troubling.
Uh, you said that there were $74
million that is now going into
the.
From the governor's request, is
that correct? Am I understanding
that right, Mr. Chair, Senator
Azel, 72 million just in pay
compensation increases for
childcare staff.
is in the special appropriation.
pilot quality childcare pilot,
uh, that is in, um, that, uh,
executive budget for special
appropriation and another 10
million in the operating budget
for wage scale and career
lattice to increase the
compensation of educators who do
have higher credentials and
years of experience.
Mr. Chairman, it's uh.
Is this gonna be a recurring
expense?
Mr. Chair, uh, for Senator Eel
for the wage scale and career
lattice or for that 7.
Yes.
It will be a recurring's a pilot
right now. I'm sorry, Senator,
it is to raise the floor in
childcare from 15 an hour in our
cost model to $18 an hour, uh,
so that we can ensure that we
have high quality.
people staying in our childcare
programs with education and
experience um and retaining
the retention Mr. Chairman and
Senator and Secretary, I do have
to point out, I hope everybody
in this room realizes where that
money is coming from.
Recognize it's not childhood
care programs. It's, it's for
all of education inspired stats.
Jokes that money's come from the
oil and gas chair Senator Ael I
I did get the list from my team.
We have consultants in Hobbs,
Roswell, Demming, Gallup, Silver
City.
Uh, Las Cruces, Clovis,
Albuquerque, and also at the
Acama Pueblo, so we do have
consultants around in areas that
you
therefore, they're not able to
get into these classrooms to be
able to help these educators
out.
Help the children out, help
those parents of these children
out.
And helped the parents of the
children that are affected by
this behavior in the classroom
now.
Therefore, I have a problem with
that.
But it's very important that if
this is a recurring expense to
our state and that industry I
just named the oil and gas
chairman and senator and
secretary.
How much the oil and gas
industry does fund, it's over
51%.
We all go. The problem I have
with this bill is I think it's.
Like
And I'm talking about the uh
private that this will cause the
private provider, I think can be
very overwhelming.
In case is the state gonna step
up and whenever there is a child
that is.
Disruptive enough that 80%,
let's say 80% of the classroom
is not the problem, but we have
so all that time is taken away
from the 20% problem in that
classroom.
If the parents don't want to
participate on is an expulsion.
Does that child get to come back
in and start that same behavior
over. It sounds.
And Mr. Chairman,
Senator and secretary, I want to
know if.
You have been in touch with you
said early child.
childhood
providers, but did you go and
get any.
Input from the private entities
that do make up these.
1000 early childhood centers
throughout our state.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Ezel, um,
we did meet for about an hour or
so yesterday, but we also met at
their association meeting. I
spoke there, um, a week or so
ago. We talked about this when
it was here a couple years ago,
so all of our licensed childcare
facilities are private, either
for profit or nonprofit.
And we work closely with them,
87% of them except childcare
assistance, many of them, um,
that's their primary funding
source, so again, I say that we
have, you know, an interest as a
state in making sure that they
get the support they need to
support the children and
families so that we can have um
better outcomes across the
state, so, and again it's it
doesn't seem like from what I
heard today, it's prevalent.
It's, it's, it's a few here and
there and that's why the
subspecialty that we have of 21
consultants, the 2.
100 coaches, the other resources
are available and able to
address what sounds like very.
Um
Limited instances where a child
needs to be, um, have a planned
transition.
Or be suspended, Senator, I'd
like private childcare centers
as well, so we will continue
that dialogue.
No matter what happens in this
committee.
And can't tell you the number
of.
A
op po n ent s that email me or
tell me and they are very, very
concerned because that.
That behavior that need to be.
Uh, taking out of that
particular.
School
how it is going to affect their
children. That's a problem to
me.
Whenever you are talking about
now.
As far as a private entities go,
mister. Oh, you said that there
were over I will get uh Senator,
uh Mr. Chairman, Senator, I'll
get you the exact number. I know
we have 150, um, that work with
our community based providers
and then I know we have between
50 and.
60 or more that work with, um,
both some of our community-based
and our school-based providers,
so I'll get you the exact number
though. OK, well, it's not, I
don't need a hard and fast
number 000. OK. It may be more.
OK.
And I'm assuming that they do go
into these private uh.
Private
For visitation as well, are
they?
Are they able to step in and
analogy there, but uh.
Mr. Chairman Senator, so in our,
um uh our um private businesses
that do not participate in the
state's quality improvement
system, but they rather go
through accreditation. They do
not have the same level of
support in the classroom, but if
they offer New Mexico pre-K,
then they do have support for
those pre-K classrooms, so I'm
happy to uh spend some time with
you and, and talking about that
if that's of interest to to kind
of learn how.
How those different supports are
distributed based on the type of
facility uh that that provider
has chosen. All right, I
appreciate that.
And Mr. Chairman, I do want to
point out, you know, we're
pregnant, the father of that
child.
And the mother should.
And these parent responsibility.
It's not the state.
And so basically what we are
doing and I was opposed to this
kindergarten is a good program.
Now we're taking them whenever
they have a problem with this
mister.
Chairman and senator and
secretary because.
What
What has happened to that
everybody thinks they need to
get out of the house and work.
More often than not these.
Unfortunately, that some of
these kids are so neglected.
That they can't interact with
the rest of society.
And I have a problem with that,
but that's how you fix this
problem rental involvement.
Parental involvement.
Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna go back
to some areas of the build that
I do have a problem with
whenever you're talking.
Uh, senator on in school
suspension.
I need clarification on that if
it's an in school, it means the
removal or exclusion of a child
from the general classroom or
program setting to another
setting.
Can you explain to me what the
setting might be?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Azel, it
might be to a um another.
classroom, or I mean, it would
be depending on um.
Uh, each facility is gonna have
different kinds of resources. So
the parent is working single mom
can't come pick up the child,
the child won't be anywhere, so
we want to keep them. We just
have to take them out of the
classroom, so it would vary
depending on the type of
facility, but it would mean they
wouldn't be sent home, they
would be there inside the
facility and it'd still be at
the facility, but not in the
classroom.
We see this in public schools,
um, in particular, and so in the
in the New Mexico pre-K, they
might go to a nurse's office or
they might go to um a a space in
the center, maybe the director's
office and a child care facility
where they stay so they can cool
down or get some additional
support, so they wouldn't be.
Out of the of this child is.
That might cause bodily harm to
another student.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I want to
bring into the classroom again,
all the children are of our
concern, not just that child, so
it would be.
A similar situation that they
would call for resources and and
support.
Mr. Chairman
Senator, on page 2 of your bill,
uh, it goes on down listing.
What all is gonna on page 3 of
your bill line to going down
through line 3.
I see then when it's stating
that the child has willfully
caused or threatened serious
bodily except in self-defense if
if if.
The situation
Has gone to the.
Children
Has to protect themselves and
self defense would that
instructor be hell like.
Mr. Chair.
Where you're talking about uh
A hypothetical situation.
And what can you because that
could come to a head.
If there is a very disruptive
child in that classroom that
cannot be.
Ex
The unenrolled in this program.
And the parents are.
And I do see a situation, so I'm
wondering.
About that child that is with
that instructor. So I'm.
I'm not,
I
I I what I, I think I just wanna
continue to make. These are the
learning environments where our
children 6 weeks to 5 years old
are at and we have to be
concerned about all the children
and to make sure that the
supports are there, so, um, in
terms of.
General liability um of what
happens, I think it's that we
want to bring the resources to
support. So, I'm my general
counsel is, I know here and I, I
don't think it.
These are all different
situations and so yes ma'am but
that's something that needs to
be considered if this bill is
passed and right now I think
there's lots of areas that do
need Mr. Chairman and.
Is it?
Another important question I
have whenever we are talking
about.
The different aspects.
If we're going to have this that
the state is now paying for it
even though some of them.
Or
Privately. Does the ECCD provide
a differentiated rate for the
children for special cares or
behavioral or mental Senator,
that is part of the governor's
budget in that pilot for
childcare $17 million for a
special needs rate. So if the
budget, um, the as the governor
has requested passes, yes, there
will be a special going to be
evaluated before they ever start
in these centers.
Mr. Chair, Senator Aelin, New
Mexico Pre-K, they're required
to be screened, um, and assessed
and also if.
Childcare providers who are all
private businesses either for
profit or nonprofit if they
participate in the state's
quality rating and improvement
system, then they also uh screen
and evaluate children.
And Senator, if I might, we've
got 2 other people and we are
going to get to this bill, and
we've got about 12 minutes, so
please wrap it up.
Mr. Chairman, if I don't ask the
questions now, I will ask them
on the test. I think it's very
important that the or listening
get understand.
Why I have such
A problem with with this bill,
the way it's presented today.
I'm not discouraging.
Early childhood development
centers.
But this bill does.
Have some major.
I do believe that expulsion is.
But it should also remain as an
option to all private providers
are.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, and not
a a direct expulsion because of
what we know, um, the harm that
comes to the to the child and
the family, so we do support
children being in settings that
meet their needs.
we're not doing expulsion.
child is moving to another.
Um, we're protecting the
students that are there.
We're also this, this child just
isn't.
kicked out and there's no plan.
So once again, this still allows
for that child to be removed
from.
Pre-K.
But
It basically puts in a once
again we're we're trying to and
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that,
senator. I really do.
Uh, but what happens if there's
an instance where the parents
are.
And
Whenever there is possibility of
an expulsion.
no, there's not a problem with
our child. What happens in those
has shown very aggressive in the
classroom and might be of harm
to the other students or the
instructor.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Rosel, I
think those are the that mean
that's why we want to bring in
the resources to support.
educator
Program, the facility, the
parent and the child, so, um, we
know that.
We know that there are
opportunities to help that
family and and they may not um
be willing to, and they, if they
are not complying, I mean, those
things can be worked out in the
rulemaking if a family will not
participate in part of the
planning and the transition,
those things, um, can be
addressed through rulemaking,
but I, I think for us, this is
an important one to make sure
that all children um are
protected within the early care
and education settings.
And that's an issue, Mr. Chair,
making sure that we all have to
come together in these
situations.
OK.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman.
I was in reading the FIR on the
2nd page of it, and I think
y'all may have.
Yeah, OK, and technical issues,
it states it is not clear if the
bill's guidance applies to a lot
of the people here in the room.
Yes, um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Azel, it applies to New Mexico
pre-K in school-based settings
and community-based and licensed
childcare facilities, so.
87% of our licensed childcare
facilities except state funds,
except, but so it would apply to
all licensed facilities.
OK.
Oh
I know what the cost of, oh my
gosh, it's, it's exploded, it's
exploded in the states.
Commercial liability insurance
for these private providers
sermons, senator and I agree,
Mr. Chair.
I have concern with that and
those are small businesses that
are out there, they are
employed.
And by the time that they have
to deal with the compliance with
state mandates, it's basically
gonna put them out of business.
I've heard that.
In a lot of the emails that I
have received over the weekend.
Oh
I just have a problem with.
More often than not, sometimes
these parents don't want to see
that their child had participate
in any sort of.
Program that might change this
behavior pattern.
And Mr. Chairman,
I understand what you're trying
to do here, senator.
But.
I appreciate
Thank you. And uh Senator
Maestas, we are not going to be
getting your bill today. We are
going to be starting at 8:30 on.
Wednesday instead of our usual 9
o'clock time. So just let
everybody know I we'll be
finishing this, uh, Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know
time is brief, um.
I just wanna go over a couple of
core questions. Um,
Disruptive children.
Evolve from disrupted families
usually.
And I'm wondering
Are these families through
Medicaid or whatever receiving
family counseling.
For the the issues that disrupt
the family that then affects the
child, their insecurities that
then get acted out in school.
Does this program takes the next
step of working with the family
and the parents and the
environment in the family.
Mr. Chair
We also have home visiting
within the early
um childhood department.
And then the infant mental
health program through the
Children, Youth and Families
department and all the other
resources vested in, so that's
the ideas that come together to
support the whole family and the
whole child and all the children
in particular doesn't lay that
out, but what that would be the
idea between a planned
transition and an out of school
suspension.
Um, Mr. Chair and Madam
Secretary and Senator, I think
that has to be addressed. We're
treating symptoms here, we're
not treating the disease.
And I was very concerned about.
The compensation I heard, I
would, would, would family
counseling get paid $18 an hour.
Family counselor.
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Hickey, I
do not know what family
counselor rates are, but this
would for all professionals,
entry level professionals
working in childcare. That's
what that budget app.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr.
Chair, um,
You know, this is, again, this
goes to the core. This is a
professional type of activity,
$18 an hour is worse than
McDonald's.
Um, I, you know, I, I, whoever
sets these rates and so forth.
I, I know, I mean, there's maybe
a little visitation support, but
These people need a skill base
that is one of the toughest
skill bases in the world to
acquire, and it comes through
experience as well as training,
and the experience and the
training need to be compensated
in order to be effected. So I'm,
I'm, I'm gonna vote for this
bill to pass it on, but I think
you have to address that in this
bill. I mean, it's a core
component of this in terms of
the, the family counseling. So
family counselor generally a
lower pay is probably $125.
an hour and you know, and, and
we go, oh my God, we could never
do that. Well, then you're never
gonna get to the core here. And
so we have to grapple with that,
uh, whether you do it through
contracts or the other, the uh
last piece, Mr. Chairman, is,
uh, and, and secretary and
senator, you mentioned federal
funding. Uh, I think tomorrow.
The uh president is gonna
decapitate the Department of
Education and all the funding
that comes out in that he
decapitated all NIH funding over
the weekend, reduced indirects
to 15% and they're usually 50%
in terms of grants, the you.
As you plan all of this in the
state needs to be aware. Who
knows? It's going to take
forever to get through the
courts in the meantime, there's
gonna be no money coming.
Out of OMB, which is the one
that ultimately writes the
check. So I just want you to be
aware and, and put that into
your planning as well. I don't
know that you can address it in
the bill, but I think you have
to address family counseling in
the bill, so we can prevent the
ACEs, so we can prevent then
what we're evolving into the
symptom of uh exposure or no
expulsion. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator. Um, I have just a
couple of questions and
comments, um, having been in
elementary.
principal and looking for where
other sites of in-school
suspension, they often are in
the principal's office or
something similar, uh, in early
childhood and I had a 2nd grader
inside of about a minute and a
half destroy my office one time,
um, had to get a hold of myself
and not be unhappy at the kid.
Because it wasn't his fault.
Um, and I think that's some,
what we have to remember is this
really is about education of
young children, and it's not
about the adults. It's about
education of young children and
when they're that young, it's
not their fault. Uh, it's up to
us to provide them the
discipline, the training to show
them how to react, uh.
Appropriately, I just heard
yesterday talking with my
sister, my great niece had a
biting problem at her early
childhood program. My guess is
many of you when you were 2
years old, you had a biting
problem. Most of you have
recovered and are doing much
better, I hope, but you don't
want to suspend all the kids
because they had an issue or
problem like that, and it does
happen because it's easier to do
that than to deal with the
behavior. That's what this bill
is trying to address, uh,
certainly the
Concerns and, and secretary.
I hope I continue.
Oh, the floor session has been
moved to 11:30.
So, uh, we'll continue to about
11:15.
Uh, for anybody watching. So
Senator, you might still have an
opportunity here.
Um
But yeah, we need to, to
remember, you know, it really is
about the children, uh, the ones
that have the behavior problems
often come with very high levels
of ACEs, which are not their
fault, uh, and the place where
we have an opportunity to work
on that is in the early
childhood centers, and if, even
though rare, if they're getting
expelled, suspended, and other
things. All we're doing is
pushing a society problem till
later when it's going to be
worse and be more expensive. Uh,
secretary, I hope as
You've heard that, you know, and
I kind of see the heads nodding
and, and things back and forth
that when there is one of these,
make sure that we've got a rapid
response team to get there and
to help and to do that, um, and
I see some of the head shaking.
It's your responsibility also
that when you, that you do call,
not just assume that they know
that you've got a problem child.
It's got to work both
directions, um, and I hear that
the funding is there, your
department certainly is working
towards
Getting all of that and making
sure that it's there and
available. And so, thank you. I,
I appreciate this bill. I think
it's important the national data
is clear, uh, New Mexico,
though, we often think of New
Mexico exceptionalism. We're not
that exceptional. We usually
mirror pretty closely to what's
happening other places, and my
guess is the number of
expulsions and suspensions
within the state is somewhat
hidden now from what is actually
out there in the number that
happened, partly because, as I
said, it's easier.
For the adults to move the
problem rather than to deal with
it in many cases. But this bill
really is about the children and
making sure that we're working
with them at the youngest age
when, you know, we're supposed
to be providing them the
education on how do you act, how
do you behave, and the modeling
of that and not just removing
problems. And so, uh, with that,
uh, what is the will of the
committee?
Yes, Senator, Mr. Chairman, I
moved the table. We have a
motion for a table that is
non-debatable. Uh, we go
straight to a vote, so.
Mary Anne, if you'll call the
role for a move to table.
No the table
Hickey. No. No.
Yes.
Thorn.
No
No.
So the move to table does not
pass.
So is there a motion?
Mr. Cha, I move a do pass motion
for a pass.
by Senator Hickey, if you'll
call the role on a do pass
motion.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Yes.
your soul.
Yes, so you, it does pass on a
do pass motion on a 5 to 3 vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee members. And I believe
this does move on to judiciary,
and I think a number of kind of
the technical questions about
things, uh, we'll probably get a
good hearing in judiciary. How's
that for uh euphemisms of
Help, help things often work.
That's what I was about to say.
Ernie, I just better than.
Cer Maestes and we do have a
hard stop at 15 after, so please
be aware of your time. It's up
to you, sir.
Which one would you like?
OK, so, uh, for those watching,
we're gonna go to Senate Bill
245, the charter schools as
boards of finance.
We give a few moments for the
room to
Declare people that are leaving,
please leave quickly, quietly.
Thank you. And Senator, I don't
know if you've got lots of
supporters in the room, but if
they use up all the time on, you
know, public comment, we may not
get here and you'd be back
again, so.
Senator, I think it's most
cleared out behind you, so
please go ahead with cent bill
245.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members, this is
Senate Bill 245, and it deals
with charter schools and it
provides a tweak to the charter
school statutes, but I think
it's.
Will make a big impact. It's
dealing with audits, um, and as
you know, audits, uh charter
schools that are state.
Uh, chartered
Have auditing authority. What
this will do is create a
separate auditing authority for
charter schools within a school
district. And so the crux of the
bill is on page 2 lines.
Through 17, each charter school
shall.
select its auditor, uh, have an
audit and shall pay for its own
audit.
And then it's also reflected
again, uh.
On the top of page.
Top of page 5.
Um
That locally chartered schools
shall qualify as boards of
finance.
By July 1st of the following
year 2026.
Uh, and nothing in this section
shall change any statutory or
contractual requirements.
a charting authority to oversee
and monitor its charter schools
so it doesn't.
take, it doesn't, it's not
instead of, it's in addition to.
And I think this will add to the
accountability and transparency
of the various charter schools
as well as uh as well as uh
really helped the leadership of
those various schools get a, get
a handle on their their budgets.
To speak briefly is um Max for
witness, Mr. Matthew Paul, and
then we'll maybe take 1 or 2
comments from the.
From the
Gallery, thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul from Public
charter schools of New Mexico.
This bill does two things.
First, as um, as Senator Maestas
mentioned, um, the
It, it changes the way we do
audits right now, there are two
types of authorizers for charter
schools. The state with the
public education commission and
any school district in the state
could authorize a charter
school. Right now, when we do
our audits, we are one of many
component units for that school
district. And the result of that
is we're a bit of an
afterthought when it comes to
our engagement with our
auditors. Um, their client is
the school district and their
board, not.
charter school that they, they
go look at the books at by
allowing us to select our own
auditors and get an
individualized audit done of our
books. Our schools can then have
a relationship with the auditor
to help improve our practices
more rather than just coming in,
checking files and going out and
then reporting to the school
district. So that's the first
one. The other um element as the
sponsor mentioned was uh was
allowing locally authorized
charter schools to become their
own board of finance. This is
exactly how
state authorized charter schools
work right now. It allows them
to do two things. One, get
funding directly from the state,
um, instead of flowing through a
school district, um, and, and
that allows for, for two things
that are important to us. One is
we can apply for our own state
grants. Right now we have to
jump on board a larger district
application for state grants,
and sometimes the school
district doesn't want to apply
for those grants even though it
has great alignment for our
charter schools.
Um, and so there, there's
potential for conflict or missed
out opportunities. And then
secondly, it allows um it, we do
have one small challenge um with
our school districts right now
that that is not discriminatory
against charter schools, but
impacts us. Um, when a school
district receives federal funds,
they usually take them the
indirect rate off, off the top
1512, 18%. So they take that off
the top and then distribute it
across their charter.
schools and their traditional
district schools.
Mm
by allowing locally authorized
charter schools to become their
own board of finance.
They wouldn't be missing out on
that 15 or 18% because the
charter school themselves is
still needs to administer the
grants and that indirect fund is
used for administration. School
districts received 2% of our
overall budget, that would not
change this year, which helps
them with any administrative
costs that go along with
authorizing and overseeing
charges.
Mr. Chairman, the, the, the bill
is basically 1 through 5,
sections 3 and 4.
I just tweak the statutes
22-8B-4 and 8B-6, eating with
the rights and responsibilities
and requirements, charter
schools, but it's basically a
5-page bill.
Thank you. Thank you. Out of
those in the audience here, how
many are in support of this
bill?
And those in opposition, OK,
Joe, you want to go first or
last?
OK.
Joe
You need to have the mic,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
we're, we're not totally opposed
to this bill, but we are.
opposed to taking
Uh local authorizing districts
out of the financial process,
the audit process, the grant
application process, so we would
ask that, uh, the sponsor
consider removing the.
The authorizations here for
local schools, keeping them for
state authorized school. Thank
you, Joe.
Anyone in those in the room and
some would like to come in and
speak in support.
1 or 2, again, be mindful, we've
got, we will stop at quarter
after whether we finish this or
not.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, everyone. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Asia Curry, and I am interim
director at Rio Guena's Charter
School, and we are a locally
authorized charter school in Las
Vegas. So rural communities,
small school, and I'm speaking
in support of this bill today.
Um, as a locally authorized
charter, we have a great
relationship with our district.
Um, however, as Matt discussed
as well, we are in charge of our
own finances. We have our own
business office, so we have to
manage and administer all the
grants, the way that we use our
federal funds and so the flow
through of that can sometimes
actually hinder us from doing
what we need to for the students
in our school, in our community.
And is a locally authorized
charter, having the ability to
have authority over those
finances for ourselves would
actually help us reach
Students in a more positive way,
um, as I said, we have a great
relationship with the district,
so it's not, it's not about
that, but it's being able to
really serve the students in the
best way possible. And also not
have to hinder the district as
well to do those administrative
things for a school that they're
not actually managing
curriculum, staffing, or any of
that. So I asked for it. Do you
pass on this? Thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you.
Honey?
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
knowing you appreciate brevity,
I will be very brief. Um, my, my
name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm
president of the New Mexico
Coalition of Educational
Leaders. The acronym for that is
NEMe. Also the superintendents
Association, uh, we see the
value of having separation of
audits as well. We stand in
support of this motion.
Thank you.
and one other. Please go ahead.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alisa Cooper de Uribe. I'm a
first grade bilingual teacher at
New Mexico International School,
and I also speak in support of
this bill, having the separation
of audits is a helpful idea, in
order for us to continue with
healthy accountability measures,
but primarily in terms of the
streamlining of the process for
allocating the federal funds
that we have available, it would
make the system much more
efficient for our school as its
own district to distribute the
funds.
As we need to. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone online?
No one online. So any comments
before we get to questions from
the committee.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I just wanted to um
respond a bit to the school
board's comments is one that the
oversight of charter schools
involves a contract between a uh
locally a local school district
and a charter school and that
contract must have academic
performance measures, financial
performance measures and
organizational performance
measures like how is the board
construed? Are they attending
meetings and following the Open
Meetings Act.
That doesn't go away. And so the
local authorizer, the school
district still can hold schools
accountable for financial
activity. What this does is it
adds another layer of
accountability by allowing the
PED to be able to um provide
direct oversight as well. It's
much like our state authorized
charter schools operate, um, our
state authorized charter schools
have the oversight of PED, but
the public education commission
can also hold them accountable.
And so some amount of
communication.
is really critical, um, and, and
I think it, it, it behooves
every party to make sure the
communication is there when a
school is deemed to be in
trouble from either the
authorizer or from the local
school district that they
communicate with one another and
coordinate their accountability.
It's time for questions, thank
you so much. Thank you.
Questions from the committee.
The result.
What happens if they are not uh.
By the date that you have in
here of July the first of 2020.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, then we have a
problem that they're the the
charter itself is at risk and
the school could shut down, and
I can share with you the
criteria that's out there
already. I believe every school
would, would be able to obtain
its board of finance. Really,
they probably wouldn't be in
operation right now if uh if
they struggle with that.
In light of your
Do you see this is over, I kind
of see it that way. Can you
explain to me or try to convince
me that it's not over
regulation, OK? Mr. Chair and
Senator Azel, um, it's a rare
thing that we're asking for a
little more uh support, um,
which is, which is what we're
asking for today. Um, it's not
over regulation in that the same
parties are still providing the
oversight. We still have an
auditor, we still have an
authorizer and the department
currently plays a role. What it
does is formalize those.
rules and allows us to have the
appropriate relationships with
our auditors and with the state
to get the support that we need.
Many of our schools, they're one
administrator and one business
manager, and being able to get
um expert advice in their
present unique circumstances
will help them uh uh uh manage
their finances expertly.
And Senator
On page 2 of your bill.
Starting line 12 in case people
online or out in the audience
don't.
See this is states each charter
school shall have a separate
audit from its chartering
authority, but its audit shall
be included with the charting
authority's audit.
A charter school shall select
its auditor, which need not be
the same as the chartering
authority auditor.
Each charter school shall pay
for the cost of its audit.
Right now
These audits are paid for by
those.
Am I understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Chair and Senator Azel, we
pay for our fair portion of the
audit right now.
OK, my problem here, Mr.
Chairman.
I know that the state auditors
department has a list of
approved auditors have areas.
Throughout the rural areas.
That it is so difficult to get
one auditor to do it, so we have
now was he saw the necessity for
maybe one auditor doing.
A municipality, smaller
villages, their audits and taken
in several exclusions made, and
I, I understand that, uh, they
do have to be in compliance with
what they findings were.
And I am concerned that is there
a concern.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the, the,
if we would pretty much revert
back to the status quo if there
is a lack of capacity with our
with our auditors. So currently,
every charter school is audited.
It's just mandated that it's the
same auditor as their school
district. If no one else is
available to say yes, the
charter school would likely just
use the same auditor as the
school district, just like how
it works now, but still get that
individualized attention, um.
From that out because they're
still looking at the books
already.
What happens if a school auditor
says no, I've overburdened right
now. What is the reason?
Mr. Chair, Senator, again, I
think they would just work with
the auditor that is uh
conducting the senator.
The audits are to be done
separately in the chartering of
the.
Sometimes reading this language
gets a little bit they do have
to be in compliance so they can
qualify and maintain the status.
As a board of.
Uh, my, like I said.
My problem is.
availability of these. Thank you
for your responses.
Thank you. Other questions?
Just quickly, uh, we've got
about 5 minutes.
brief
Just one question, uh.
chair
Senator. So,
Getting back to the audit issue,
it, it, it sounds like then we
have the.
Chartering authority, doing the
audit, and then you have an
additional separate auditor.
And it's my understanding,
according to the fiscal impact
report that artists typically
cost about $20,000 roughly.
Give or take.
And so and what it's also saying
that the charter school is now
responsible for. Is there any?
Is there any
Our our charter school is just
gonna have to absorb that cost
to do this additional audit.
And, and, and how are they
expected to do that? No most
charges for those watching,
there was a nod, yes.
Yeah, I saw a lot of charter
schools go, yes, we're gonna
have to pay. So, my concern here
again is, is, it seems to be do
this additional charter.
Now, benefit of what you're
saying here.
Becoming their own board of
finance.
And and go directly for. That's
the benefit of it.
And so I understand that.
Um
Without having to go through the
structure of the of the PED.
So, there's a benefit here, but
um I'm just struggling with.
With the uh cost ratio benefit.
Can you help me, maybe you can
walk me through that. Mr.
Chairman, Senator Thornton,
thank you for that. Keep in mind
today, the charter schools pitch
in.
For that district audit and here
they would absorb 100% of that
cost so it wouldn't be maybe the
full $20,000.
I would um state government
chapter charter schools, they're
asking for, so they've
determined that it's in their
interest for this to move
forward. It's my understanding.
If you're a charter school.
Affiliated with, with, with the
state. It doesn't this bill
wouldn't affectability with your
local district, it would allow
you that autonomy and.
And expertise from that auditor
and.
That's all. Thank you. And I've
got kind of a very quick
question. First, I want the same
thing about who's paying for it,
and it sounds like you're
prepared to pay for those out of
your current budgets without
additional cost. Is this
something that is required that
all charters do, or if this is
something they may do with uh
support of their local district
and if so, how does that little
contract get done?
Mr. Chair, it, it is required.
And so all locally
authorizedized schools would
transition to having their own
board of finance, while
maintaining that um they have
that uh contract with their
authorizer. And so rule might
need to be updated um from PED
which is why we have this uh
being implemented in July 1 of
2026 to provide for a year to
figure out the tinkering pieces.
We know the mechanics, but it's,
it'll look a little different
for locally authorized schools.
So, let me make sure and clarify
that all of them must do this.
So if they don't choose to, too
bad, you know, you gotta do it,
you gotta adjust your budgets to
put in 20,000 or whatever
dollars for an auditor and make
sure you secure an auditor, that
audit then becomes part of the
district's audit as a separate
piece. I know the districts are
concerned, many of their
findings often come out of the
charters that are within them,
uh, will that show up as
separate so it's not affecting
their audit?
Mr. Chair, the idea is that it's
separate, and we have a
standalone on it that we can put
on our website instead of page
300, whatever it may be of your
district audit and that they,
they would be packaged together,
but the idea is that they are
separate, yes.
Thank you.
Um
Pleasure of the committee.
Very
Motion for a due pass.
Seconded by Senator Figueroa, if
you'll call the roll, please.
boom.
Yes, and I would like to. Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And you have a due pass.
Senator, please Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much. I did vote
for, I'm, but my concern is the
auditors and the concern was
brought up by the state
auditor's chairman.
Thank you. And for those who
watching and the people in the
room who are regulars, we will
be starting at 8:30 on
Wednesday. We've gotten a bit
behind on some of the bills.
Some of them are backing up of
ones that we've rolled over a
couple of times, um, if we don't
make a lot of progress, we could
be starting even earlier come
Friday and weekends. So let's
get things moving a little bit.
We've had some very important
bills, some great discussion on
them, but we also have others we
need to get to. And so with
