Very short agenda but we got a
short amount of time in that we
close at ten forty five so
members can get down to the
floor we're going to be going a
little bit out of order today in
order to accommodate other
schedules is getting to where
people are different committees
and trying to get around so we
will start with Senate bill one
thirty one which is Center
Stourton Brandt that we're going
to jump up to Senate bill one
thirteen or cheesy Pino and then
from there I think we're going
to go in order with Senate bill
one twenty Senator pope and then
the required thirty minute
recess with senator bill one
thirty seven so.
Obviously things can change
depending on people have to move
in or out but that's the plan on
how we're going to manage things
today
Senator Stewart whenever you're
ready to present I believe this
is a doubling indoors Bill by
both LFC and public school
capital outlay oversight task
force Senator Mr chairman that
is exactly right I am so proud
of three the state agencies
slash committees that worked on
this LFC L. E. S. C. and public
school capital oversight task
force so this bill is a long
time coming we have tried for
the past twenty years to be more
equitable in our distribution of
capital outlay for schools that
has put two point seven billion
dollars into building new
schools fixing schools so it's
the long time work of the public
school of finance authority that
came about as a result of the
Zuni lawsuit so what we are
finally able to do and.
Thanks to the oil and gas
industry this year for the large
revenues that we have that will
translate into more funding for
the public schools we are
undoing the restrictions that we
have put on districts all over
the state for variety of reasons
when we passed the bill
repealing impact date we put in
there that starting next year
those districts would need to
account for what they spent on
capital as part of their local
match we are totally on doing
that provision so that impact
aid in those nine native
American districts will be fully
used by them we are undoing
what's called a offsets provided
offsets which have built up over
time and they've kept many
districts from all over the
state from even coming to the
public school capital outlay
council for funding we are
undoing the
The.
We are we are increasing the
state match for all districts by
thirty percent we're increasing
it by fifty percent for the
micro districts and we are
cutting the
local match for pre K. five
fifty percent so in addition we
are putting funding directly
into the state equalization
guarantee us to be distributed
to schools twenty five million
for school security projects
we're undoing the complicated
school security projects that we
put in place several years ago
to distribute that bump up
people know now how to do school
security we still have needs for
that this will give twenty five
million to the districts to use
as they see fit us the other
seventy five million is for
career technical pre K.
facilities and local maintenance
priorities again all local
control this is one way for
districts to use the money that
they get for pre K. facilities
without even having to go
through the public school
capital outlay council
this is this is just such an
exciting bill in part because it
reflects what we've done the
last twenty years and we've done
a really good job of making sure
that all districts have funding
for their capital needs
those are the highlights
do you have anything to that Mr
chair I'll just reiterate this
was a massive collaborative
effort and and sort of recognize
some faces that were in the
audience of health I think
because he is from yes of a
piece of a was integral in the
the authorship of this bill as
well as stand round jokey and
with the school board
association in the
superintendent so I thank you
and and will stand for for any
questions.
But we do have an amendment in
center I'm just gas would you
like to do that now yes I would
so in the distribution from the
SCG the seventy five million for
CTE in pre K. and maintenance
and the twenty five for school
security in the past of we have
not had distributions to charter
schools and so the amendment
just make sure that charter
schools also get some of this
funding and so whenever it says
districts in the bill this
amendments just acts and charter
schools.
I would like to move the
amendment in that for discussion
Senator Kernan is our second on
a second the second on the
amendment so on the amendment
any discussion from the
committee.
If not if you'll call the roll
on the amendment.
Senator brands.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes.
Center my S..
Senator Neville yes.
Senator Pinto.
Senator hello yes etcetera so
yes the amended bill
this time we'll go out to the
audience burst just a show of
hands how many people are in
favor of this particular
legislation.
Very good anyone in opposition.
There's no one in opposition if
people would like to speak on
this bill if you come up please
but recognize there's no
opposition you don't all have to
say exactly the same thing that
you're in support of it if
anybody particularly would like
to that would be wonderful
please come up I do allow only
two minutes per person to to
speak Senator.
Mr chairman I want I wanted to
add something
there's really an issue with our
the I. E. schools are tribally
controlled schools of when we
try to think that have put them
into this bill and we can't do
it legally but there is a bill
in the house house bill one
ninety eight I think that's the
right number by Representative
Lente who helps those school
supply for programs on the PED
website and I'm suggesting in
the interim I know you're not to
be chair but you'll be by in the
L. E. S. C. interim we look at
how to ensure that those schools
get more adequate funding and
I'm just committed to trying to
do that in the in.
Thank you and then I know during
the interview can reduce
committees and stuff so thank
you for giving me a little
security I appreciate that.
Of stand please.
Mr chairman thank you Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents association I'm
also a member of the public
school capitalize oversight task
force we strongly endorse these
changes you as a legislature
done great work in dealing with
these needs we've tweeted
several times this is a
necessary correct next
opportunity for us to do the
things that are necessary not we
especially appreciate the twenty
five million and seventy five
million that seventy five
million will make a tremendous.
Impact on what districts do
locally in their decision making
so thank you Mr chairman we
fully endorse this bill thank
you stand living right thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee Lillie Mae or tease
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico scored Association
and we want to thank the sponsor
for tires Lee working on this
bill over the years this is a
big improvement that's going to
help our school districts as you
know the school board
association of many proper
positions for capital outlay we
have several I would two of them
are supporting the removal or
reduction of local matching
requirements for all projects
school security pre K. funded
CTE projects the other is
supporting the offset of removal
of penalties of the pope so
capital outlay projects composed
when districts get special
legislative funding we think
these are critical there
included in the bill we thank
the senator for sponsoring this
we ask you all the favorable
considerate thank you so much
thank you very much.
Robert.
Morning the morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Robert up without to I'm a
lobbyist for McKinley hill
academy to the charter school
south valley to valley prep
academy which which is so valley
properties in south valley as
well and also with Navajo
preparatory school which is
located in Farmington area we
fully support Senate bill one
one thirty one specially
hopefully so much our schools
can access some of the PSUC
funds additionally with south
valley preparatory school.
We've been having number
conversations with with the
sponsor and fully supported
hopefully as we move forward
into interim committee we can
make some those adjustments that
do affect some of our B. I. E.
funded school so we would fully
support this bill and thank you
for your time thank you.
Yes ma'am yeah David good
morning my name is just as well
in the field of ours and I'm a
senior that attends never
preparatory school myself and a
few other students came here to
visit visit legislators to get
support for bonding for our
project LFC our capital projects
all the ideas and we are the I.
you school and we support this
bill and in the terms of the
word equity we would love to
have funds for up to hold the
button down.
There you thank you.
We would love as a with the word
equity we would love for our BA
he's going others to get funding
for the state of New Mexico and
not only for students now for
students for the future thank
you thank you.
Yes.
Yeah they've been my name is
Linda psycho good morning I'm
also from Navajo prep I'm a
junior and and the school
representative of the school I
just like to thank you all for
your time and your sign pen
process and to the legislature
did you put in today similar to
if not the I thank you all
because this change right now
will help improve not only
today's B. I. A. B. I. E.
schools but also our own our
future leaders I future to our
children well and prove their
the way they learn and teach I
sat and saga that.
Thank you.
That.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico I
think it's been well established
why the bill is a good thing and
why we support it just coming up
here to thank the sponsor with
the amendment because it now
includes all public schools so
thank you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee to see riser
Albuquerque public schools we at
this is a party bill for
Albuquerque public schools and
our board and we stand in full
support and thank you Senator
Stewart for your work on this
bill thank you.
This.
Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee instead of of course
to support this particular piece
of legislation I was honored to
be able to run the first bill on
the public school capital outlay
and PS a fait it was a really
good bill then but with the
changes that Senator has done
and senator Brandis done it's a
great bill now thank you Mr
thank you Sir.
This.
The chairman because House auto
on a registered lobbyist for Los
crucis Rio Rancho cats and
public schools and all three
superintendents in support of
this piece of legislation and
thank the sponsor for bringing
up thank you.
Thank you I believe we have one
on zoom in support so.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we're in
strong support of this
legislation as well we're in
favor of the extra distributions
in this bill especially those
for funding school security
upgrades in CTE facilities many
of our schools are still playing
catch up with security projects
to add or replace camera systems
upgrade secure like tronic entry
systems add to cure you
vestibules at school entrances
for safe visitor check ins
having a special appropriation
just for these kinds of projects
it's completely appropriate and
many of our schools many of our
state CTE programs lacked the
facilities and equipment to make
high quality modern curricula a
reality CTE programs can give
our students valuable hands on
experience and workforce
training but they need the
support to do so this bill makes
this funding more accessible
than ever for our schools and we
urge your support on this bill
thank you thank you Sir
anything for go to questions
from the committee senator.
No Mr chairman to see if you can
see we're all excited to partner
Ross was gonna stand for.
Happen to him.
Okay.
Questions from the committee
Madam thank you Mr chairman
thank you madam for jam and
Senator Brandt for bringing this
bill and you know I always
appreciate when you acknowledge
for the money comes from and I
think it's a reminder all the
time that it's very volatile
part of money so I do appreciate
that I do have a question.
You know I've had a little bit
of concern about waiting the
offsets that
obviously that's going to be
very helpful to many districts
and and so I I guess I'm on
board with that but I wonder you
know as we were doing our junior
money this time one of the
requirements was if you were
giving that money to an entity
that was going to have oversight
by your city or your county you
have to fill out a special form
where the city had to sign off
and say yes we out at except
this we think that's a good
thing and I wonder if it makes
sense going forward because I
know certainly there are some
large school districts that are
gonna get to write off a lot of
money and many times legislators
will appropriate capital outlay
dollars to community that we
don't even know they're doing
and would it be possible either
through rural or maybe an
amendment to require some sort
of acknowledgement and
acceptance of future capital
outlay dollars spot legislators
to the capital outlay process so
that we don't get the same
situation we're in now with
dollars not being spent because
the district maybe didn't have a
place to to do that
I don't know how that can be
done that I think it's a
safeguard for future
situations where we have
millions of dollars in money a
legislature has appropriated
that didn't go through the
process and now the district
staff with you know all these
dollars I can't do anything on
their own maybe they have a
different project in mind.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
that's a very thoughtful
questions but certainly I think
now we have to go to our city
our our school districts to ask
if they want these funds
certainly I don't put in
anything for APS unless I get
notice from them this school in
your district needs parity this
school in your district needs
security the school in your
district needs something else so
I think that's already built in
at the fact is these offsets
have just built up over time and
almost every district has
offsets there there's a few that
don't but there's significant it
yeah it looks like Albuquerque
has the most but not cookies the
biggest that's the only reason
why a small districts have huge
offsets that are keeping them
from coming to the public school
capital outlay
You know lake Arthur one point
three four nine million.
Offsets Lovington three point
one million offsets Santa Fe
five point nine but they never
come to public school capital
outlay because we've always had
their local match so low same is
true of the bigger cities now
because when we did house Senate
bill thirty a number of years
ago we shrunk the ability for
those districts so
even the smaller ones the the
charter schools offsets I mean
this is been building up over
time and it keeps us from
Reading the the the funding that
we have now from schools.
All over the state so this is
really designed to try to do
that well in Mr chair and I
appreciate that and I I do know
that many school districts have
done this but I I want to make
sure that when the legislature
does put that in I think
sometimes they don't check with
their district and there could
be money sitting there that is
not being used I just think it's
a safeguard to make sure and I'm
not going to trying to be in the
bill that I do hope all school
districts have been legislators
it's not the districts fall that
legislators will have given
their districts the courtesy of
saying do you need to for me to
put this in we have the right to
put our money where we want but
I do think just make sure it's
being spent by the districts is
a good thing to do but I have
another question with regard to
If if I can positive the moment
I'm very Cherry the public
school capital outlay and I
think this would be a great
topic over this next year is to
see how we can put in guardrails
so that it doesn't happen that
way and so what if you know as
kind of a topic for public
school capital outlay to look at
that over the interim so that we
don't start this process of
building it back up to direct
appropriations thank you I think
it's exciting to Representative
now appropriations Tennessee
chairman I also say that the L.
E. S. C. always at the end of
the session gives us a full
accounting of who again what
when it can't comes to education
so that's built and that I agree
we will should look at thank you
Mr chairman and then pro tem and
and actually for the very first
time last year I've appropriated
money to my school district but
they did come in no actually I
think I said to them do you need
anything that it was junior
money but that you always should
communicate I think most
legislators do that let's just
make sure secondly on the the
oversight for adequacy standards
related to our new C. tech
schools art the new correct
technical schools that are going
to be in place that would be
going forward that would not be
anything retroactive if schools
for instance with hops we
already have our school in place
we feel like we've done what's
best for Hobbs I want to be
careful that we we are
careful about developing rules
and guidelines for districts
when every districts can be a
little bit different and I'm not
sure PSC see can really I hope
that capture everything and we
don't become so stringent
because that has happened before
especially with our classroom
sizes square footage you know we
had to come before the committee
wants and and get an exception
because we had a situation we
need to do something different
in Eunice so I just want to be
really careful on that and Mr
chairman I will tell you that
you know all that more take a
speaking about.
She's our new director they have
done amazing work in interim
they have improved of their
standards they've improved the
way you look at adequacy they've
improved of the way you even
fill out the forms thank shorten
the forms it's pretty amazing
but I think the market that can
can and more
Mr chair Senator Kernan if I
understand your question
correctly you're asking if the
C. D. C.
adequate standards are going to
be go forward or they
retroactive and it's my
understanding as we received
applications this year we will
be looking at it as a go forward
to make sure their C. adequate
space needs for whatever career
technical education the district
may want so thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that and
and I know that's going to be a
bit left because building a
career technical school you know
in Hobbs we have a committee
that went all over the country
looking at schools and you know
I hope you have the expertise
will develop that expertise
going forward to make sure that
that we're watching to see how
that's done in other places
because it's a little bit of a
new thing for New Mexico but I I
do and I appreciate all your
hard work and that's that's
going to be great that's all I
have thank you.
Mr Chairman maybe we should come
down to Hopson have a little
meeting in that building and
look at it and maybe it before
and I missed it I thought I was
ill we would welcome anyone Mr
chair to to come in because I
did do a very very good job in
it is a partnership and I
appreciate in the LESC
analysis to date they mention
that that it is a community
project we're for you work with
your community it can't just all
be done through PS the OC got to
work together thank.
Thank you senator any other
questions from the committee.
Not a motion the appropriate.
The password Center Brandt
second second by Senator pope if
you'll call the roll please.
Excuse me Senator Brandt yes.
The Kernan.
Center Maestas yes moved to
explain Senator Neville yes
Senator Pinto.
Senator post yes centerfolds
yes.
Six of six is yes six zero vote.
You have a due process this is a
and as amended.
Mr chairman I I know Sir my ****
want to explain as well but I I
have failed to recognize my
partner in this of you know I
talk about R. Ellie as C. is my
favorite Canadian in part
because it is so non partisan
when we ended R. Elia C. we
unanimously supported our both
our budget in these bills and
Senator Brandt is one third to
we haven't done very many built
together so we're both kind of
excited about being on the same
bill and so Senator Brandt was
active participants in that
thank you very much yes this to
explain thank you Mr chairman
Senator Stewart I voted yes
because the best idea since
sliced bread.
It's it's fantastic thank you so
much and this is very important
bill for our schools and help
things move forward.
Is that the we use some of the
capital money that we have
thanks to oil and gas we have.
Our next as we indicated on my.
My list we're gonna have senator
Ortiz Pinos bill Senate bill one
thirteen and then followed by
Senate bill one twenty so
Senator Ortiz Pino equal
education opportunities
scholarship.
Representative morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee
Over the last few years
I've been approached by a number
of people saying you know we
need to do some way to help low
income kids take advantage of
opportunities that might be
available in some private
schools but that the family
simply can't begin to touch
And so this last summer
and that was the number of the
educators from private schools
and and from.
Advocates for the parental
choice and made very clear to
them that what we did not have a
chance of getting through was
any kind of voucher program that
would reduce the money available
to the public school systems in
our state for educating.
Children and what we've tried to
craft in this bill.
Is a bill that that walks that
fine line.
That actually limits.
And we have amendments that that
that will make real clear how
much we're limiting it to.
Foster children.
And low income children.
Those that are below the the the
the eligibility level for free
and reduced price lunches.
And our member will say no more
than four hundred of them which
was our anticipation all along
it would be a very small number.
Who would be able to get a five
thousand dollar a year
scholarship and keep in mind SCG
is twelve thousand.
So we're just asking for less
than half of what would be
available to that child if they
were to go to a public school.
And we're asking that that that
that know we're going to do a
pen and pencil amendment move
the it we were just meeting in
the hallway and I was I was
talking about the F. I. R. and
and and some of the issues that
the FY are raised about the
potential impact that that's
what I'm hearing this of Mr
chairman thank you
we're going to propose that here
and I think it's fairly simple
and I hope it it you know if it
will be a burden to add that.
Because the FIR said this is
going to cost the state almost
six million dollars this is
going to
potentially involve fourteen
hundred or fifteen hundred kids
no way but to be explicit about
that we're saying we're going to
propose an amendment that caps
it at four hundred kids
statewide would be able to
participate in this we want to
make sure the note all four
hundred were in Albuquerque so
we have that link the section
that says if you're in a small
district nope nope greater than
I think it works works out to be
eight kids or four kids are you
know depending on the size of
the district.
Might be eligible for these
scholarships and the funds for
these scholarships would come
from a foundation.
And this is the heart of the
bill the foundation would
receive donations from hopefully
corporations or businesses or or
individuals who want to support
the idea of parental choice or
per or a private school
education or parochial school
education.
But they would make a
contribution and then they would
get a tax credit for a small
what fifty percent no more than
fifty percent of their actual
contribution could be used as a
tax credit.
That tax credit could not amount
to more than.
If if they donate ten thousand
dollars thank they can't claim
more than five thousand more
than I but I think we also kept
the total amount anyone here yes
that would be a total of two
million but for a total of two
we're gonna proposing and the
caps a total of two million
dollars so that essentially what
we're doing with this bill is
opening up private schools that
have a program that's attractive
to the given family for whatever
reason maybe they're located
right next to the school and
they'll have to take a long bus
trip to go to to attend a public
school or maybe there's just a
program an arts program that
private school that they want to
take advantage of this not
available for whatever reason
the parents would prefer this
child to go there they can get a
five thousand dollar
scholarship.
The state is actually saving
seven thousand dollars each one
of those kids that money is
still available to public
education statewide.
The impact on the district is
limited by the cap we're putting
on the number of kids it can
attended in a private school in
any through this scholarship
program in any one district.
So even in Albuquerque I think
it amounts to something like a
hundred and fifty K. sixty so
one sixty seven kids is the most
that could participate in the
biggest school district and all
state.
And the impact of the state is
actually and most going to be in
terms of the tax credit anyone
here no more than two million
with the cap that we're going to
impose so we think we've walked
the fine line that permits
families to choose programs
educational programs for the
children that they feel ideal
that doesn't cost a local
district much or if any does not
cost the state anything at all
in fact we probably would have
more money available the way we
appropriate SCG you have a big
mouth you divide by the number
of students the the divisor is
lower and so you're gonna have
more SCG per student this way.
And we're saving.
The opportunity for people of
with low income or children in
foster care they would be
eligible for some of these
programs so that's why we've
we've put this together and and
Mr Mr chairman I'd like my.
expert witness is worked on me
with me on this bill would be
over on this bill a district for
a number of months now Mr JD
Bullington to say a few words
about this bill Senator should
we go ahead and move the
amendments and then let me
explain yeah I would like to to
to point out where the I'd like
him to point out where the to
the two points in the bill were
making these amendments there
additions to the bill.
Mr chairman members committee
we're gonna make three minor
amendments the first one's going
to be on page twelve online I at
the end of this section five
section five is the section.
Sure.
Nine six.
Our page twelve line I we would
add A. B. six we would have a
six here and this amendment
would read it starts off
previously on page ten words as
a department shall one two three
four five we would add six the
department shall ensure that no
more than four hundred students
per school year receive
educational scholarships
pursuant to the provisions of
the equal education
opportunities scholarship
backed.
So the department shall ensure
no more than four hundred
students per school year.
We find that.
We've we've we've got a.
I understand we do have in
writing so it's not formally
propped but we do have it okay.
Meg of the second amendment
than that so we make sure what
are absolutely correct.
The second one will be on page
sixteen.
Line three.
There will be L. period.
The total credit amount claimed
in this section shall not exceed
one million dollars.
This is the section seven there
after long to answer that's
correct there will be an L.
period the total credit amount
claimed in this section shall
not exceed one million dollars.
And at the very end of the
billing page nineteen.
We're going to do the same thing
online seven.
We're going to add a J. period.
And it will say the same thing.
The total credit amount claimed
in this section shall not exceed
one million dollars.
So these amendments place a
total cap on the total amount
that the tax credit combined
from citizens and also
corporations cannot exceed two
million dollars in the year.
And we are limiting the number
of students each year.
That can the is a scholarship to
for working on.
Following.
The following with.
Those are.
Whenever.
You're the one that is that we
get the wording in the range of.
You go ahead and get so one of
the motion on the internet.
Are you a motion and seconded
the discussion on the amendment.
Don't tell me kind of broadly we
again what this ammendment does
or how it changes with currently
in there how it clarifies things
that.
Mr chairman and and JD may be
want to add something to what
I'm saying but essentially what
we're doing with this amendment
is making sure that the issues
raised in the FIR about the
impact which we thought were
grossly exaggerated.
We want to make sure that that
that that those issues raised
are not met that is that we
we're not going to affect very
many students were trying to cap
it at four hundred statewide.
And we're trying to cap the
fiscal impact of the state of
those tax credits that a total
of no more than two million one
million of personal income tax
credit one million and corporate
income tax credits in any given
year the could be claimed
through this program.
Okay everybody followed with the
the amendments are.
The amendments and a discussion.
If not if you call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator my Estes yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator full
yes.
We are amended thank you Mr
chairman of the health on the
bill.
Quick overview of the yes if if
Mr Billington want to say a few
things about the bill so Mister
chairman of the committee I'd
like to give you an overview of
what this bill does what it what
existing line is where we've
been through the courts and all
this it's pretty simple but it
can bog down at the technical
details so here's the situation
we have nonprofit organizations
in New Mexico right now.
That are charitable
organizations and they pay the
tuition for lowincome children
to go to private schools.
The problem is they're not
getting very much in the form of
donations and so not many kids
are benefiting from these
charitable scholarships to go to
private schools so we are simply
creating an incentive for
citizens or companies to donate
more money to these non profit
organizations that will then pay
the tuition for these low income
students for students who are in
license foster care programs to
go to a private school if the
family decides that's the best
option.
Now this mechanism is often
referred to as a voucher so I
want explain real quickly the
difference between a voucher in
this bill in New Mexico vouchers
are unconstitutional because
about your means the state cuts
a check.
Backed by public money and it's
given straight to the student
and they take it straight to a
private school state of New
Mexico can not cut a check using
public money to a private school
it's unconstitutional it's also
unconstitutional Arizona because
our constitutions came in to
existence about the same time so
in Arizona with a pass to get
around the voucher problems they
passed a scholarship bill very
similar to this.
And the Arizona Supreme Court
said vouchers are clearly
unconstitutional in Arizona
however they're not on
constitutional if you use the
tax credit mechanism.
Because what's actually funding
this tuition is a private
citizen is using private money
to give it to the nonprofit
organization the nonprofit
organization pays the tuition
for a private school so we have
private money paying for the
private schooling tax credits
the legislature clearly has the
authority to do tax credits
we've got tons of them on the
books in Arizona and New Mexico
the Arizona law was challenged
it went to the United States
Supreme Court and in two
thousand and eleven.
The United States Supreme Court
said yes tax credits are
constitutional in Arizona
because when you find a tax
credit to someone you're
basically allowing them to keep
their own money there's no money
that crosses the line out of a
citizens wallet.
To the state you simply pass a
tax credit and you allow me to
keep more of my own money so the
money never crosses the line and
becomes public money you have
the authority to pass a tax
credit and you're simply
create an incentive for someone
to make a donation to a
nonprofit organization with a
private money and that is
constitutional so this is a
mechanism we're going to follow
here this is a pilot project we
want to make this available to
four hundred students a year for
a limited time.
To see if this primes the pump
and we have an additional four
hundred students per year that
now who are local income or in
foster families they have a
chance to go to private school
if if that's the choice so I
just want to highlight key
sections of the bill real quick
and then Mr chairman it's all
back in your hands on page two
at the bottom there's the
eligibility section line twenty
one eligible student means a
student who is rolled in a state
licensed foster care program or
the member of a healthful for
which the total annual income
you know allows and qualify for
free or reduced lunch those are
the only category students that
can benefit from this had to be
limited four hundred a year we
have other up section in this on
page nine this is where we
protect each school district by
strictly limiting how many
students can come out of each
district and it's based on
population size the largest
school district is Albuquerque
public schools and the formula
here is limits Albuquerque
public schools to no more than
one hundred and sixty seven
students four year to come out
of that the school district and
use this and use the
scholarship.
All a lot of this bill is
administrative.
but we have the amendments in
place I think that the the most
important point about this bill
is the big picture of who were
trying to help low income
students and students who are in
foster care and
also protecting the school
districts which is something
we've never had in this bill we
are strictly limiting the number
of students that come out of
each district so Mister chairman
members of the committee that's
that's the big picture you know
in light of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit I represent
representative of the public
included a for a long time I I
can see a lot of native students
you're not utilizing this
program.
And you know the court has
directed us to do as much as we
possibly can to help at risk
youth and so this is another
tool in the toolbox to help at
risk youth if there public
education system is not working
for them for whatever reason for
four hundred students at least
they've got another option thank
you.
Thank you Mr president with that
will stand for questions okay
and first you know just by show
of hands those in support in the
audience.
In opposition.
Thank you.
Then first those in support of
like to come up to the the
microphone please try and avoid
state is actually the same thing
do limit people to two minutes
so we saw your support so you
everyone that I have to say
exactly the same so please go
ahead good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
really in a living stand and I
am the director of community
life Rehoboth Christian school
there Gallup I'm also in a long
number help with Christian
school as well as my three
daughters we hope with this not
a typical private school we are
not just for the wealthy like
all assume the private school is
our families rely heavily on
tuition assistance and
scholarships we have been
serving communities that stand
to the Navajo Nation and is
there any public village since
nineteen oh three I believe in
our school because they have
been a large part in my
educational journey as I'm
currently in the native American
leadership in doctoral education
program at UNM with the tuition
assistance and scholarships my
parents with only middle school
education wanted this option and
work hard to keep me in a
private school from kindergarten
to high school.
I oversee our admissions
department and I often hear from
families who desire another
educational option where classes
are smaller or offer safe and
caring environment for their
children or whether children can
thrive even when challenging
even with challenging academic
needs it McKinley County the
household income is forty
thousand in this role part of
New Mexico there at least four
other private schools who need
this bill I support the equal
education opportunity
scholarships Act because our
school serves at least fifty
percent are free and reduced New
Mexico families from
kindergarten to twelfth grade
and public service seventy nine
percent native American students
seventy six percent of our
students rely on tuition
assistance we hope which
provides a holistic education
that also includes a special
education program where we work
alongside Gallup McKinley county
school district I ask that you
support this bill that can help
us to continue to teach and
nurture the mind body spirit for
students I had thank you thank
you.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning at a minister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Carissa
Johnson from Rehoboth Christian
school I've been in education
for ten years and both public
charter and private schools.
We are in support of this bill
and would like to ask for your
support as well this morning
this bill provides access to
better educational opportunities
in our area for lower income
students which are school
primarily serves as someone who
was raised in a low income
household on the Navajo
reservation my private education
was not possible without tuition
assistance and scholarships this
bill would provide yet another
opportunity for students to
succeed and to allow our current
families to continue to have
their children continue their
education at our school where
they will have the support
needed to finish their journey
to graduation and as a teacher
it's difficult to see students
who are learning and thriving in
the classroom but may have been
forced to leave our school due
to financial reasons and that's
the learning loss that we can't
make up so thank you he had.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jamie I'd and today I woke up
at four AM and maybe a three
hour drive to come here and tell
you why I believe this bill is
important and why you should
vote to pass it.
Currently I'm a junior Rehoboth
Christian school in Gallup New
Mexico growing up I've seen many
students including close friends
of mine who had to switch from
my school to public school
because of financial issues and
that's not their fault it's
nobody's fault really but I
think we can both agree that
it's not doesn't seem fair.
I believe all kids should have
the opportunity to attend any
school regardless of their
family's income and this bill is
a step towards that.
Both my parents are career long
public school educators here in
New Mexico and they chose to
send my siblings and I to
Rehoboth not just because of the
release not just because of
their beliefs but also because
of the school's atmosphere and
the quality of education.
I think there's a misconception
that all private schools are for
the wealthy and I strongly
believe the Rehoboth does not
fall into that stereotype and in
fact majority of its students
are receiving some sort of
financial aid.
The point I'm trying to get
across here is that private
schools are for everyone and
should be available to anyone.
I hope you take what I had to
say into consideration with your
decision thank you and we're
going to thank you.
Yes please.
Yet been a Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Shanti Benson I'm a junior
health Christian high school and
for the two years of attended
I've paid entirely from my own
tuition.
This is a decision I've made for
myself for the good of my
education in future over these
past two years I've had to
balance working and keeping a
steady GPA while having little
to no time for myself.
Before coming to help with I was
in public school from
kindergarten to ninth grade
through those years I felt like
I wasn't being challenged
academically and woodrat having
to go to school especially
during the pandemic that would
be days where I felt like I
didn't say a word to anyone even
though I was surrounded by
teachers and peers and those out
hour long classes however things
really began to change when I
came to help with I don't think
I can stress enough how amazing
is that part we hope it is from
other schools I can confidently
advocate for myself and many
students who came to Rio with an
experience the care and
acceptance that they were
longing for in other R. in our
previous schools I work at we
hope just before and after
school care and doing this has
also opened my eyes to what I
want to do career wise in the
future.
And I've had so many
opportunities given to me by the
help us help us to help further
my passion in the education
field.
There is a common misconception
that private schools are
exclusively for wealthy families
but me and my family are by no
means wealthy and by passing
this bill you could offer
wonderful opportunities to
families like mine.
Sorry.
Thank.
I liked and.
So
that was saying that I'm not
very good at speak for the
people.
But I would strongly compelled
to be here today.
Because this bill has the
opportunity to the other
students.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning Mr chairman and the
committee my name is Deanna
Benson I am the campus hostess
and volunteer coordinator at
Rehoboth Christian school I work
for hope it for sixteen years
I'm also a parent and alumni of
the school
I don't come from a wealthy
family I grew up on the Navajo
Nation I attended public school
all the way through the middle
school I started attending how
with when I got into high school
I come from a long line of for
hope with the tenders my mom has
a large family of thirteen
siblings nine of them which
graduated from hope with
including my mom myself and my
daughter who is now attending
Rehoboth along with two other
daughters I have experienced so
many amazing opportunities
throughout high school as a
student I worked to help my
parents pay for tuition I worked
at the phone of on program which
is a program that helps Fund the
tuition assistance program at
Rehoboth Christian school in
working in this phones on
program it helped me
establish and learned many
skills that I still use to this
day
This helped me also understand
what it took for Rehoboth to run
at the school it helped me
appreciate all the staff and
their dedication and support
that goes throughout the school
year to keep this nonprofit
going I just want to thank you
so much for this opportunity I
hope that you would support
because I know that this would
benefit many students in New
Mexico if you would offer
private education as a choice
for them so thank you for
allowing me to speak today I
hope you have wonderful day.
Isn't good morning Mr chair
members of the committee and Out
of on from New Mexico kids can
in all honesty we were not
planning to stand in support of
any private school school choice
bills for the session but
there's a couple things that
have happened over the last few
months that I think can really
change our course one we've had
the worst name result in
seventeen years our students are
on track to six point eight
percent of their lifetime
earnings that's a study from
Stanford in the Hoover institute
because of the impact of COVID
we're now on our fourth
secretary of education and the
PED in the HSD seems and massive
chaos we haven't run our school
accountability system in at
least four years and we have
students attending schools that
have single digit reading and
math proficiencies and we don't
seem to be doing anything about
it and so with all of those
reasons.
We're in full support of the
Senators action to say for our
most struggling students in our
state's last place rankings they
need an option to get what they
need that our public system
seemingly is not providing and
doesn't want to provide unless
we do something dramatic I would
love to see dramatic change in
the public school system and in
the meantime I think this is a
necessary option for the kids
that need it most most
specifically are foster children
who are seemingly in their own
sets of chaos with everything
happening at CYFD so I really
hope that this bill with its
provisions today that is limited
to the students that need it
most is really seriously
considered and we also take
action to improve the public
system for all the kids that
will continue to choose that
option thank you thank you.
But.
My name's Antonio Trujillo and
I'm representing the dice is a
Gallup and I'm principal at
Saint Joseph's mission school.
We have ten Catholic schools
eight of them all qualify and
have students that are in the
free and reduced lunch program
five of them service the native
Americans including my screen St
Bonaventure's and the room
service the Navajo Nation St
Anthony's ins any service the
the SUNY Pueblo of St Francis up
in pool state and services the
Apache have Correa and my screen
services act amounts Laguna
preservation all of our kids at
least qualify seventy percent of
our population seventy percent
qualify for the free and reduced
so this bill would be so helpful
because here's the deal.
I we work well because we're all
title one school we work with
our Eleazar and they know our
predicament and sometimes I have
principal and I won't say which
school so they don't get in
trouble but they'll call and say
all of your research in our
curriculum and here are these
books and they're going to be
thrown to the dump but before
they get thrown the right here
on the docket so we go and do
and and they they cooperate with
us we work with them they know
us especially because we're
we're we're serving the same
kids.
You know in the trenches we're
all doing the same work and I
know because we're Catholic but
I hope you understand that our
schools are over a hundred years
old in our area.
And something has gone wrong I
haven't been a principal for
thirteen years Garcia district
of requests has already gone
through I superintendents are
neighbors principles all okay
and so anyway those are the
issues were working and one of
the things that is our Guiding
Light is the the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit we've been following it
because it it affects us too and
we look at that as a model thank
you.
My name is Sarah Jane Allen I'm
from Albuquerque New Mexico
sorry chairman and members of
the committee my name is
sergeant Alan I live in
Albuquerque New Mexico and for
the last twenty seven years my
husband I have been small
business owners I am so excited
about this bill because it
complements everyone within our
state to help this unified and I
know that many business owners
and individuals within our our
state want to contribute to this
kind of effort
I a my two youngest sons attend
APS of public schools and when
someone will say anyone can
transfer to any school within
APS that did not happen for my
son I tried to transfer him in
elementary school to another
public edge Pueblo
Special education program that
had a BA therapy and I could not
do it I tried I work with uptown
I did everything I could but I
could not do it so I'm sure my
son was the exception to the
rule but this needs to be
available to low income families
so that we can have more
equality within our education of
New Mexico thank you thank you.
And last week.
No this is the last one that in
line.
This is gonna be the last one so
that it yeah mmhm thank all of
the vote.
He represents the the
archdiocese and I represent like
Dr I see.
Of chairman of the committee and
members Allen's son just
executive director New Mexico
but the Catholic bishops
we worked many times with you on
many of the issues for equity
this is about equity this is
about equity for our children to
have choices a yesterday we're
gonna hear This Is Wednesday
we're going to hear this up this
is a really will mean a a Yazzie
was here to testify.
we hear about the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and what's the
state doing but what did she do
she shared with us what she did
she had to take her children to.
A private school.
What was her option that was the
only option she had this is an
equity bill we ask you the same
spirit that we passed the
constitutional amendment of
early childhood we got a.
Turnover the turnover every rock
and find a way to do this and I
know status quo doesn't like
this.
But we need to make every effort
because the little ones they're
counting on this and this is a
pilot will learn maybe some
things have changed but we
learned to change in New Mexico
you're doing a great job you're
changing the state and I'm
watching it happen so please
support this legislation thank
you thank you are we have one in
support online Tracy Lee.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
What.
Good morning everyone I'm Tracy
Lee I am the principal at St
Bonaventure school I am a
product of private Catholic
school and.
I just want to share that we
think Bonaventure Catholic
school exists to provide
students from the rural eastern
Navajo community and surrounding
area with a quality education
with Christ at the center our
curriculum is research based
comprehensive and rooted in the
gospel values we currently serve
one hundred seven students
eighty eight families and our
student teacher ratio by the
grace of donors we are student
teacher ratio is three two one
our current.
Free and reduced lunch is that
sixty percent and none of our
students.
Are asked to pay tuition because
like I stated earlier we are a
donor based school and we would
greatly appreciate that this
bill be passed because this also
would help our students we serve
students from the Crown Point
racial past merry on a lake
Smith lake Pruitt blue water and
difference.
Communities in the continental
divide area besides that the
rural areas so we have a vast
wide array of students in our.
Minutes.
This also will help our schools
by allowing us to continue to
brought provide a quality
education for those families who
are still in need of running
water in their homes.
electricity and strong
telecommunication services in
their home private areas the
fifteenth.
So again we want to thank you
for hearing us and we are
grateful for all that we are
given and we promise that we
will be good stewards to any
funding that we receive thank
you thank you.
We do have one other one online
terror the young.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Terry Dion I indicate principal
and one line from a hold as
Christian school we've heard
from many
that represent our school this
morning what wonderful
testimonies I am a PhD student
in the teaching learning and
teacher education program at UNM
and my research interests are in
teacher preparation programs and
teacher retention.
I am in support of this bill
because I believe that our
school is inspiring our teachers
our staff are inspiring to our
students as we heard from
funding this morning.
I support this bill because I
believe that families and
students should have the option
of private schooling no matter
their household income I stand
in support of this bill because
I know that Rehoboth we provide
ridge which rigorous education
that we try to make accessible
to all our tuition model is
income based which is unique for
private education.
I stand in support of this bill
because we have teachers and
staff that represent our student
demographics forty three percent
of our staff are native our
teachers are inspiring the next
generation.
This is my first year working
for a private school and the
first time I have ever had a
student come to me and inquire
about becoming a teacher because
in his words it looks fun and I
may want to become one this
student just transferred to our
school at this semester Kandace
frightening I thank you for your
time this morning and I hope
you'll consider all of these
points that have been made this
morning thank you thank you to.
let's see of those in opposition
if you would please you'll come
the to the center to our youth
some see how many.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee lily may R. T.
so again of the Legislature lays
off of New Mexico scored
Association and you've heard
from an us and must be a before
and we have spoken on this issue
of the membership just discussed
and voted on this position as I
mentioned previously since
ninety two thousand and fourteen
and we have had it and our
platform since that time and it
still remains unapproved
membership initiative to propose
this type of legislation
regardless of the title it is
given with whether it is called
the tax credit tuition freedom
account is still becomes a
method a method of diverting and
moving money form for education
from public schools the analysis
speaks to and here's a note that
was made by PED that is not in
the state's best interest to
fund a private school system
that competes with state
supported public school systems
the FIR in the analysis also
indicates that Senate bill one
thirteen relates to Senate bill
one oh nine the education
freedom acts and then another
concern is that public private
schools are not required to
adhere to the individuals with
disabilities act that support
disabled and special needs
students that precludes of
students in many instances from
attending New Mexico scored
Association strongly opposes
vouchers tuition tax credit
tuition tax subsidies tuition
tax deductions or any program
any program which diverts money
from public schools that is our
key issue and Mr chairman Mr St
rounds from the superintendent
association had to go to another
meeting an estimate I would
voice there's a opposition to
this bill as well thank you very
much thank you in may.
Yes Sir.
The chairman members of the
committee on a moment's human.
I'm I'm one one tiny former
school board leader of the state
former school board member I'm
not opposed to supporting kids
low income.
From poverty areas I travel the
state of New Mexico on a regular
basis I walk most of the K.
through twelve schools in the
northern areas what I'm
concerned about as we say talk
about supporting all students
that's all students there's a
lot of kids major our kids come
from rural New Mexico that don't
have access to these private
institutions in their areas
how's this going to positively
impact the students second of
all I wasn't even gonna speak
today on this but come to the
committee again we hear how bad
our schools are doing I sat
through an LFC hearing on how on
an audit on to other school
districts and yet hodgepodge of
ideas nothing comes out of it.
I'm tired of hearing how that
our schools are with no bills
being introduced and how we're
going to fix this we're looking
at loopholes to move kids from
one area to another area to give
them a better opportunity we
need to stop this is sometimes
were common sense comes to die
we need to really look at the
root cause of the issues that
we're having in the state and
start addressing these issues if
I have a if I have a two state
can continue going to Walgreens
for amba soul in two weeks I
still have a tooth that's not
going to fix the problem I got a
deal with the root problem and I
agree with Senator Brandt on
some of his issues that he
brought up and and also Senator
Kernan who says we put a lot of
money into this millions of
dollars into public education
and yet we're still seeing our
numbers dead last in the state
all I ask is that we start
looking and addressing some of
these bills that are going to
fix the issues we have and the
dismiss the the failures of the
PED in Santa Fe and the the
continued change of of directors
in that position Rio Rancho
public schools has a
superintendent twenty years it
having to take direction from
someone from the pet has been
there six seven months we have
to fix the Senators thank you.
Senator thank you yes.
The.
I would just go through here
with I'm a lobbyist with
Americans for prosperity no
opposition for the bill I'm very
pro school choice this bill is
not school choice when it caps
the number of students at four
hundred students there are three
hundred twenty three thousand
plus students in New Mexico this
helps less than one thousand to
one percent.
This bill doesn't do enough for
school choice in New Mexico and
for us to spend all this time
negotiating talking and having
conversation about it we should
be doing more for more students
in New Mexico offering more
school choice for more people
this doesn't do enough that's
all I can say thank you.
Thank you do we have anyone.
One.
Okay well.
If they don't don't tell us
which would side it's hard for
them to.
To do that Senator anything you
want comment before we go to
questions from the committee.
Mr chairman if I may I would
just wanna make a couple of key
points and I want to publicly
apologize to drive up when
Warniment who I have tremendous
respect for during the interim
period I raise this issue with
our I told her I would get
together over there and spend
some time with her there's
there's a piece of the FIR that
you need to understand it
doesn't capture or reflect the
savings to the state on the SCG
side every student that would
leave the public education
system course the district would
lose a student but in terms of
the FIR to the state the way we
have structured this the tax
credit value is so far below the
value of the SCG money it is
mathematically impossible for
the state to do anything but
save money with this bill and
that of course is not captured
in the FIR the fire because
that's the way that we that they
are fires are scored we don't
have dynamic scoring they will
score that piece but please
understand mathematically that
is that that is a fact it
doesn't come out of the same pot
it's a little more complicated
than that but the state coffers
save money on the SCG side the
last thing I wanted to say Mr
chairman as I'm not representing
a client on this I'd I'm doing
this for free because I believe
in it I donate my time I'm very
familiar with the issue and when
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino came to me
and said I want to run this bill
I want to help these kids I said
I'm there with you thank you.
Thank you question from the
committee.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator Ortiz Pino
for bringing this forward.
Thank you for you know I know
the intentions here what you're
looking out for the students
especially the low income
students and giving them an
opportunity
you know I'm not here without
having those opportunities
unfortunately I had to go away
in join the military to to get
some of that and I always wonder
what we can do here in our state
to where folks don't have to
leave to get that.
A few questions so now we're
with this and we're talking
pilot program we're talking four
hundred students talking about a
scholarship.
The.
So is it five thousand dollars
that they would get the
scholarship Mr chairman and
senator pope yes five thousand
and there is a sense that on it
so it is ineffective pilot
program gives a chance to stop
after a few years and see if
it's working or not so this five
thousand dollars what.
What options would students have
I guess just understanding what
would what what are the costs of
private school.
For the students.
Well there are some elementary
private schools that five
thousand would cover the cost of
certainly you're not gonna go to
Albuquerque academy or Basti
prep for Santa Fe prep on a five
thousand dollar scholarship but.
You know it it would open up the
doors for for the possibility of
attending some schools that
might give you reduce tuition in
light of this availability of
this scholarship so we can't
really we can't really tie it to
the how much the tuition costs
we're just saying it's a five
thousand dollar scholarship and
and if you get one use it as far
as it'll take you.
So in essence in some ways it
would kind of subsidized because
the the family would still have
to cover C. additional in a way
somebody would there might be
other scholarships I mean we
don't preclude a qualifying for
another scholarship for okay and
then and then listening you know
we heard just from some of the
testimony folks calling in one
of the schools mentioned that a
lot of this is donor based some
of the schools are are paying
for some of the students that
way right now and I and I guess
my question is
It sounds as if that's not
feasible right now or maybe
there's not enough money coming
in that way and so where do we
see doing this tax
Incentive to do this I guess is
that more motivator or
why isn't this already happening
from philanthropy or from our
corporate partners to help some
of our low income students and
Mr chairman and and senator pope
of also if couple things than
the GT wanted to say something
as well on this of all the
schools already are doing a lot
of fund raising I think there
was mention to the the the the
phone calls that they make I
know the archdiocese does a big
fundraising thing for their
schools trying to raise the
money to subsidize the tuition
and and to by keeping the cost
of the school is low as possible
to attract the students but it's
still not enough and so we're
trying to add to that pool
because people who donate now
they can take a a
But contributions the deduction
on their income but but this
will be a tax credit and it
carries more value and hopefully
would be more appealing to
businesses to make this but
alleged eighty six of the.
If I may we have a commitment to
end here at quarter till eleven
because we are due on the floor
it doesn't look like there's any
way we're going to finish this
bill today so just letting
everyone know we will come pick
it back up so Mister chair I
think we can finish it right now
with a do pass motion.
I've got a number of questions
that I'd like to ask that I
think are important as well so.
Your and and that is that our
commitment all along that to
pick and choose which bills go
forward with those little bit
like we've done that so that's
and I'm willing to go an extra
five minutes or so I don't think
we're going to get all the way
through and I apologize but that
has been with this committee is
done all along this I I didn't
think we were having a floor
session today I thought we were
having a joint session for
Indian day native American day
that do we know when that that
started nine.
They were in their town already
Mr chair Senator Pinto has been
leaving the structure we.
Something.
And I guess I would refer to the
the ranking member you know as
to I don't know how long you
would need for your question if
you're I don't.
That yeah again I I'd be willing
to eleven but I just want to
remind people that yeah we tried
to do this last couple of years
and that commitment I apologize
that I hadn't said that earlier
yeah we had an awful lot of
people that may gave testimony
that took a while all the way
through so.
Mr chair I still have some
questions as well.
Yes did you want me to answer
question Mr Chairman real quick
yes let's go back polygons for
interrupting but what kind of
the the procedure within the
committee that we try and
continue to be consistent Mister
chairman Senator pope I'm only
aware I'm aware of only one
nonprofit organization in New
Mexico that pays private school
tuitions I believe it's called
educate New Mexico and I know I
know that they have struggled
financially in terms of the bill
it even being able to paint
executive director who I think
works for free there's they just
aren't attracting very much
money to help loan comes
students who need to go to a
private school they're just not
they just don't have enough
money so the ideas well let's
find an incentive may we get a
little more money to the
nonprofit organization thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair and you know
you mentioned that you know from
the SCG standpoint we're not
doing this it sounds like it's a
benefit or it's not hurting
but essentially by doing this
credit we are really kind of
reducing revenue.
From our tax base is that
correct yes Mr chairman and
senator pope yes that's probably
put the one million dollar cap
on how much could be claimed as
a tax credit from personal
income tax and one million
dollar cap per year that was the
amendment adopted to the one
million dollar cap on corporate
income tax.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
other members questions.
I never questions I suspect most
people know pretty much where
I'm coming from on this
First is there any reason that
would keep philanthropists and
others from putting
substantially more money into a
program like this.
You mean other than a tax credit
Mr chairman yes.
No there's no there's no of the
at all this is simply an
incentive we're we're trying to
incentivize.
And so Senator as we do with
affordable housing and as we do
with the health care and so on
we we give tax credits for
people who who who want to see
this opportunity present itself.
Senator do you know
approximately what percentage of
the state budget goes to public
education I was here to meeting
the other day forty six percent
okay and so unless I was a wrong
answer which is I don't well you
know we'll see where the budget
ends up this time at somewhere
around there
and so.
Approximately any money not
collected through our normal
system that we give the tax
credits you money not collected
is very similar to money spent
and so of the I think we so Mr
millionaire so what percentages
of forty six percent of the
let's say a ten billion dollar
budget would be four billion six
hundred thousand dollars for
four billion six hundred million
dollars and our tax credit would
be two million dollars so that
would reduce the total intake to
the state you're the
mathematician Mr chairman I what
percentage.
I haven't calculated that I
think it's infinitesimal it
infinitesimal it's relatively
small yes very slow of.
The concern is.
When we are doing tax credits
instead of if people really want
to support this support it
straight up you have not through
a tax credit process yeah that
that's one of my biggest
concerns you'd indicated they
were going to be four hundred a
year other than four hundred
more next year so it's eight
hundred and then four hundred
more.
The four hundred total.
Four hundred total per year so
if there are four hundred apply
this first year the next year no
one knew can come in.
Is that would be correct that's
correct the scholarships for
each for each year so I mean
it's not you know you don't get
a the a five thousand dollar
scholarship to last you for your
whole education so it is but if
each year there would be no more
than four hundred students
receiving five thousand up to
five thousand dollars
scholarship right I understand
it but so we have if for
instance four hundred begin the
first year and then continue
there would be no space the next
year for any new students coming
in until they graduate that's
true in order to transfer out or
or whatever and then there would
be some slot of we heard lots
from one particular school how
many private school options are
there in Raleigh for instance
items in rowing I don't believe
there are any private schools
Mescalero.
School district Mr little in
the skeletal or muscular Mr I I
meant I'm sorry most ghetto I
don't think there any and most
going to reserve one of the the
there are very few private
schools and all that that's why
the HSD the the impact that the
FIR said you know was was kind
of ludicrous because there are
very few private schools in the
state.
So Senator when we talk about
that there's a certain number
per district that there really
are options in many of the
districts is that true that's
true but what we've done is cap
so that Albuquerque doesn't get
all four hundred.
For the Santa Fe doesn't get
half of them we're trying to
spread it out so that if there
are schools they could
participate and the cap would
still be four hundred.
Understand where I'm coming from
is this isn't available to lots
and lots of our students because
there are no private schools
available in many parts of the
state that's right today and the
reason is because those parts of
the state or very poor there is
very little money to start a new
school and so.
I mean that's why the charter
school movement has as boom
because of that very issue.
Indicated.
This probably wouldn't work for
Santa Fe prep school.
Why would students not be able
to to use it there was a cut Mr
chairman I didn't mean to that
they couldn't use it there but a
five thousand dollar scholarship
would pay the the cost of
tuition Santa Fe prep which I'm
not sure what it is now but at
one point it was twenty thousand
a year and so if you want to go
to Santa Fe prep and you when
you apply for one of these
scholarships you're gonna need
some additional scholarship help
from somebody else because this
will only find five thousand so
it's up to the family and the
student.
Would private schools I mean we
talked about low income students
a student in foster care for
instance they're not gonna have
any other funding beyond five
thousand with the schools take
that completely or would they be
able to say no ours is seven
thousand you only have five
thousand so with that I think Mr
Chairman is our public schools
are required to take every
single student regardless of
income regardless of disability
your all of those types of
things with those same rules
apply to speak to a student
getting the scholarships I
believe so the the that if if a
student
the faster Joe you're talking
about foster kids if a foster
child applied to any of the
schools that that that we're
here today to testify and had a
five thousand dollar scholarship
that they would take them is
that what you're asking would
they say no because you cafe are
full price which is fifteen or
something what I'm saying it
would they be required to take
them or with the student have to
provide supplemental and and it
comes even more into under the
special education student with
us if you're disabilities.
With this option be available to
them and would the school be
required to provide all of the
special education services for
that student is in the public
school some of those students if
you looked on an individual
basis cost twenty thousand plus
dollars each Mr Chairman the
point of this bill is to allow
the family to pick the school
that can serve their kids needs
the best if that family says
this screen with the small
classroom size with the better
teacher pupil ratio with
teachers that are really
inspirational that's where my
child with the special education
need wants to go.
That's where that's what this
bill would make possible.
That's what it would make
possible live for the family to
make the decision about another
I'd like to let you because that
that is correct Mr Chairman
we're not changing any rules.
eligibility rules or anything in
the in the private school budget
this this this money is
available to private monies
available to a family that is
selecting a private school that
thinks that serves its needs
they can't afford to the go to
they apply at the nonprofit
organization.
Eight gosh you know if we have
five thousand dollars I think we
could I think we could I think
we can piece together pull it
off it's we're it's really it's
really just that simple.
So I don't think it's that
simple we have students are very
high needs and the schools from
what I've seen with capable of
providing for their needs.
Mr chairman I don't know why
that the fund would take that
screen yeah.
What would the family want them
to go to school they can't meet
their needs but that's in some
ways that very much I think
Senator the point is that lease
the most difficult to educate
students yes in the public
schools where there's twelve
thousand dollars and plus
federal money for special that's
not available you're absolutely
right and it it may seem unfair
to a public school teacher
principal or school board member
that they have to take all the
kids but that's the way our
system works this is just to
give a few kids whose families
want them to have access to
certain programs that
opportunity that's all it is
we're not trying to undermine
the responsibility of the public
schools or the funding of the
public schools we don't touch
that we really are touching.
Well yeah I guess I see that
very different that you know the
the schools are not under the
same regulations requirements as
far as curriculum requirements
to take every student tell of
did to manage all of the other
things that public schools are
in so if students leave for
these others it leads the more
difficult a cost on the public
schools which does change the
formula and the ability to do
that of indicate this is a pilot
project which indicates that the
plan is to scale this up know
the punch the Mr chairman thank
you for bringing that up that's
the same point I tried to make
to Senator pope we have a sunset
clause to give us a chance the
legislature chance to evaluate
is this something that's that's
worth keeping or or is it just
becoming a boondoggle or is it
something it's not it really
making a difference in our
scores are we still having
Yazzie Martinez from all of that
could be evaluated when that
when the sunset comes up and if
we don't think it's working then
we we don't extend the sense and
then please if you Mr Billington
so the but this program sunsets
in twenty twenty seven I'll be
honest with you Mr chairman the
value of the tax credit at fifty
percent is so low.
I have my doubts as to how much
it is going to generate for the
nonprofits but like Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino said we're we're
gonna get the we're going to get
a good look at it we're going to
see if it's work if it's helping
families you know in my opinion
my gosh if if you got a work
problem with the fiscal impact
at four hundred since to many
changes to one let's get.
And let's see let's see if it
works it's it's a pilot project
and a very very small limited
scale to protect the school
districts to because we know
there are students that are
dropping out of the public
schools for variety reasons and
maybe just maybe a private
option might say that kid so
let's take a look at it for four
years just to help you following
that same logic if we really a
plan to pass the care about
students and things of that sort
they can donate the money
directly instead of needing a
tax credit in order to do so
absolutely at and that would be
the preferable way this would
never be an issue or an option
but I do not see how I'm and I
that's my biggest sticking point
on all of it is.
The.
Giving away public money through
from the credit to.
through that whole process you
can call it what you want it is
a little like argue with you
please line is the same did we
have the same debate about
tickets we're giving away public
money will until you have the
ticket you don't have any public
money and and and and and until
the kid shows up in school
there's no there's no money
being drawn down by the district
so I I mean it it becomes in my
mind a semantic issue that that
we're giving away public money
because we until you until you
actually.
I'm going I I mean that you know
you and I don't see it on that
particular issue but but I I
fully respect your views and
know your long history in public
education and I respect that.
Thank you clearly I you have
yeah I'm not going to support
this I I think it's a wrong
precedent for state we're we
need to do is put effort into
our public schools I understand
in districts where there are
problems and concerns but people
leaving the public schools does
not strengthen the public
schools are I certainly and
anybody who knows me knows my
history with trying to fix the
problems I the public schools
have problems from the poverty
issues from the early childhood
education and trying to work
very much on trying to improve
those so that students do well.
But money going to private
institutions to religious
parochial schools the United
States has a long history
against doing that this even at
a small level.
Is I think does all of that but
you know it's clear you know I
did appears I probably will be
out voted on this but I just
want to make sure that you know
my opposition was very clear and
also very concerned from a
school board association are
superintendents association and
the people in public education
that are opposed to this just
fundamentally and not opposed to
helping students and children
please anyone understand your
all debate many one as far as
working towards changing things
and making things good for kids
I don't think this is the right
way to do so so we we do have a
motion and a second on the on
the floor and so if you'll call
the roll please Senator Brandt
yes ma'am Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan.
One hundred center Maestas
Senator Neville yes.
Senator Pinto Senator pope.
No I like to explain about
Senator soul no and I think I've
explained my vote.
Have in the affirmative to.
We do have a due process under
thank you Mr chair as amended as
amended just just a quick cut
two quick comments number one we
incentivize through tax credits
all the time in fact Mr chair
with all due respect you've done
that pretty well in taxed out
soon this will come to tax and
we we all do that I've done it
that's incentivizing people to
do something is part of what we
do secondarily I am a public
school person but I will tell
you I am a little disappointed
with the fear that that that
this somehow is going to distort
public education and I would
hope our school boards in our
our our superintendents
associations would would really
come to come to the table a
little bit we aren't serving all
kids in public schools and I'm
disappointed that we can't be a
little bit flexible and at the I
don't think this is a beginning
of a massive transition where
from sept a public schools it's
an opportunity for foster kids
poor kids to get an education
when they need it so you know
that's my comment and and I hope
we can change that perspective
from the public school side.
Okay
that Center pope says thank you
Mr chair you know up I love this
conversation my heart goes out
to many of folks here in the
testimony and I know there's
been so successful outcomes to
folks out here in private
schools and looking for that my
concern is is just making sure
that everyone has access and I
understand this is a pilot in
the grow.
But doing this and then for me I
know it's a small amount that
goes away from our revenue in
our public schools I just once
again.
Where is the access for everyone
in doing something like this so
that's my concern and
that's all I have Mister.
Thank you thank you very much
everybody in those who travel to
come here do appreciate we do
listen very carefully to
understand the problems I have
you know there certainly are
some disagreements in this area
appreciate everyone being here
we're a bit over time we'll try
and get down to the floor
Monday we are back to starting
at nine o'clock.
Thank you.
