We will continue as we've been
doing to to have a hard stop in
time to make the floor session
with this committee.
Um.
Anybody has is it aware we have
a limit public testimony to two
minutes a person in same for
people that are online people on
line make sure that you were in
the queue if you want to testify
on a particular bill and
indicate whether you are for or
against it so are zoom operators
can help us continue to be
efficient and the other
questions comments are in things
for we get started.
If not understood thank you for
being here right nearly just as
we get started and perceived
you here for a senate bill one
thirty seven the school work
training bill
thank you mister chairman more.
This bill came from the
legislative education study
committee.
And it it deals with changing
school boards to make them more
effective than better
right now we don't really have
any sting and start you about
training for school board
members so this proposes to put
a mandatory training ten hours
the first year five hours to
every year there after and at
least out what that training
should cover everything from
phone answer budgeting to policy
making to assessment et cetera
so
we have uh
it also requires there's no unit
in the last committed they said
well what are you going to do
it
and I said you know the
education community doesn't
really respond well to threats
but what they will be required
to do is report that training on
their website and then new
mexico and in this does which is
the PED website will also report
that who's gotten the training
and who hasn't so we're hoping
that that sort of public
acknowledgement of training or
not will a promote more more
school board members take this
seriously.
So i've gone over the training
it also looks at the school
boards a campaign reporting
right now you only have to file
a campaign report when you write
for school board if you live in
a city over twelve thousand and
you don't have to do any
reporting if you spend under
five hundred dollars we're
increasing that to a thousand
dollars but we're impossible on
everyone.
It will remain the same for
these small little districts
by giving them at least a
thousand dollars to spend
without having to follow report
you know they can put an out of
the paper they can make what
cards i'm very different than
the more competitive races and
the bigger cities nevertheless
they they will be under that
campaign reporting act.
Originally the bill said that
school board members could not
take action in the first sixty
days for a dealing with the
superintendent after a much
discussion with joking and
others are the amendment that
we're going to propose extense
that from the time school boards
are elected until sixty days
after they take their sworn in
it take their office this is
just so that earth roger school
board members don't extend the
contract for five years and then
you need to pay out or fire
someone just because they can
because that's what they ran on
it it provides a little bit more
consistent see and at time
period where these new school
board members can try to learn
their trade ninth side after
sixty days but we do leave in
there if there's cause they
can't terminate.
Up so mischairman I do have the
amendment and it's I don't like
these linked the amendments but
it was needed so here it is so
can I go through that for you.
Yes
floor leader protem whatever I
don't have titles and
yes please we need to have a
motion for discussion
that we move for discussion if
you please yet so it does in the
title where adding on page on
page one line fifteen
we are insert after boards we
insert contract extension or so
that since would be limiting a
local school boards contract
extension or termination of a
superintendent after school
board election and
that that actually is on the
last page of the amendment.
On page nine.
We strike that top line on page
nine and then we undersearch.
A local school board shall not
during any time between the date
of the regular local election
which school board positions are
on the ballot and sixty days
after the convening of the newly
elected board or until sixty
days after a majority of a local
school board has been a point
pointed they can't extend the
locals superintendents contract
or terminate the local
superintendent without cars
that's the main need of the
amendment even though it's on
the last page of the rest of its
we had to go in and make changes
to the campaign reporting at
four school board members
so you see on that first page as
where we've raised it to a
thousand dollars you can spend
on your election without having
to follow report but after that
then everyone house to.
The.
Up so as hers walking in I was a
talk to fire someone in the
audience one of your usuals what
were requiring school boards to
do is to
most of them do this now a
beyond line for their school
board meetings and then.
Have that available for people
to look at for five years those
the suggestion is five years
seems too long and too
cumbersome and we cut it down to
three I am fine with them that's
not on the amendment so we could
discuss that at the end so I
probably have forgotten
something but i'll stop for now
okay so we are on the immense so
comments from
the audience on the amendment
stand of those in support for
stand.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
standard for the supertendence
association and the college of
educational leaders we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward and also for
the amendment as it said that
the concept is that once an
election occurs local district.
We have a fallow period for the
time until the actually take
their seats as a board plus an
additional sixty days or we
don't go through contract
revision or termination of the
superintendent we've talked a
lot before this committee about
the need for consistency of
management consistency of
approach and this is a way of
being able to parcel that into
the bill and give us some
guarantees so we thank you and
we want to thank the sponsor for
her help
thank you stand others yes great
thank you mister kind of line up
I would be helpful
thank you mister chair and think
the sponsor for bringing the
amendment forward the agency for
the same reasons it's stand at
illuminated is in support of
this to improve the consistency
that we have with
superintendents over time that
is a concern that the agency has
at present and we believe that
this is one measure that can
help to support that thank you
thank you very much mister
lilli artist for visa mean
legislative lays on for the new
mexico school board association
we want to think the sponsors
for working with the word
association are the senator has
worked with our executive
director joking and multiple
times and come in together with
this language we believe this
language language will help
develop a best practice for the
transition of leadership and
we're having new boards coming
in and we thank the senator for
working with the school part
association and said the same
reason that mr rounds indicated
we believe this is a good move
on this amendment thank you.
Thank you
mr chair members of the
committee no comment on them the
amendment as a currently stands
but i'll self identify as as the
person who approached the
sponsor about the five years
that would be about a hundred
hours of of data storage and so
if there isn't a real committed
reason for five years two or
three seems reasonable with with
knowledge that the minutes would
be there and perpetuity so thank
you thank you anyone else in the
room in favor
anyone online in favor is there
anyone in opposition.
Seen questions from the
committee about the amendment.
The.
See no questions.
Senator so mr
amendment to the amendment of
yeah change to yes change the
number years that.
The video documentation has to
be maintained yes and mister
terman it's on two places that
them page eleven line twenty
two.
We could change the five to
three and then it's
on
the very last page.
Point sixteen a week they make
sure we get things straight are
we including this in the
amendment or is this a separate
amendment to the document it's
totally up to you
and it's fine it doesn't matter
to me however the best
you just know when make sure I
take care marian and she's told
me this work okay
we're good okay senator would
you like to make your motion
for.
I think we've got it is there
any opposition to changing it
from five years to two years
first on the three years on the
amendment.
So we'll just have one
amendment.
Okay.
So is yours.
Adopt the amendment there are
second sec I second I guess by
senator pope you'll call the
role please on the amendment
senator brand center gay goes
sender yes senator my yes
senator novel said pinto
senator pope yes sender soul yes
so we have an amended building
so back under the main bill
anything else on that senator I
don't think so I think i've
explained it.
Okay well I know.
Out to the audience those in
support first on the main bill
and if you will.
Line up please.
Okay.
Yes please go ahead
thank you mister chair and think
things again to the sponsor
there the school boards are an
incredibly important part of the
educational process and we feel
like this bill will add
additional support for school
boards and again will support
with stability for our
superintendents as well and so
the public education department
is in support of sp one thirty
seven thank you.
And miss chairman standard again
for the school superintendent
sand.
Coalition of educational leaders
for the reasons we've mentioned
already we support the spell
again when I think the sponsor
will bring it for
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee lily
artists legislator lays up at
the school board association I
just wanted to touch on the
three pieces of the legislation
that affects school boards that
work part of the amendment the
training we just want to say may
if you hold the mike down just a
little bit it won't that's there
thank you mister chairman the
training whim I say is is
critical for school board
members to receive a new mexico
compared association has for
decades in training schoolboard
members throughout the state I
was a score member nineteen
ninety seven for ten years and I
received twenty and thirty hours
of training annually so the
scored association does a good
job by gaving the training out
there we believe
institutionalizing the
requirement will hopefully make
more of our borders complaint we
have the majority of the board
members comply it now and so we
we think this is a good thing in
terms of the campaign reporting
we had preferred that the small
districts are excluded from that
and in the past had applicated
for that this now includes all
districts the definition changes
changed to that and now we hope
that it doesn't dissuade any
members and candidates for money
for school board because and
some of the rollers is difficult
for them to get all line and get
that campaign reported done and
then the last peace regarding
the web casting and archives of
the medias we thank the senator
for reducing the amount to three
years we are concerned that
because it was an unten funded
mandate of school boards we're
doing this during the pandemic
they still have the funds now to
especially the smaller districts
provide this service and make
might need technical assistance
and make you sure that they can
do this whether long run but we
support the bill we support the
internet we thank the senator
for working so hard with us all
this time and we ask your
support as well.
Thank you lily
mr chair members of the
committee map paul with public
charter schools of new mexico
first I just want to think you
all as committee members in the
sponsor for making that change
on the the whole thing of the
the of that the recordings
charter schools have actually
been under provisions such as
this for over eight years and
I I don't know if we'll claim
that this is a charter
innovation that's been taken on
by the by the entire day of
public schools but I do ever
learning that I want to share
from that is
we've had these categories
things of that nature the boards
and this actually reflected in
the audit wint when a board does
not complete their training it
turns into an audit finding so
for those of you there is that
question that was possible is
done where the accountability is
that shows up there and I think
that's a that's a good mechanism
in this case and a very good
bill from the sponsor so thank
you
thank you matt
thank you mr chair members of
the committee and mason graham
i'm the policy director for
comic calls i'll be brief I
wanna think the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward we
are in strong support of this
bill because of the increase in
transparency and disclosure for
school boards and school board
candidates and it's important
that we hold our school board
meetings and elections up to a
standard that we hold other
elections commissions and boards
when in regards to open meetings
and reasonable campaign
financing thank you thank you
good morning mr chair members of
the committee my name is
mandatories education director
for thinking mexico we sent him
full support of sp one thirty
seven new mexico school words
paid critical rule on improving
district budget hiring a
superintendent and setting the
tone on culture and expectations
for schools and students and we
deeply appreciate those who are
committed to take on this task
we need their leadership and
understanding of their
communities in order to help set
our students up for success yet
as important as the role is for
school board in terms of charter
school board members.
Current law does not specify the
training as you have heard as
they should receive such as for
how budgets work how to support
superintendents and how to set
achievement goals and monitor
the outcomes send it by one
thirty seven will ensure that
all school board and charter
school board members are
empowered with the information
they need to do their best work
by increasing the minimum hours
of training senate bill one
thirty seven would also bring
your mexico in line with forty
four other states that currently
require all school board
candidates to disclose their
donors and our current law only
school board met members and
districts larger than twelve
thousand students are required
to disclose who gives money to
their election campaigns that's
just five of our eighty nine
districts in the state
finally
sb one thirty seven or to a
prior that schoolboard members
and charter board meanings be
webcast and recordings and
minutes be posted online this
will make it easier for parents
and community members and all
voters to follow the work of
their local school boards and
the effective and the
effectiveness of their members
representing them we strongly
support these reforms and we
commissioned a point twenty
twenty three and found
it was overseen by union
professor doctor gabriel sanchez
and found the eighty eight
percent of respondents require
supporting requiring school
board members to receive the
train specific training
and eighty seven percent in the
mexico border support requiring
boards to webcast their meetings
thank you thank you.
Just honest
good morning good morning mister
chair
and members of the committee
steve shiannes with any in a
mexico among behalf of our
members we strongly support
speed one thirty seven it's a
solid build we think the sponsor
for bringing it forth it makes
common sense let's embassed in
our people in our board members
and in result we're gonna have
thoughtful decisions and that's
going to benefit our schools and
our students so for that we
support this bill and we ask
that you support it as well
thank you
thank you we have more people
online and that will hear from
them again people online no more
than you don't have to go the
whole time but no more than two
minutes first to be gabby began
and then hope more.
Good morning mr chairman a
members of the committee my name
is gabriel begay and I am
serving my second here as an
elected school board member in
cobra consolidated schools as a
newer board member I need access
to training that's visited
civically aligns with my duties
as a board member like improving
student academic performance and
outcomes public school finance
and budgeting and strategies for
supporting and supervising the
local superintendent because
these topics will help me
prepare to make informed votes
for my district
although these are things I can
currently seek out this bill
will ensure all these sessions
are priorities and that all
board members across our state
participate in these essential
sessions giving communities
assurance that we have been
trained on these issues this
legislation provides the
expectation for support
transparency and accountability
for school words across the
state
I also support campaign fund
fund reporting the nepertism
class and the web casting of
school board meetings I want to
be as transparent as possible
this bill outlined simple things
that will guide me and help me
in my role as is as a school
board member my experience has
been rewarding and I look
forward to improving as a school
board member I stand in support
of this bill thank you for your
time thank you miss begay nexus
hope what alize followed by
emily will do.
The.
Good morning mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is hope moralis and i'm the
executive director for teach
plus new mexico I have recently
completed serving a four year
term on the rosal school board
spending over two years as
president.
Currently expectation for
charter boards are higher than
district school boards.
And although the major duties of
a board member is focused on
budget policy super ten any
valuation that should all be
aligned to the strategic plan it
did it mean that as a board
member I was required to attend
training on any of those topics
it was only recommended.
The proposed legislation
in the proposed legislation will
increase hours to match harder
boards and will require training
on topics that clearly align
with the duties of the position
at the september twenty twenty
three lec meeting it was
reported that one hundred board
members did not meet their
training requirements and of
those forty eight did not attend
any training there is currently
no way for community members to
know if their board members are
meeting these requirements this
legislation supports
transparency and will be
reported on the end of the
vistas which also highlights
district and school data this is
important because board members
are an active tea member in the
progress made by schools and
districts the legislation
provides targeted support and
transparency which is greatly
needed thank you mister chair.
Thank you hope next emily will
doubt followed by serious its
gerald.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee i'm among well
down with new mexico voices for
children and we support this
bell think you senator stewart
for carrying sp one thirty seven
we are we support this bill
because we believe that the
mandatory required relevant
training for our school boards
will ultimately support our
student outcomes because they'll
have stronger skills in leading
and supporting their districts
and we also support the pieces
of the bell related to
transparency and improving
campaign reporting requirements
and webcasting and archiving
requirements for school bird
meetings so we ask the committee
to join us and supporting sp one
thirty seven thank you thank you
every service general.
Good morning mr chair members of
the committee i'm service girl
senior vice president of the
greater album chamber of
commerce we're in strong support
of this bill and we think
senator stewart for bringing it
leadership matters and it starts
at the tap our local school
board set the tone for our
district administrators and our
principles who in turn lead
schools of hundreds sometimes
even thousands of kids this bill
will help them attain the skills
they need like an awareness of
financial legal topics and the
value of data for helping
students set and reach academic
performance calls this is also
going to improve transparency
excuse me to make sure families
can hold their board members
accountable for their actions
our students and families have a
right to expect their district
leaders to give them their very
bust in the spill creates new
supports to help or members
deliver thank you.
Thank you and one more online
burden matter that.
S thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee and
marifician and i'm speaking on
behalf of the legal and voters
of new mexico and the american
association of university women
I don't need to repeat all of
the reasons why this is a great
bill
and been worked on for for quite
a long time and i'd like the
amendment I think no of one
point that hasn't been
emphasised enough is that it
will help to engage the
community parents
like students can watch his
webcase in understand the issues
more fully and lot of times
decisions are made nobody
understands why we can see an
article in the paper but they
can't go into the the depth of
topics that are covered in a
school board meeting I think
this is a win win and long
overdue and I appreciate all the
other comments but I don't need
to repeat them so I urge your
support thank you
thank you
is there anyone in the room in
opposition to this legislation.
It went on line.
So seeing none would go question
well I always like center
anything you want to comment
after public comment abnor what
great public comment
questions from the committee.
Is there a hike.
Thank you for bringing this
really important bill and
having had citizen boards and in
my past with not for profits and
and so forth
in a way in in companies we tend
to spend a lot of time and
training people that we often
forget about the board in the
board the board is at the top
and then becoming incredibly now
edgeable is really important to
understand the no wants it so I
really commend that compared of
as well as the other logical
steps just one question for you
if I may mister chair madame
protest is there a possibility
in the future that we might even
extend the training time
requirements for the board but I
mean that this is a good start
but again such a complicated
issue in such a tough issue in
new mexico I would hope that
they might be able to get even
further training thank you
mister chair but while mr
chairman and senator hickey
that's a great comment I should
tell you that many boards go
beyond what we're requiring
there's there's train there's a
lot of training offered by the
school board association through
ped so
we offered training all the time
we can get training at the same
kind of legal training so this
has just setting up minimum that
they must do at least ten hours
the first in five hours every
year after so uh so many of them
do.
Thank you senator gay goes.
The.
Is german and protempt thank you
for this
I didn't get see the amendment
last night and I know that's all
in the campaign finance part
i've been on school board for
over twenty years have never had
to spend a dime earned small
community different than alba or
last crucials or they are more
contested races.
So so that really didn't affect
me what i'm wondering about
mister chairman protein is we
currently have two for school
board we have lost conference in
may june and then we also have
this week come up on our um.
I had right it down
and looked at the you know
starting online page nine the
requirements we already do that
was couple association is there
reason we just trying to make it
a mandated instead of a.
Chairman we are trying to put it
to statute so that everyone has
to do it now plenty of board
members get training i'll give
you some statistics though that
I was surprised at that.
So we have four hundred and
forty seven school board
members.
Why actually this is for the
there is only sixty one that
failed campaign finance reports
that's not about that but.
But there are there just our
school board members that just
don't author and so this is
trying to get.
Transparency
more buying and also to really
lay out
what school board members need
to know because they're toughing
and start to.
Yes
training i've been to the
conferences
this is a way to make it high
quality and required and showing
the public that you're taking
your job seriously in you
thank you for them and go to him
sir I I think we're already high
quality I think school board
sociation has done that but my
next question mister man
protempt is so.
As as we go through the week.
My obligation is here so make
the breakfast but not merit or
we can have since it can be
mandated now are we gonna have
any honline training for those
of us that can't make the
required and I only have the
five hours so I can do it during
law conference but if I don't it
sort of a hindrance and I think
right now there's two school
more members in the legislative.
But it's one of things are they
all going to be in person or we
can have some online trying
going back to
I guess I don't met miss
chairman madame protemp don't
want to come out the middle of
the session and that during the
year and found out a miss my
opportunity on my five hours and
they get removed from the school
board.
Little bit different from what
they did to
other school boards but I just
wanted to make sure that there's
an option for me and others
they're in the legislature that
don't have the time constraint
to make the very very good
classes they have prepared force
this friday's possibly saturday
because it if we don't have
floor session we are having so
though they may have been but it
just goes to that point our
obligation is here even though
i'm on school board and I need
the education are there other
options and mister chairman so
someone else in the audience
were probably correct me if I
give this wrong but it's my
understanding that there is not
once at training.
It is on I just have to talk
into it.
So there is not one to set
training that you have to do the
training sir offered you round
so I think there's just a lot of
flexibility I think there is
some online so
I I don't know if anybody else
wants to answer that but yeah
everybody.
Yeah.
They thank you so much mister
charles
yes is multiple opportunities we
actually have the scoperide
association.
Lillimerty school were
associated the scores are
stationed has four conferences
throughout the year aboard
institute now
and there's over you can get any
board member easily get five
hours a training if they attend
the entire conference we also
have the law conference in june
and then we also have a
leadership institute in july and
then we have the annual
conference in december four
opportunities you can get five
hours of training on one
conference if you're diligent
and you take advantage of all of
the sessions we do have some
online classes that are provided
and then also there is the
opportunity for some boards ask
our executive director or by
some to could do some training
for board members at on site for
them so there's opportunities
there's no reason why a board
member cannot get fires a
training one year the
schoolboard association is
committed to train and to help
and make our board members the
best
leaders in their community
restaurant
protect can I ask her one
question
so really may on our regional
meetings those also can't
forward this five hours yes
there were some yes the regional
media's has some level of tradie
i'm i'm not sure exactly if it's
an an hour and a half and a half
but they do give you credit
credit is given the scored
association logs the multiple
numbers of hours that you've
taken that that is something
that takes some time in some
effort but we have an individual
that works on listing all of the
training you've taken you sign
in for the session to there are
you you get the word in the
benefits of being there and so
we we keep track of that
regional meetings also cancel
those multiple multiple multiple
opportunities to get the
train and one has point
if I might yeah that you might
add also the national conference
of the training so anyone who
attends that absolute than the
national school thank you
senator the national scoreword
association has their annual
conference I attended that many
years I was an officer in the
school word association at the.
State and national level the
training executive you can get
lots of training there as well
so there's no reason that there
were not enough opportunities
for a board member to get the
five for the ten hours annually
really quick though for only may
steps down mister protemilletly
may so
is a national for leadership
only just basic or mr chairman
as i've never been invited to
that oh mr chairman senator
anyone that his registration
began to tell the national
association I could attend i'm
not abortion of any longer but I
could intend if I take the
registration and get benefit of
this of the training sessions in
the final piece of mister um
then protem little may is on the
leadership stuff i've tried fill
out the application get that
started a due to time
constraints with this position
that doesn't work so I
understand the leadership pieces
that are round the state but if
you're not part of that training
already I don't seem to come
into towers to your leadership
if not not in your leadership
group i'm just saying there are
other options but you have to be
a failable for them out of time
and in that proof so I still
think there again I don't think
the five hours is bad I actually
like it better to when scandals
in i'd ask multiple times we had
people that would not come.
To any train in units.
And I asked what to take to get
us out and they wouldn't
enforcing so I hope that this is
acting force not just uhm.
Putting an information out there
to make spilled it.
But I can see that for certain
people it may be harder
especially at the ten hour level
then the fire but I like the
idea like the options I just
want to make sure we had
everything out on the table and
that the public knew you have
already had this in place prior
to this bill because it sounds
like it's new it's not so
with that are you I think thank
you married my response mister
chairman thank you mister terman
senator the scored association
is committed to training and
support members of a board or an
individual for particular
reasons specific reasons needs
training we will work with them
to make sure it occurs.
Thank you thank you thank you
center thank you really may
assert
thank you mister chairman thank
you
and I appreciate this bill it's
pretty cool I have.
Mr chairman
a couple hours on dec.
I think they cover that i've
seen their journals they have
some things like that I think
this is what they need to be at
school board members so.
You know this was worked out you
can't put everything in a bill
can account really in where you
can't really legislate good
behavior.
It's very hard to legislate
could be.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you as there should know it's up
there's kind of simple just good
old fashioned techniques that
democracies have used through
time.
There's some city council.
Appearing that I watch that I
cringed you know that they are
we should be proud of ourselves
up here in south of the decorm
that we have in the simple rules
like don't.
Don't question someone's motor
just little things like that or
necessary to govern
but I I know that the attorney
general's office is tasked with.
With training and things that
nature know if it does or not
but but these are fantastic
training tools that the board
some.
Hopefully will become more
empowered I think every board
should have their own council.
Ah I know that there's every
school district has its own
council but if there is a
complete between the super in
the board who is the.
You know who is the lawyer
represent but anyway this is
awesome and I I support the bill
thank you.
Thank you and just a comment the
the mountain training that the
board association does carries
out is wonderful and they've got
a difficult task as they've got
new board members and they've
got board members have been
there for fifteen years and
trying to keep them engaged and
so some of the higher level ones
about running a meeting and
robert's rules of order and how
to do that is certainly part of
it schools superintendent
relations and then very basic
things about decoral men how do
you ask questions and things
like that so they do an amazing
job.
Yes
i'm sorry mister german and
do we know for sure if all of
our boards now have internet
connectivity that they can
stream these.
Uh mr chairman as senator
during the pandemic everyone had
to do it they just had to and it
there there may be some little
pockets around state ped is
ready to help them do if they
need to have no weak called
pederate
yeah at this billers really
worked on by a lot of people ped
lesc.
And and I definitely sport the
bill I think that it's great
idea definitely board meaning
should be online we do that here
all the time there's no problem
with that thank you mister thank
you for emotion please mister
charlie moved to pass
your passport center pope
secondly was that diagnosed in
the gages thank you you'll call
the role please
sell your guy got sender hickey
sender my estimate yes no bill
center pinto senator poe yes
then her yes
yeah the dupout the united
states thank you I up to telling
mister chairman it's so much
better to have the education
bills in front of the education
committee who understand them it
was not very much fun in rules
that it
next up we're going to have
senate bill one fifty nine and
then after that the center but
the is here will do his
otherwise will probably do
center hickeys and then mying
last but.
Plan right now is going to build
one fifty nine followed by
senate build two eleven
typically those of the members
who are here because we get to
us whenever
and balance the other so center
composed higher education trust
thank you.
Education committee it's great
to be before you today to
present senate bill one fifty
nine.
In essence as we move forward
with education as we just heard
there's not only the
transparency in the
accountability but there's also
the wise use of the resources
that we do have in order for us
to be able to move forward as we
take a look at how we're going
to take care of the needs of
students and at all levels so
when moving forward when we
start talking about.
Would you say early childhood
education going to the secondary
education and then again post
secondary education at all tice
together but often times as we
deal with these issues at all
those back to affordability and
I really appreciate of course
and applied
the work of the legislative
finance committee you're in the
entrum as they took testimony as
we traveled through out the
state in terms of some of the
great financial needs that we
have to educate our are young
people connor during soon who is
your with me from the
legislative finance committee is
here to go in and provide
technical assistance he's not
here to go ahead and either
speak in favor of or against
this particular measure but he's
very knowledgeable of not only
what this mechanism would do
but many other facets of higher
education so in essence senable
one fifty nine establishes a
trust for.
To pay for tuition student
financial aid programs
authorized by law to accomplish
this the bill creates a higher
education trust fund to invest a
nine hundred and fifty nine
million transferred from the tax
stabilization reserve
additionally the bill creates a
higher education program fund
which receives annual
distributions from the higher
education trust funded maybe
used for scholarships for
tuition and fees if I may just
do better understand the process
we have the tax stabilization
reserve and within that as of
twenty twenty three at your end
the balance was at two point
three nine billion dollars with
about seven hundred and twenty
three million plus.
Anticipated to go ahead and be
added to the phone by the end of
this month and and going forward
the other issue as we deal with
s it does create if you will the
trustphone and then moves on to
the higher red program funds so
you will have the reserve you'll
have the phone where the
resources are going to be made
available and then a course
distributed to the higher
program fund in an essence of
mister chair
senator issue committee that's
what this particular measure
does and before you we also have
an amendment and just briefly so
that you'll be able to to move
the amendment for consideration.
What this would do as it makes a
distribution from the trust fund
to the higher education program
find in the amount equal to
forty seven million nine hundred
fifty thousand dollars and so in
s and seventy chair members of
the committee that's the
synopsis of the bill
reverty in terms of what the
amendment would do but if I may
mister chair I would also like
to defer to mister durinson to
also make a brief start a
statement in terms of some of
the technical pieces that we're
reviewing when it comes to this
piece of legislation if I can do
that at this time I would
appreciate that.
Thank you mister chairman and
members of the committee.
The.
Thank you mister chairman again
i'm connected drawings and i'm
the lfc analyst for higher
education I just wanted to make
one point about the amendment.
The amendment was necessary
essentially it's a technical fix
the idea of the bill as to
distribute five percent
of their year and balance of the
trust fund in every year and
make that available
add to pay increased costs of
these tuition programs however
the way the bill was drafted
initially there would have been
no year and a balance on which
to calculate that five percent
so the amendment simply takes a
five percent calculation of the
nine hundred fifty nine million
dollars base and makes that in
FY twenty five.
Thank you mister.
Thank you very much
that's in essence where we're
out and you should have an
amendment that has been
presented before you and i've
already gone through that and
connor is already express
explained that so please proceed
thank you first on the amendment
we need somebody to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes mister chair I move uh
the amendment for senate bill
one fifty nine for discussion
purposes thank you so and the
amendment out that the audience
anyone who would like to speak
in support of the amendment
rather technical amendment it's
not like everybody has to stand
up thank you very much.
And you went in opposition to
the amendment.
You would online in opposition.
Committee on the amendment thank
you mister chairman center
compass move the amendment
a segment.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Anything else on the main bill
at this time so mister chairman
and of course members of the
senate education committee as we
deal with this this goes to
tuition and as we continue to
see the growing amount of fees
that students are also do pay
this covers both areas that's an
essence uh another component
that I wanted to emphasize thank
you mister chairman.
Thank you
audience those in support of
this legislation they be like to
speak in support.
Still that you know the the
grill up to the microphone
please anybody else who wants to
speak and support please come
down so we I can get a feel for
how many people you have two
minutes
mr chairman standards on behalf
the superintendent the coalition
of educational leaders are we
support this
this particular bill because we
think it's going to open up
opportunity for those who might
want to come and our education
core.
And are unable to do that and so
this kind of assistance is good
years of the stabilization fund
and we support it we're gonna
affect the sponsor for bringing
it forward
thank you
good morning thank you senator
sauls.
Senate education committee
senator compos a vanasta hawker
the executive director for the
new mexico independent community
colleges we want to thank
senator copos for bringing this
bill in this time with the state
having significant revenues
coming in and recognizing that
having finds for our opportunity
scholarship our lottery
scholarship making those
investments now so that when the
funding sources lightery
revenues go down general fun
appropriations one day that will
go down having a back stop to
help support those scholarship
funds we really appreciate that
and thank the senator
thank you.
As morning as your chairman
members committee marks or
rather with the new mexican
council university president on
a i'm also just think the
sponsors are a compost
connor dragonson for bring this
to the committee comes
university presence I represent
the seven four universities into
mexico and we stand support of
this bill I just also reinforced
what director hockey with an
enemy cc just mentioned the
committee is pointed recognize
that this and down with his
heart and down in focus on
financial late something that we
can look forward to into the
future and I think it shows a
live inside and planning example
the lottery the lottery we've
been supplied to plan to that
with normal cream money for
years when the lorry went from a
hundred percent sixty five
percent we signed romant drop at
our institutions with the
governor in the leadership the
legislature we got the
opportunity to scholarship with
all time first time freshman
high dimers and mexico for
example so we won't keep that
going yes but this fun helps us
focused on financial while funny
the structures in general for
our campuses and providing
funding for student support
services to help pertain and
recruit our students which is
something that we want to
continue to make sure we have
that we stands poor this bill
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you mark anyone else in support
in sport looks like we've got
one.
So my yablo these in support.
Greetings are
good morning mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is mike debrio and I am the
education in richmond director
of the well foundation for more
than twenty five years the
welfare nation is administered
post secondary scholarships for
students in northern new mexico
did a general city of our donors
we are not getting more than one
million dollars a year to
northern new mexico students.
His standard support of sp one
fifty nine sitting of a
permanent fund to support
students pursuing higher
education a permanent fun will
provide a sense of confidence
for family so they know they
will have financial support all
way through the students per
secondary career.
We support the concept of a
permanent fund and as I am sure
those in this body know they're
still concerns here i'm making
sure there are guard rails for
how to keep tuition for higher
education check but we do stand
and support this bill we do
recommend the committee consider
changing the timeline july first
too late for institutions and
subsequently students to
understand how much they would
receive from this permanent fund
students the payments need to
make informed decisions about
the true cost of college and
that is done much earlier in the
spring.
In addition scholarships are a
great start but they cannot be
provided are years of experience
of showed us we must establish a
robust and systemic sweet a
student support services
including mental health to
support our spirit college grads
thank you for your time.
Thank you mister we all I
apologize for mispronounced your
name initially from the list
thank you is there anyone here
in opposition
to this legislation.
The only one online in
opposition you have not
questions from the committee and
I have been a senate gagas.
Miss karen center thank you and
just reclarification in the fire
and I think their men and takes
care of this it don't show
distribution to
if I twenty six of the forty
nine point four may that would
go back into twenty five where
there's a boy great check right
mister chairman of course
senator gary was.
Well thank you for that in and
just a final community I
appreciate this because I know
we need to back to it but I
think this proves a free tuition
is not free thank you.
Thank you other questions there
my estus.
The.
Thank you very much mister
chairman thank you center
composed thank you.
Folks that spoke so i'm actually
kind of torn torn on this in
which is explained why
we are we as a body.
Went through
you know psychological trauma
you know when the banks crossed
in two thousand and eight.
Where to come back in two
thousand nine and slash but
budgets in the middle of a
fiscal year in two thousand and
fifteen sixteen when the oil
prices crashed we had to do the
same.
I was unfortunate at the time
was the the cheap executive had
a no tax place there was no way
to raise revenues
for example we haven't touched
the gas tax since nineteen
ninety two we have not touched
taxes on crude oil drilling
since nineteen fifty three.
So so out for for some reason we
find it difficult to tax.
You know it's politically
difficult
the.
So to ensure scholarships to
ensure free scholarships to the
mexico students is paramount so
I want to commend that sponsored
for for coming up with this plan
cause this is this is an ****
and plan to ensure that that
happens the
the lottery.
Has not raised the proper
revenues you know we tried to
tweet the lottery statute few
years ago some of our friends in
the ad because security didn't
understand it and there was
articles written and so we just
kinda gave up on that endeavour
it would have allowed us to sell
more lottery tickets hence raise
more while revenues from the
lottery for the lottery
scholarship now with the
increased revenues we have I I
don't believe we need the
lottery scarship.
I think the revenues raised from
the lottery's i'm sorry we don't
need the lottery forgive me we
don't need the lottery
discussion with that with the
revenues we we raised currently.
The revenues we acquire from the
lottery ticket sales is minimal
minimal and selling lottery
tickets.
With the payout of like fifty
nine cents on the dollar is not.
Not the most ethical thing to do
in my opinion but what we could
raise revenues on is on
is is if sports betting where it
were allowed in the state in
mexico so instead of buying a
lottery ticket.
And getting fifty nine cents on
the dollar you buy a ticket it
spits out up a random game with
a random.
Point spread it and not.
Theoretically might be funner
than a ten second scratcher and
we could raise tens of million
dollars with diverse to that but
the locker currently doesn't
allow it but hopefully we can
change that law in the future.
Um but I wait my to make a long
story service chairman the i'm
torn because what this does is
this takes money that we're not
using and put it in a fund in
which we can use it which we're
going to use five percent of it
so work right now where they
were not using a hundred percent
of that fund and if we pass this
bill we're still not using
ninety five percent of that
fund.
To me that fund up should be in
the general fund and should be
accessible to us and any given
year so if this bill doesn't.
Pass we should definitely think
long and hard as to how.
Still whether going to make a
generational commitment to to
free scholarships which I
believe we should and how we pay
for that over time because the
generality.
Said something very powerful
that.
That.
Something to the effect of art.
R our general fund will diminish
or something like that I don't
believe that's true.
We have taxing authority.
Psychologically I think we think
we don't have taxing authority.
But we have taxing authority and
if we tax wisely and our economy
grows.
Ah our government funds will
never ever deploy.
So I may not support this at
this time but a but for those
reasons thank you mister
chairman
senator other questions
there thank you mister chair
thank you senator compels for
bringing the spill forward is
this currently uh in the budget
right now to establish this fun
so mister chairman now senator
pope it is not in the budget
it's one of those things that
were proposing if you well
through this particu.
So so if I may mister chair and
differ again to
connor to go ahead and talk a
little bit about that special
appropriation contingent upon
this bill but again
we don't have anything in place
because we're just not sure
where all this is going to end
up by the end of the other
session but if I may i'd like to
defer to.
Thank you mister german and the
senator so right now the lottery
scholarship is in about a ten
point six million dollar deficit
for FY twenty four the executive
has requested us supplemental
appropriation for that amount
this bill
would allow that.
That deficit to be covered with
the FY twenty five distribution
additionally you'll see in the
base budget for the opportunity
scholarship program at the
higher education department
there is one hundred forty six
million dollars currently
dedicated to this
program that's.
Four FY twenty five that's flat
with twenty four essentially if
there is any cost increases.
Those would have to be
born by another funding source
if the revenues provided by
senate bill one fifty nine we're
not available.
Thank you mister chair thank you
senator thank you corner you
know I struggle with some of
this what center my sisters
talking about
and just the mechanism to make
this happ.
Have the funds to pay for this.
Without even having to.
I'm gonna support this but
I think there's other ways that
we need to try to fund.
You know the.
The.
You know.
The comment was made that free
colleges and free I think now I
think we all know that.
I think there's no better way to
inve.
So thank you center accomplish
for bringing us
thank you any other have a
couple of questions and and
comments
think you would indicated
there's two point three seven
billion dollars in a fun now
this is going to move money out
of that into a more of a higher
education fund is that that
accurate mister chairman if I
may ah again deferred to connect
but that's what indicated yes
sir.
Thank you mister chairman and
yes
that sick reports are two point
three nine billion available in
the in the tsr
right now in another anticipated
distribution of seven hundred
twenty three point nine million
that'll be showing up.
In january which so I assume.
That would be now
so there is the the funding
available in tsr to make this
transfer.
Okay thank you and of those
moneys though if we have a major
economic downturn are those
monies available to be swept in
pulled back into the general
budget at that point.
Miserable chairman yes or so
there's a there is an order
prescribed by the bill of what
um.
Which abbeys funds can be spent
first the endowment fund would
be eligible to be expended once
the tax stabilization and other
operating reserves are expanded.
So these are not ones that are
protected without specific
legislation it's something that
the.
Not sure who does the develop
the fa they'd actually expend
the money but without additional
legislation to correct it if
there's an economic downturn.
So so mister chairman for a
manner and it deferred in a
moment but as we deal with this
it would go ahead and be of
course DFA and then as we deal
with some of the investments
with sic and then moving also as
we communicate with the office
of the state treasure any place
where there are investments
there would be that
collaborative if you will to see
how these adjustments would be
made in the future thank you
mister thank you and where i'm
coming from few years ago when
things we were trying to sweep
money and find money and corners
and and everywhere else but they
these moneys would be available
to to meet any of those demands
that that accurate mister
chairman of that's our
understanding yesterday.
When the money gets over to the
higher ed department are they
able to expend it as they need
to or do they need to get
approval from in order to
increase scholarships
and where this is coming from is
I know on the big economic
downturn around two thousand and
eight higher education you'll
got cut that huge amounts and
has never been completely
restored to the levels of
funding in those your dollars I
mean within flavor to dollars
they are
does this give them the
authority to
increase the number of graduate
student assistant ships and
other kinds of aid for graduate
students or whatever higher ed
things necessarily or does this
require finance committee or
someone else to to make those
decisions semester chairman as
we go forward and again i'm
gonna for in a moment but in
dealing directly with a higher
it is the take a look at the
resources available that gives
them the opportunity to work
closely with the higher red
institutions in order to
demonstrate to disseminate into
distributor resources through
scholarship forums and i'd i'd
like to also indicate that as we
deal with things like after and
other forms of financial aid it
all boils down to a package.
And offer each one of the
students as we deal with it so
when when we talk about it it'll
be higher it's going to go to be
the institutions and then along
with that it's going to go and
be the federal financial aid
status as we deal with it it's
really another mechanism to go
and put the pieces together in
order for us to move this
forward to a fully fund if you
will the education slash and the
fees of providing students so
that they can become very
successful with their
educational endeavors if I may
again just differ quickly to
connor for his response
and mister chairman on page
three twenty two
the bill states that money and
the fund is subject to
appropriation by the legislature
and it's specifically to provide
scholarships for tuition and
fees
as provided by law so if it's an
existing
financial tuition and fee
program that would be eligible
but for example
for the opportunity scholarship
which is its own program within
the legislature would need to
authorize an expenditure from
the fund in the opportunity
scholarship program once that
happens ag will work with the
institutions who will submit
their projections for the
expenditure and and the the
money will move from aged to the
individual institutions
thank you so connect the.
I guess i'm a little confused if
it's mid year.
And eg comes do we have to come
back in the session to allow
what new expenditure you said
the appropriation by the
legislature we're only here
january february.
Does it have to wait till the
next january february before it
can get put out and then move
forward or is this something
that he did as the the authority
to do when we're not in session.
Mr chairman that the
appropriation would be for them
for the fiscal year so
the the appropriation is made to
each day and but it takes them
quite a while to get that
distribution to the actual
school so the general
appropriation act.
Those monies are authorized july
one often times with
the lottery and opportunity
scholarships you're seeing
projections coming in in the
winter in the december time
frame and
and the final remittance of
those funds after that so now
the the legislature would be
able to authorize in one fiscal
year
for the for the future and not
need to come back in if I may
mister german and you know this
very well so as we deal with
putting together the financial
aid for our students as we get
started with each will just say
several moving into the fall and
then from there into the spring
where the resources that we
authorize and of course the the
governor does the sign off on if
that's the case then we're able
if you will as already been
mentioned with the previous
piece of legislation we deal
with this system in such a way
that we have that one year of
appropriations to ensure that
students do have those resources
available for their financial
aid.
Thank you kind of along those
same lines higher education
doesn't have a home in the
interim committees other than
finance it doesn't come to
education where the educators
are would it be only the finance
committee that determining the
amount each year or is this
legislation that the education
committees would have been put
on so so mister chairman and
again a very valid point and i'm
gonna go ahead and comment as we
move forward the education
committee needs to always be
involved when it comes to the
appropriations for
a higher education as well as
secondary education and if you
were even early childhood
education because we don't we
don't feel like we always are
and and that that really brings
up a very valid point because in
in this process through
education as was already
mentioned you are the
individuals that have that
educational experience in senate
finance there are three of us
that do have that experience and
there's over a hundred years of
experience amongst the three
however as we deal with it this
and no way is to buy pass the
education committee and move
into the finance committee so my
commitment is if there is an
issue dealing directly with
education that it does start
here and it moves to the process
so you can help us not only
develop but to create a much
stronger and more vibrant and in
robust educational system for
the state thank you mister and
get into my last question we
always hear about the target
cash reserves is this two point
three nine billion and the money
that's being moved out of that
into this is that counted in
that percent of the budgeting
cash reserves or is this on top
of that and not part of that
cash reserve thank you mister
chairman so in reality we have
about fifty billion dollars held
in and in reserves if he will
today and this is fifty billion
and this is this is part of that
and and so as we deal with it
it's not just one part of
resource there's several and to
go ahead and get back to it into
some of the.
Points that have already been
made the issue then becomes how
do we wholly and fully fund
health care education dealing
with our quality of water in all
of these issues so with that
mister chair I will indicate
that it is part of if you will
the permanent funds that do hold
if you will resources for our
reserves.
Senator i'm not sure I
understand now these moneys are
money is that if there was a
major economic downturn
swept with without.
The legislation we hear the
permanent fund that we can't
touch some of those pieces
without an and I want to differ
to connor in a moment but in
dealing directly with this when
we dealt with these issues in
two thousand eight two thousand
nine two thousand ten and that
particular era as we dealt with
it there had to be legislation
in order for us to go ahead and
I only conduct the sweeps but
also recreate if you will how we
were going to deal with the
sustainability for the state
states budgets as an example so
within that there would be if
you will be the transparency the
need by legislators and overall
the mechanisms which would be a
statute and authorization for us
to go ahead and poll funds in
order to go ahead and take your
if you will of the downturns
that we may see either from oil
and gas for some of the other
mechanisms that we do receive
receipts from in order to go and
sustain our state budget.
Okay thank you mister chairman
they don't if I may just quickly
deferred a conduring may ever
comment on that yes sir please.
Yes mr chairman so.
Again if these these funds would
be accessible to the legislature
but.
It would come after uhm the
operating reserves and the tsr
are depleted then this funding
could be at tapped into and I
think that's an important
distinction because what it does
is it provides more stability
for that endowment fund meaning
the sic will be able to invest
in instruments that are longer
term it has less reliance on
less need to keep assets liquid
and that should
theoretically drive up the
investment return rate.
Thank you.
The other questions not emotion
from the committee I apologise
for kind of getting into some of
the the weeds and details on it.
Yes
yes so yeah but do pass with one
negative mister chair members of
the senate education committee
thank you very much for your
consideration of this particular
measure
thank you is senator pavia.
Do not see him center hicky if
you would
would like to present yours and
will let you let the know that
you'll be on deck.
And so we are people watching we
are moving to senate bill to
twenty seven entrepreneur in
development program senator
hicky and then the deal is able
to come will do his senator
built senate bill to eleven in
mind senate bill to a w.
Come on down.
And we have an amendment on this
bill.
Mr chair and committee at my
privilege to put forward this
what I consider very low cost
huge share rate of returned
ville for
the
various colleges here in new
mexico the community colleges at
central new mexico seeing them
that is san on community college
southeast new mexico college and
santa fe community college which
is not in the original bill and
will be an amendment to the bill
instead of a letter deal with
that amendments are first then
the bill will be hold for us to
debate
mister chair I moved
the amendment for senate bill to
twenty seven for discussion
purposes thank you thank you to
talk about the amendment first
please sir thank you mister
chair and and committee
simply it was an oversight that
the college of the sense and the
faith community college was left
out in the bell and so it would
online one page thirteen
after first instance of college
inserts handiface community
college in line when page twenty
two after college insert santa
fe community college.
Thank you.
The audience anyone in
opposition when you want the
absolutely have to talk about
the amendments really simple and
you went online thank you
committee members and the
problem concerned with the the
amendment.
Moved in second if you'll call
the role please.
Center yes that are yes novel
senator yes
yes you have an amended bill
thank you mister
briefly what this bill does it
appropriate three million
dollars
to educate.
At thirty
it's ten per year among these
colleges three individuals going
into entrepreneurial studies and
being educated about that
through the engineering program
as they work with the colleges
and essentially the selected
individuals will be spending
time with a start up so they're
going to learn from the ground
out how this works and as they
often say in in venture capital
it's jackie not the horse in
other words that is there a
skill base there to know what to
do and how to manage funds to
get more funds and would have
you that really allows a new
approach to something
to succeed and so just training
the jockeys as you might say
after a future work and so
essentially they they would get
the the know how the math the
the politics that goes and in
the venture capital angel
community and so forth are to
bring in money for an effort
ended spreads it all over the
state which is the other great
thing because we tend to
otherwise concentrate things in
albecurate people with these
community colleges throughout
the state having students who
were able to participate were
able to get that and so if we
were over the sovereignty three
year period and if we can train
thirty individuals and one out
of over our successful the small
cost of doing this over the
three year period should
multiply by
potentially up to a factor of
tender or more and so in some
ways I also would call this jobs
bill
just because.
Taking our creative minds and
with the p h d's we have more
phd's per capital and any other
state are coming out of the labs
and they are very often going
into venture capital need people
to help up and this is going to
train those individuals to
themselves enter into our work
with those folks and support
those folks as they as as the
phds bring for their up venture
capital projects and I would ask
you if my experts have anything
they want.
And then engineering teacher
cope with cn engineering as part
of
CNN and i've been working with
entrepreneur old community
throughout the state for eight
years
to send it a hickey's point
what this does is
multiply the number of
entrepreneurs who are the job
creators in the state over time.
It does that by acknowledging
that there is a gap currently
and allows for that gap to be
closed through this program the
gap is.
If you are the first time
college student or you're come
from a family that can't just
take you under its wing
financially for a year while you
go and try to build a start up
you're gonna get a job you're
just going to
you're going to need to get get
a job rather than go on the
journey of creating jobs through
your own start up what this does
is offer
those who have high
entrepreneurial aptitude and
high drive and hunger to be
announced per nor to come under
the wing of this program receive
a stop and to spend time with
startups learning the trade
becoming a great jockey as
senator hicki said and over time
joining companies that then
or creating their own company
after their entire and
development experience so that
we have net new
start up activity in the state
are start ups have more manager
talent within the state and so
if you are start ups leave but
fewer of our top brains also
leave so personally this comes
this idea comes from my
observation that many of our
great graduates from our
universities colleges are
leaving to places like denver
asked then
bigger cities that right now
might have more activity and
it's connecting them to the
opportunities that are here if
only they were to be connected
to them and about two
take those twelve to eighteen
mins to
to really lean into their
entrepreneurial energy and and
exercise that.
The pilot
but I also.
I.
Put forty million d.
We will do a lot of start ups in
new mexico because of all.
Which is one year she but we
just don't.
This bill allows us to build
that base so
it's right now when when the
start of this judice for years
it looks like it's got a market
at works and so forth and you
got.
Thank you for those in the room
and support.
The nest command down please.
The.
Good morning again senator
saul's committee senator hickey
a vanessa hawker executive
director for the independent
community colleges I am speaking
on behalf of president rally
from santa fe community college
she got pulled into another room
as she said to let you all know
that she strongly supports this
bill and she thanks you for your
consideration thank you thank
you anyone else and support in
the room anyone online.
So one person online.
The rental race
good morning which is shirt and
my new slide sort of yes and
vice president workers and
economic development for some
one college first of all I want
to think that the sponsor the
bill and second world strong
support of the bover said a
build to the seven.
This will increase the award the
sustainability of a new trip in
nurse and house great the growth
potential for the economic pace
inside one county.
We support the bill thank you
thank you sir is there anywhere
in the room in opposition.
The.
Anyone online in opposition.
If not questions from the
committee.
Sarah gagos
miss senator thank you for this
I do have a couple of questions
on the analysis of the bill and
talked about nineteen center
statewide do we know in in some
other areas it looked like
all the small business
development centers is the
mexican college I know they have
small business development
center are they being considered
in this also.
I deferred in my expert thank
you thank you mister chair
center I guess
yeah so the colleges you see
listed in the bill and with whom
we do out the relationship and
design in this program are those
are founding partners the idea
though is that there's no
there's no cap to the number of
institutional partners in this
model that are
representing their counties
there are communities offering
this opportunity to students
recent graduates etc
and they're coming into the
program
so in that sense every spdc is
also a partner at CNN we also
have an steve for central new
mexico francisco there's a great
partner i'm referring her
clients who come through our
programs she is refrained them
to me for veteran capital etc so
there's alright already that
good report and so I would just
say yes
we're considering all those but
we made a point to design this
program
with these partners from the
ground up and then expand from
there.
I'll thank you for that miss
mister center in expert witness
the air and just because in
towel tooks talk about southeast
mexico college which is actually
just in carlsband I just want to
make sure there's been looked at
expenditure but there are you
know thank you thank you send it
or other questions I have if not
I have just very quick question
this is a pillar it sounds like
what measures and to who will
determine whether this is
successful and should be
expanded.
Great question and i'm going to
defer doubt they'll have the
specific answer for you.
Thank you for the question
mister chair.
This is a nice program and so
far as the the metrics that will
measure our are really financial
nature and there start up
metrics so the the real key
metrics that we want to see
within twelve months of
graduating further you come
through any idea children are
going to then it comes to the
cid program the question is do
they land at a start up do they
get a job to start up.
Um especially through find in a
multiply our factor to that base
of talent is do they land on the
cap table of a start up are then
owner are there part owner a
founder and a start up will
measure that by five percent or
more ownership stake in a
company which means investors of
that company co founders of that
company have seen the maturation
of that talent such that they
see a coffounder that they see a
key contributor so
to recap one are they a staff
member
salaried or contracted with a
start up within six months it's
very similar to our coding book
camps that we do we measure do
they land at a tech company are
they are they coding at a
company within alva similarly
whether they're see suit
executive or director product
development whatever it is have
they landed out a at a company
number two and that the real
corromatic we're going after his
net new co founders and that
knew
five percent or more ownership
holders and companies.
Thank you i'm kind of a
statistics nerd.
What percent of the thirty have
to be meet those metrics for
this program to be determined to
be successful one twenty nine
give me a number I won't hold
you to it but just your what
what do you consider to be
successful of the thirty co work
that you're talking about I
consider
thank you mister chair I
consider and and I think we
would consider partners saying
one southeast santa fe
fifty percent of those who
graduate so if we have thirty
fifteen around a start up within
six months
twenty five percent we'd love to
see with that ownership stake
and start ups within twelve
months so.
As a pilot these are these are
observed observing the natural
flow and the speaker would start
ups move these are numbers we
come from from that but we're
gonna have to see is a more
eighteen months we need to
support these before they're
ready to jump in as a corner etc
but deserve those are my basic
numbers that you want hold us to
I will do those but but we will
you that's what I need to we
will pursue.
No thank you and mister chair I
really like your question and I
would hope you know and I think
you do it's if you make an
investment in the person
they return you had a number
here one dollar returning seven
point nine which means looking
over the long term and so if we
have those the capability to
keep following people in the
metrics as they apply and again
it's really as it applies to
those dollars being here in new
mexico thank you.
Motion from the committee i'm
overdue passed with the past
second center in the bill you'll
call the role please.
Center brown.
Senator.
Yes
yes.
Yes
yes yeah
and I will present senate bill
two oh nine and so center hope
if you will take over his chair.
So we are now on senate bill to
senator soles the other for
thank you this is an
appropriation builds to the last
choices public schools it is for
a pilot type of program that
many of you are aware of the
work that i've done with aces
adverse childhood experiences
the creation of the anna e j
institute to reduce child abuse
I building healthy communities
a few months ago I had a copy
with the super the brand new
superintendent of the last use
of schools ignacio ruise and
during that he started talking
about he'd been reading my notes
about anna and things and wanted
to put in a family center to
provides all of the ten
surviving and thriving services
that are talked about indiana j
there's been a very robust group
they have resilients leaders
which is that group down in the
last cruces area who has been
trying to get funding for a
family center through
legislative appropriations and
was struggling as never quite
been able to get it for the into
budgets and such this is putting
it with the public schools so it
is a group working together with
the public schools with the
resilience leaders there is also
support from the county and
support from the city of loss
crucials this would provide
funding over several years to do
a demonstration and one way to
look at many people are aware
of.
But they're typically called
community schools this would be
a community school model but a
bigger center that serves the
entire district not just the
specific community schools
designated within the district.
Um and lots of the services
beyond early childhood types of
services so parenting classes
for
parents with teenagers when they
suddenly think the parents don't
know anything anymore and and
getting them help on how to
manage all of those pieces a
long with this I have with a
million dollars of my capital
outlay will be going towards
remodeling the space that the
public schools are providing for
this and also four hundred
thousand dollars of my grow
money for operational as part of
this were to supplement the
things that are here so i'm very
committed to making sure this
happens or the children in lost
cruces first expanding them to
the county but providing a model
for every county and community
in the state for how to put in
family centers to build healthy
communities which leads to
healthy kids which is good
education outcomes and with that
also and for questions thank you
senator where i'll send it built
two zero nine
out in the audience do we have
anyone and support of this bill.
If we could have you step up in
have everyone could go ahead and
line up
and you have two minutes.
Thank you mister chairman chris
bells on on the register
lobbyist for us closest police
schools we stand in support of
this base of legislation we want
to really take this moment to
think some of the source to lead
on this or the children of the
scrutins and don't thank you so
thank you very much thank you
standard outs for the school
superintendents of the
educational leaders of new
mexico we don't normally stand
on individual district.
I had issues but this is in fact
an important sage way between
community schools and then the
local initiative of the binds
all of the governmental entities
and the communities to support
students and their parents and
so we think this is it is it is
is is something we need to come
in on and support because it is
it is a model we think the serve
the state of new max for well so
we stand as supporter g also to
do that
thank you for them thank you
good morning mister chair
members of the committee steps
youngest with any new mexico
government relations corrector
on the floor members are we
support speed two or nine and
first I want to think the
sponsor for bringing forth this
bill
we are struggling with chronic
apps and teasing at forty
percent at a very very high rate
and one of the issues is the
lack of family engagement.
And I think this bill is going
to address that and it's going
to do in such a way that it's
going to involve not only
parents.
The community but also for
educators so for those reasons
we support a speech b two or
nine and we ask that you
consider roading in favor thank
you
thank you
looks like we don't have anyone
online and support
it's all going to the audience
to have anyone in opposition to
this bill.
Anyone online an opposition.
Alright with that I want to give
senator
wanted out of the public
comments they were all positive
I think you're going to go
all right with that all go to
the committee.
Center guy
thank you mister
just couple of questions so do
you already have an organization
in place in los cruces to be
able to do this.
This chair center guy goes there
are a couple first there's the
last few public schools the
money will flow to them from the
ped to them for this program and
I have talked with the secretary
and he thinks this is a good
model and having them as the
fiscal agent that and flows
moneys to the public schools
there is also what's called
resilience leaders which has
been meeting for three or four
years as surveyed the local
community on the needs for
health care for transportation
for food for housing they've got
all of those different sectors
and people leading those pieces
what they don't have is a place
to bring all those together for
families and children and
students.
Thank you for that in this chair
mister then my next question in.
It talks about ten areas.
That this would help
in in.
I guess I didn't see you know
paring sport
is there somewhere that I get
list of what all of what it to
make a better flu student I know
in units just tell you we've
always had problem with parent
engagement.
You do.
One year we did cookies everyone
came.
Two years later they weren't
coming so we up the annie der
sandwiches everyone came and
then two years later they didn't
so I guess i'm wondering what
category she has refecting and
how that'll work.
To be able to make an overall
benefit from the child.
Mister charit and senator i'll
try and remember all ten please
give me if I miss a couple of
them they are laid out in the
book in a age eight and then
also very much the whole n a j
institute which is in I think
sixteen counties now and booking
to expand all of them.
But you're real.
Thank you
so they are medical and dental
care that all children not to
have access to that housing
security.
Community schools the habitable
health care transportation so
parents can get children to
medical into appointments and
other things youth mentoring
programs food security early
childhood I quality early
childhood education and learning
programs job training for
parents and.
Thank you thank you for that
mister mister so
trying to take these a little
bit of time so the food security
we already take care of that
with free meals at school said
not correct.
Mister chair and senator do the
public schools we do but there
is still major food in security
in that from the survey we did
in was crucial area due to.
The schools don't provide the
meals on weekends for instance
and during holidays uh.
Any evenings I mean certainly
breakfast and lunch at school
meals are covered but there is
major food in security and often
parents don't know where to go
to get the additional help that
they need.
Thank you that was chairman
chair so my last question is
after you do this pilot or you
look and take it stay wide.
Mister taren and senator yes
this is both this disserved
directly the people in blast
crucials.
But then hope to be a model for
other communities on how you set
up a parent center and and move
it out to scale and so this is
not a small pilot in lost uses
this is a scaled.
A fully scaled project for the
last cruises area to then scale
out to the county and be a model
for other communities on how to
do so thank you for that I
remember you're talking about
the county peace per are just
hoping that it would.
He looked
Oh
we and school more as you know
our held accountable to the
fence for the interaction and we
don't have any controls I mean
if you don't do something
different every year then they
lose interest so would that all
you thank you mister.
Any other comments questions
from the committee members.
I might I just want to thank you
center for bringing this forty
one one of the questions I have
is I see this is more kind of
the one stop shop that would
cover
all of last cruises proba.
Having a bunch of I guess
community schools in the area
is the thought that.
Is this is still doable in the
last crucial school district
with this m.
Or is you really just trying to
find this out really mister
chair and that's very insightful
what you asked it lost uses we
have
five six seven community schools
this is not going to replace the
services they have directly at
their schools this will more be
the one stop central hub and you
might think of them as kind of
spokes out and smaller ones to
put the services closer to where
those families are
if this as their scales in done
yet a county one would need to
be in hatch north in donate
county and one probably in
anthony area maybe one and seven
parking one and out in shop at
all but maybe not at the same
size but the provide many of
these seems kinds of services in
albuquerque there may be a need
for five or six of these in the
different community kinds of
areas and then spokes out to
community schools directly
within those more regional
communities.
Great this is something kind of
this model being kind of looking
at this state wide when it comes
to like veteran services as well
so these are things that we're
looking at
and I think this is just will be
so helpful I mean we're talking
about a tendence we're talking
about students were talking
about families and you know of
course we want the parent
parental engagement but I think
in some cases that's not
happening because of what you've
laid out those ten areas folks
are struggling with housing
there they're struggling with
food and security in other
struggling with other services
and when you're strolling with
those services sometimes you
know going to an after school m.
It's just not going to happen so
i.
Engagement and in student
attendance with that I will
look go to the committee do we
have motion.
I'm sorry senator ville we have
a motion in the second from
senator hickey.
That.
Yes
yes.
Yes
yes
and you are do pass senator in
animals from.
And not seeing senator per the
idea stuck over in rules so we
will move his bill to the top of
the list for friday we have only
a couple of other ones at this
point scheduled for friday when
a remind the committee about the
school board association
breakfast at seven o'clock on
friday at the convention center
there's a meal there for all of
us but it's a great time
interact with school board
members from around the state
and for them yet to see who the
education leaders are within the
legislature.
As a result of that and they're
relatively briefed by the
introductions and opening of
their meetings I think chairman
rometo and I are both scheduled
to speak during that but we will
not start until nine thirty on
friday in here any other
questions comments
announcements.
If not we will stand adjourned.
