Re written so that it's a little
more comprehensible
understandable.
Also we have a whole group of
students here with someone tell
us who you are welcome to the
Senate Education Committee.
wonderful well welcome this is
the Education Committee that's a
great place for for kids to be
and hopefully you'll find
something interesting and
something is probably a little
on the but the other side the
the of the adult side of things
but welcome you glad that you're
here with us today any other.
Weston's
just a little heads up for on
Friday.
That this point I think we only
have one memorial on the list
there maybe a couple more so
committee members kind of pay
attention we may average clear
back to a ten o'clock or
something late start date if we
don't get some other bills
assigned to us at this point so
this committee is very much
caught up with things
the first bill we have to do
today the education assistant
salary increase and
Representative data.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am proud to
present H. B. one twenty seven
before this committee it calls
for a minimum salary for all
educational assistance in our
state of twenty five thousand a
year this house passed
unanimously in three committees
in the house in commerce
Education probation and I had a
unanimous vote on the floor so I
bring this to you today and
proud to do so this was also an
L. E. S. C. endorsed bill and I
stand for questions.
That was quick.
Appreciate that up up to the
audience is there anyone in
support of this.
Anyone in opposition.
A couple of supporters would
like to come up to the
microphone.
We have
the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jovian with New
Mexico school board association
this is a very important bill to
us that it was well worked on
throughout the interim with the
L. E. S. C. and we're proud to
stand in support of thank you
and we think this monster for
bringing.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily will
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and we support this
bill thank you to sponsors for
bringing it forward educational
system play an important role in
our classrooms and they should
receive higher wages not only to
reflect this also to improve
their own economic conditions
that we pay our educational
system the higher wage they're
more likely to be incentivized
to stay in the educational
system so we ask you to support
H. B. one twenty seven thank you
thank you Natalie it's nice
having you here in person
usually we we see your name on
the on the list.
The one Mr chair members the
committee CCI is within the New
Mexico government relations
director on behalf of our
members we stand in strong
support of HB one twenty seven
we think this faster bringing
forth this bill a much needed
bill we all know that the
current minimum is fourteen
thousand dollars that's about a
thousand dollars a month
too little I think that we're
going the right direction with
this bill and it's something
that our EAS to serve he's also
will help to recruit and retain
our educators so we so
desperately need.
With that said thank you very
much and we just a support HB
one twenty seven you go to page
thank you thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee with Holland
president of AFT New Mexico
before you such an important
piece of legislation I was a
classroom teacher for nine years
and my instructional assistant
with my right hand the educators
in these roles are truly the
glue that holds our schools
together they do it all because
they care about kids higher wage
shows respect for the important
work that they do each day thank
you.
Thank you.
Hi Mr chairman members of the
committee and Bethany Jarrell
preschool educator in Alamogordo
New Mexico and the NEA New
Mexico vice president and I just
want to urge you to please
support aids B. one twenty seven
our classroom assistants keep
our questions going they love
our children support our
children and do all of the hard
work in our schools with along
with their teachers so please
support H. B. one twenty seven
thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee first I want to
thank my wonderful Sanchez here
for I even bring this to the
fore my name is Kathy Chavis hi
Representative Albuquerque
Albuquerque federation classify
professionals I work with
educational assistance and go to
every school every day and they
are doing an honest job and it's
just involved it's not just the
assistant anymore we're now this
teachers were nurses were family
liaisons were re directors were
substitutes that way I mean we
do it all and act special needs
kids have the population has
grown in the work there is
extremely hard I was one of
those for seventeen years I
worked in the very have spent
every duty special ed please
thank you please please we went
to support this bill and thank
you for having us and thank you
for.
Everything thank you thank you.
Morning Mr chair members
committee my name's Justin
trader on the executive director
of the C. diff will charter
school in Albuquerque about ten
years ago I was system parts
what's up I can be and we
embraced education assistance
for the first time and we paid
him twenty five thousand dollars
because we know they are so
valuable when they're in the
classroom during direct
instruction with collaborating
with professionals
differentiating individualizing
to truly meet our students needs
the only reason I might oppose
this is I pay twenty seven I now
I have a PS goes up to twenty
five might be harder for me but
it is what is in the best
interests our students in truly
lowering that adult to student
ratio and meeting them where
they're at and propelling their
learning simply support this
bill.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Marshes registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico coalition of
educators consisting of
superintendents and
administrators we stand strong
support at this legislation and
recognize the importance of this
profession in our classrooms
thank you.
Thank you.
And last twenty years thank you
yes my name is Amy Simpson and I
work with the national education
association our national all the
office as you know annually and
for the last thirty years does
educational salary comparison
state by state and to the last
salary comparison showed that
the ideas P. earnings New Mexico
we're forty six in the nation so
this is up for past due and we
greatly support.
Thank you is there I don't think
there was any opposition in the
room.
There in the one online so got
questions from the committee.
Motion for a new path thank you
bye Senator Pinto if you'll call
the roll please hold on just a
moment thank you so much as this
as a question Representative
we're on the brink of victory
there for the.
Why
Why is it there in the first.
Why is there a minimum in the
first place.
Mr chair and Senator that right
now we have about one fourth of
our
of our educational assistants
are making less than twenty
thousand here we set the minimum
at twenty five thousand it
doesn't mean schools can't pay
more than that but we at least
wanted to set a standard that
you could not pay less than that
anymore so we set the minimum at
twenty five thousand and I'll
have the I didn't introduce my
expert but it is going Warniment
head of the LFC.
Mister chairman Senator my Estes
in the schools school personnel
act we have minimums for
teachers as well as the minimum
for EAC thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative that
are going the but this is the
equivalent to.
Two thousand eighty hours at the
minimum wage and the minimum
wage change this.
And and and then my next
question is do we want to at
some point track it to the
minimum wage that way if that
goes up this goes up if that
doesn't go up we can revisit the
statute.
Mr chair and senator this is
actually teachers don't work you
know I mean educational
assistance work this school year
is not it works out to about
probably eighteen dollars an
hour for educational assistance
but also comes with a health
plan and a pension so that's
what you need to understand with
this wage to but I'll turn this
over to go and for a further
exclude explanation.
Mr Chairman these are working
correct thank you so Mister
chairman Senator Maestas
Representative Herrerra is
correct it is not educational
assistance on average if you
consider minimum wage make
between eighteen and twenty two
I believe it is and that's
because of the school year the
length of their actual contract.
Correct Mr chairman misprint of
Bill Clinton yeah I know I'm
aware of that but just
coincidentally or maybe on
purpose the twenty five thousand
is the equivalent to the minimum
wage in the state of Mexico if
in fact they worked.
Two thousand eighty hours a year
so that was on purpose or not or
or whether whether we want to
gauge it to that or not but they
should up based on what this to
be a floor for folks so thank
you Mr.
Any other questions we do have a
motion for a do pass you'll call
the roll please Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yeah Senator
Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes Senator
Novell yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope.
Senator souls yes and to pass on
the hi from you have a pass on
the I over the.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee.
As indicated in public.
The guys want to go by.
The next in the last bill house
bill one ninety one is amended
Representative Dixon.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee are you
ready for this ma'am wonderful
so we're here this morning to
present house bill one ninety
one is amended.
it is a very straightforward
bill
it does one and only one thing
rate increases the disbursement
from the early childhood trust
fund for fiscal year twenty
four.
From sixty eight million dollars
to a hundred and twenty five
million dollars.
the.
Disbursement that was calculated
for.
The initial disbursement of
sixty eight million dollars was
determined by a three year
average but the amount was
artificially low because the
first year was zero so what
we're doing is by increasing the
disbursement for fiscal year
twenty four we are going to be
able to increase support for
infant mental health tribal
services in the child care
assistance program this increase
in disbursement will not
substantially affect future
disbursements.
and I have experts this morning
Kelly fund and John Courtney
from LFC and we would stand for
questions okay of those in the
audience in support of one
ninety one.
Anyone in opposition.
That the sport is would like.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Emily rolled out
with Mexico with sister children
and we for eighty one ninety
eight thank the sponsors to
bring it forward we support this
bill because we know the funding
needs for early childhood
programs or treat voters support
spending on early childhood and
we know that these investments
in the earliest years pay off
for the lifetime of our children
we have the funding available
and the need is there for our
kids today so we asked the
committee to join us in support
of the to be limited thank you
thank you.
Good morning chair you need to
use the Mike if you will thanks
very much sometimes those will
pick it up but not always good
morning thank you chairman
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Barron resend the
director for policy and growing
up New Mexico we're here today
to stand in support of H. B. one
ninety one and thank you for the
support from this committee.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
And on line we have Terry Cole
so Terry if you would please.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Terry
Cole and I am the president CEO
for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we were
strong early advocates for the
creation of the early childhood
education trust fund and like
many in this room we've been
surprised and happy to see just
how fast the fund has grown it's
a tremendously important fiscal
tool for the state as we seek to
continue expanding early
childhood services and insulate
them as fast as possible from
future revenue down terms in our
opinion this is a good news
bills the fund has grown so
substantially that we are able
to increase distributions from
it already and scheduled to
cover important early childhood
expansions and initiatives we
urge your support for the bill
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you Terry any.
Okay there any opposition again.
In opposition the house bill one
ninety one no okay.
Distance from the committee.
Thank you thank.
So I
Mr chair and Representative
thank you very much for bringing
this bill it certainly sounds
very logical
given the circumstances and the
incredible surpluses were having
is there any other money coming
through any other bills that do
this as well or I just that I'm
wondering if there's maybe in
New Virton double dip into a
maybe that's the wrong phrase
that we just the again just
wanted to be sure that the the
department is on the agreement
with this and so forth.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Hickey
the we have been in discussions
with the department about this
and if I may allow my experts to
find a little bit more detail in
terms of different funding
sources if that would be helpful
yes thank you Mr chairman of the
committee again click on the
legislative finance committee so
ECECD's budget is quite
complicated this year this is
one component of the increases
they also have increases from
the land grant permanent fund
coming into this and so the way
that this would work is this one
twenty five is already built and
house bill two as possible to
exist from HFC in the house and
the Senate right now and the
increased distribution would
basically fund a majority of the
executive's request for
expansions and childcare in
tribal support and
family infantile the rate
increases and so without this
those things would not those are
contingent on this bill passing
I see.
thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Thermos this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative Dixon
thank you experts that just to
Just to refresh your memory what
what is there's two in the up.
The program and the Fund.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
senator masters so the early
childhood trust fund was
established in twenty nineteen
right with
Sorry twenty twenty with an
initial balance of three hundred
million that balance actually is
estimated to be at ten billion
dollars for sorry yes nine point
nine billion dollars by twenty
twenty seven so that is the
trust fund and an annual
disbursement of that goes to the
programming was at.
Senator was that your question
so thank you thank you Mr
chairman Representative Dixon so
so the the early childhood
education and care program is
the department.
Mr chair Senator my Estes if
Kelly could answer that Mr chair
so that the trust fund is the
corpus is invested the program
fund is just the accounting
mechanism for the distribution
is put so the legislature can
then appropriate out of that
funds to its purposes thank you
so Mister chairman generally
the.
So the original up proposals
twenty million annually because
of the surplus and the money
that went into the fund now we
want to do it about one hundred
million annually.
So Mr chair Senator masters so
the annual disbursement rate is
based on a three year average of
the past three or disbursement
rates so it's not a fixed amount
so this the.
First disbursement in
twenty twenty one.
Supporters and.
Oh sorry the first disbursement
of for fiscal year twenty twenty
two was twenty million the
estimated disbursement for
twenty twenty three was thirty
million and so the way that.
the calculation for twenty
twenty four is estimated it
would be sixty eight million but
remember because it's the you
know calculated on the past
three disbursements it is
artificially low so what we but
the LFC and house bill two
proposes is to increase that for
one time to bring our average up
and increase
this year for fiscal year twenty
four to one twenty five million.
And then moving forward the
estimated disbursement.
so it would be.
In fiscal year twenty five
around one hundred and sixty
million and then in fiscal year
twenty six actually have the yes
Representative Dixon I don't
mean to cut you out did you want
to do is there a substitute or
is there amendments to this bill
that's not what I'm reading.
Mr chair Senator masters it was
amended house bill one ninety
one was amended in house
appropriation and finance from
one hundred million to one
hundred and twenty five million
okay so that might be the the
distinction and I'm happy to
Understood so thank you Mr
chairman so that's the only
thank you so much okay great so
I see the amendment that was my
bad
and so on page two line twenty
three we changed one hundred
million dollars to one hundred.
Twenty five million dollars
correct and I was the only
change since the bill was
adopted but here here's what but
here's what I'm reading it says
you know five percent of the
average of the year in market
values of the fund for the
immediate preceding three years
or one hundred twenty five
million how does that work.
Mr chair Senator masters if
Kelly could respond thank you Mr
chair members the committee so
that twenty million was
initially the floor distribution
when there was no formula early
on and then it moved to thirty
million in the second here is a
secondary floor distribution
because there was no formula and
so now we're because we don't
need a formula after listening
are we don't need a floor after
expects there because the
formula will not be held
artificially low because of that
for zero the one twenty five
will technically be the new
floor but the distribution
projection is going to be fun
going out many years for
increased growth as you can see
in your FIR there's both there's
two tables on that a fire that
show the current distribution
and then what increase
distribution would do for future
years.
So Mister chairman gently so so
was it five percent four hundred
twenty five million whichever is
higher.
But it doesn't say that so do we
just have a choice like the
formula takes precedence Mr
chair the form they would take
precedent over the floor
distribution.
Okay Mister and the formula is
is written where like where is
it like it's not in this is in
the bill.
Or just in the and in the way
it's written in house bill two.
Mr Mister chair finally speak
it's under section G..
And so section do changes on
July first of each year a
distribution shall be made from
the early childhood education
funds to the ECECD program fund
in the amount equal to or
greater than five percent thank
you so very much thank you so
okay great.
Is there Mr chairman gently of
Representative Dixon is there
any up proposals to diminish the
flows into the fund.
Because of this the massive
massive surpluses we're seeing
and crude oil drilling at this
is there any proposals at this
time.
Mr chair Senator masters not
that I'm aware of
I'm certainly not carrying
anything
Okay great and then
Because this
The fund I think it's awesome
that the fund group this much.
because it's essentially
earmarked for early childhood
education and and we could build
out the program with zero
economic research concert you
keep zero eight financial
constraints is just amazing what
the state is going to be able to
do with that but the the whole.
The whole crux of the
constitution amendment was to
not.
poured cash.
And so at some point in the next
year two or three we need to
discuss whether we want to
record.
In nine million dollars or not
or simply have it available in
the and and the general fund
for.
Or better yet an investment
account that that allows us to
appropriate appropriately
without changing this this bill
is here.
So reporter those discussions.
In the months and years ahead
thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee so this
fund was established in July
first twenty twenty.
And it's only been three years
and we're trying to right the
plan.
Mr chair Senator Pinto it's
actually we're not touching the
corpus of the fund we're simply
increasing the disbursement
amount
that's based on its growth.
So the and in your FIR Mr chair
Senator it does show the
projected scenario of the
difference in what the
disbursement would be if we
stayed at the sixty eight
million dollars verses at least
the initial FIR was versus a
hundred million but I do have
the figures based on
A hundred and twenty five
million and so the difference in
fiscal year twenty five is one
million dollars so it if we did
not increase the disbursement.
The to estimated disbursement
for fiscal year twenty five
would be one hundred and fifty
four million verses one hundred
and fifty three million so it's
not substantially changing
future disbursements it's
allowing us to spend more money
in fiscal year twenty four for
early childhood education
program.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Let's make sure that all members
got phone or whatever on please
muted thank you.
I think the Senator.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and that have
a question on the bill if which
we know that because of the high
inflow with regard to the oil
and gas production that that
five year average can be
impacted I may have missed this
when you walked in a bit late so
but that's going to level out
and Mr chair maybe Kelly could
respond to
what the long term outlook is
even though oil and gas you know
for what we know it's going to
continue but that average is
going to flatten correct.
Mr chair members the committee
so the end the inflow into this
fund is for those access
payments of federal mineral
leasing and so the Craig this
consensus revenue estimating
group which comes out with your
revenue estimates which is a
combination DFA department
transportation LFC so these
federal leasing payments would
come in really high and not
really as sustainably
level over the years right you
get these one time massive
payments and that would put
spikes into your revenue
projections and so when this
bill was created basically what
they said is we're going to put
an endowment of three hundred
million to start the corpus of
the fund and they were gonna
take out those spikes in revenue
depending on all of these other
things that are complicated that
I can really explain to one
revenue said but those spikes
are going to be the inflow to
help create a continued corpus
growth until the end and that
investment is what is bringing
also the distribution the out
here so even if those those
inflows stop you basically
create a corpus with enough
investment ability to continue a
state in growth for many years
to come in as a non economists
at the best way I can explain I
thank you Mr chairman thank you
so when we talk about five year
averages for other funds is this
one a little bit different than
because we know at some point
when you do a five year average
and then you distribute based on
that that eventually you're
either going to have to extend
the five years to seven four
we're we're gonna see a
difference there and it probably
Seneal can speak to that a bit
better than I can but let me
move on
So the distribution is
increasing
is that money going to supplant
foot perhaps LFC is
recommendations are with regard
to what they would have funded
for ECECD may not I worry
sometimes when we take money
from a funded we increase that
amount that actually that's just
less money that LFC is going to
have to appropriate into that so
it are these actually for extra
services which I think I heard
you say and what those services
have been funded if this bill
were not moving through.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Kernan and members if
Kelly could sort of highlight
some of the
uses of this additional
disbursement that would be
great.
Yeah Mr chair just to clarify
this fund is based on a three
year average of the calendar
year and secondarily
The L. the increased
distributions for this funds
nothing was used.
I mean there was a small revenue
swap but mostly was all used for
expanded services so there's
twelve million dollars for
Medicaid B. children's of
physical behavioral health there
was revenue to increase home
visiting our site I was in the
land grant permanent fund
there's room for for tribal
early childhood for I. T.
maintenance for infant mental
health for a home visiting
marketing for the delay success
lab for early childhood
coalitions and measured overhead
at the department and over sixty
million dollars in Google
revenue sources for child care
assistance and so most of it has
been used for expansion of
services so Mr chair and that's
exactly what I'm getting at with
regard to the expansion of child
care assistance which I did not
participate disagree with but I
would have preferred that that
Scenario the publisher that come
to the legislature for that
instead of just arbitrarily
deciding that that's what we're
gonna do that now we're paying
for it which is fine but that
should have been a reverse
process they should have come to
us and ask for additional
funding to increase that
assistance and now we're paying
for it through this process and
and I don't disagree I mean I
think it's probably going to be
fine but I hope in the future
that the department will not do
that in that they will go
through the process like
everybody else does we want
increased funding so that was
one of my concerns
I think that's it I still have
questions on the five year
average but maybe senator
Neville can kind of wrap your
arms around that little bit
better than I can because it
seems like you know we're we're
not recognizing the fact that
those averages eventually you
know level out and then then we
turn to the one twenty five and
I use that as an either or which
I think you either go by the
average or you put an amount in
there I think over over the long
term and someone mentioned
rating the fat I think we have
to be really careful this is
meant to be back up for me when
as we have been told oil and gas
is basically going to go way
which I don't think it ever will
that but I do think it's better
to prepare for that and
certainly not to jump in there
and and not start
chipping away to fund that is
meant for our kiddos for long
term and certainly the needs not
there after we we did the
permanent fund in in that past
and that's going to be
additional money that's going to
go to early childhood I just and
can concern that we put a lot of
money in there that over time we
may not be upstanding thank you.
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Kernan and
members so actually Kelly just
did a quick calculation about
what the distribution would have
been could you share that Ms
fares just looking at it the
corpus didn't change the purpose
was just what it is at the close
of last fiscal year which was
three point four seven billion
and it was five percent on that
and didn't change from there on
it would be a hundred and
seventy three million and so
it's it's yes.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman first up
was this one of our endorsed
bills okay that's what second
memory is getting fuzzy at this
stage of the of the session but
Hundred what did you say on the
three point something billion
that we currently have a hundred
and Mr hundred and seventy three
million and what would be when
we're at nine point nine billion
Mr chair it would be three
hundred and seventy four.
Which is approaching what are
PED number is for the
for education and to and its
entirety for this one segment of
education just I just want to
point that out Mr chairman and
then we've got to the right I
called to raise the rate on the
permanent fund is two hundred
fifty million dollars is that
about right somewhere in that
ballpark.
That's total us not just early
childhood within the.
Isn't that amount coming out of
the.
Two hundred and some million
dollars Mr chair and centered in
New Mexico from the land grant
permanent yes the additional
disbursement that the voters
approved Mr chairman members
committee for at early childhood
educational owned the
distributional be a hundred and
forty million.
And then what is the general
fund amount that has nothing to
do with these two fronts
dollar amount there yet Mr
chairman prior to those two the
FY twenty three general fund
operating budget of the
department was a hundred and
ninety five point six million so
we got a hundred ninety five and
a hundred and twenty something
and another hundred and some
what's that add up to five
hundred Mr chairman members of
the committee be
HFC
appropriation
Appropriation recommendation for
the bill for the early childhood
department including all revenue
sources is a six hundred and
seventeen point five million.
The project change Mr chairman
what is the overall education
budget separate from this.
Mr chairman it's it's a it's in
the ballpark of five hundred
four hundred fifty or something
like this is our call sep
ballpark in that about right.
and Mr chair Senator nouvelle in
this all the six hundred and and
seventeen million also include
some of the federal revenues the
matching funds and Mr Chairman I
just wanted to point out the
numbers of creek I think we have
adequately funded early
childhood and possibly over
funded and.
Then we get to the nine point
something billion in the future
it's even more over funded so I
think we're gonna to look at
something in the future Mr
chairman not not trying to take
away from a child that are
generally genuinely believe it's
it's for critical and we need to
do as much as we can but I think
we we may if creative it of a
monster here and it it all
depends what all the guest as
with the oil and gas even.
If it doesn't go away has a lot
of volatility and so I don't
know how that's all going to
work out
I think that's all point I
wanted to make and get some
answers on that
Big numbers Mister chair Mister
big numbers thank you Mr up.
Statutorily that that we'll get
back at me ask couple questions
first of what is the early
childhood trust fund monies
early childhood is it
statutorily allowed to be used
for.
Mr chair and members
Mr chair members of the
committee the money is to fund
subject to appropriation by the
legislature for early childhood
education and care services and
programs and that is not
necessarily defined as ECECD in
particular but for services for
children.
Early childhood that yes those
are the top grateful young
children we haven't defined in
statute with that age range
means because right now pre
child care assistance Mr chair
which is one of the largest
programs that ECECD runs from a
couple weeks of life until you
turn thirteen.
So is that the interpretation of
the finance committee that early
childhood education funds can be
used up to age thirteen
Mr Chairman is Committee LFC has
not voted on an official
position on the.
Could any of the fund
disbursement being talked about
here be used for children up to
age thirteen.
Mr chairman of the committee
yes.
And so.
So do we need to define what
early childhood is because I
certainly don't think that age
thirteen is early childhood.
Of yet funds out of this art
could be used for up the age
thirteen I don't think that was
the intent ever that it was up
to that age do does the federal
government to provide early
childhood it'll.
Mr chairman of the committee so
childcare assistance would be
used from this fund and so that
would be one of the larger
programs that serves older
children I'm not sure if there's
a federal statute that defines
early childhood that's actually
many states have been moving up
to included through kindergarten
we have a thirteen year old
kindergarteners no Mr I'm just
saying that childcare assistance
ECECD's one of its major program
serves children it's couple
weeks until they hit age
thirteen and so that has been
part of the system for a long
time is there anyone here from
early childhood education care.
Do you all in June answer what
what is the the mission or what
do you see as early childhood
education what up to what age.
Chair thank you for that
question I'm actually strong I'm
the general counsel for early
childhood Education and Care
Department the public questions
that you ask one of the federal
definition for early childhood
under the every child succeeds
act is the state the they
defined early childhood
education programs as head start
state licensed or regulated
childcare programs and programs
serving children birth to
kindergarten that address
children's cognitive social
emotional and physical
development.
We do provide healthcare systems
up to age twelve but that is not
with these funds that's with the
federal child care assistance
funds the funds that are funded
by state funds under the trust
fund are only going up to age
five which is our are enabling
statute allows us to go to eight
I am in some cases if the
context permits up eight eight.
so the up to age twelve is with
federal dollars not state
dollars we do interpret the
trust fund language it says that
it is limited to appropriation
for early childhood education
and care services and programs
and we are the early childhood
education and care department so
the the those
Programs that are.
Run by early childhood education
and care and so that would be
the definition of what you know
we what we do so that's what we
believe that these funds are
limited to we do believe that
there are a couple of programs
and helpful to that could
potentially that are not within
that are there's fifteen million
there funded with the trust
funds that we do not believe.
Actually that these are
classification but that is what
we believe that this is
statutorily limited to and what
we would limit these funds uses
to okay thank you that I may
have questions for for you again
so it sounds like the statutory
language limits any of this fund
to up to about age five of the
age eight and sometimes things
like that are in special
education cases or or things of
that sort.
Is any of this money that in
this in house bill two is it
being spent on things that for
Children beyond age I.
Mr chair members may yes there's
significant increases for
child care assistance we don't
define how the department can
use their federal their general
or their Trust Fund it all goes
into the same line item and then
the department has the
flexibility to put those pots of
money to use use that accounting
code to pay for what child as
far as legislature's concern
that money all goes into the
same line item.
Well except for federal monies I
mean this is state money that by
statute can only be used to H.
five I believe some of what's in
here is for school based health
centers.
R. is that correct Mr so
Schoolbased health centers are
serving children that are in our
public schools.
Which is well beyond age I how
do we justify that when by
statute.
It's as updates I.
Mr chairman the committee the
state doesn't have a statutes
and that that's federal
requirements on head start and
child care hold on that.
yes early childhood education
and care department Ebeling
statute.
Goes up to eight five and in
some cases eight to eight
thousand are labeling statute
I'm so that is states that to be
federal education every child
succeeds act is also definition
but the state definitions of the
enabling statute.
Mr chair the the statute for the
fund however does not say that.
That's the enabling statute for
the department.
That correct but are they not
the ones that are then going to
be spending this money doesn't
this go to their Department for
expenditure Mr chair and members
of the committee the money goes
to ECECD as of many other for
funding goes to ECECD's that is
then transferred to other
departments as well CYFD
department of health
And through it it's it's going
to Department of Health for
school based health centers and
to Medicaid to provide a
behavioral and physical a
service for children
Rates increase for those
because.
So kind of the same question
that twelve million dollars
that's going for behavioral
health is that just for young
children age up to age five or
is this reimbursement rates for
behavioral mental health up to
age thirteen.
Mr chair of the department is
provided me the definitions of
their ECECD accidents as a child
means a person from age five or
where the context otherwise
provides age eight or thirteen.
That's the actual language in
their enabling act.
Next.
Sir and Mr chair my other doctor
Courtney would say that that
context is the children that the
department does serve in that
age range.
What is the early childhood
education care department
consulted about this that this
fifteen million I mean this is
an increase distribution about
the fifteen million and that
it's going outside of where
their normal
The page I was trying to think
of a better word than that but
they're normal at
structures.
Mr chair members made LFC
recommendation was released in
January the department did not
request this money however
previously the department had
been transferring money to DO H.
for the family success lab.
So they had already started
transfer money to other
departments for services the let
me ask the department when you
transfer money is the family
success lab what what age groups
are what is that focused on.
Mr chair of those programs are
focused on their early childhood
education and care department
programs my understanding is
those serve of the very young
children before age five but I
do not have the exact answer to
that I.
We'll get that for you but I'm
almost certain that that serves
under age five okay so that
still falls within would you
consider to be the statutory
enabling language for the
department for those of those
funds with the department of
health Mr Chairman it's the
partnership they're helping us
run one of our programs.
The.
Back before session started have
a discussion with and I it that
time chairman Lundstrom and
stuff and I was very concerned
when some of this was brought up
and and said that that this was
funding that was using money out
of the early childhood and Care
Department for things that are
outside of their.
Their jurisdiction if you will.
And you know and this doesn't
show up basically in the bill it
shows up deep within the
language of house bill two out
these monies are actually going
to be spent which is very
difficult for people to find.
Mr chair we've been publishing
tables that show exactly where
the money would be
Representative and so to break
that down
of that money transferred out
four point three million is
going for children's behavioral
health for children in custody
some a lot of them were younger
ages provider rate increases for
children health services
youth residential treatments
at B. H. D. provider rate
increases for applied behavior
health rates for children and so
those were the main dollars are
going that you're talking about
so that's the a to fifteen
million being transferred out of
the hundred and twenty five
million dollars increase.
Okay well but again it sounds
like that's outside of what the
the normal jurisdiction is of
early childhood the these monies
are being spent other places
yeah this is the first time it's
been a place where I've had
opportunities to to see in this
discuss and I I think that that
is yeah that that.
Material legal is the right
thing but that is a miss
distribution of the funds of the
early childhood funds outside of
early childhood education when
it says specifically that it
needs that it will be going to
Department of Health for
behavioral health provider
increases I believe is what the
wording actually says so
increased salaries for
behavioral health providers and
then the the three million that
is toward school based health
centers which typically don't
have early childhood education
students at them occasionally
there might be a school that has
an early childhood center as
part of it which would be pre K.
and some of those but most of
that money is not going to early
childhood it's going to regular
childhood.
Which is outside of the
jurisdiction and I don't see how
I can support this when you know
there are the money and and the
language of that is and I
realize it's available for all
but it's somewhat hidden or
obscured down in your page
hundred and seven I'm making up
a number but hundred seventy
something of the language around
house bill two.
Of.
Mr chair and members of the
committee
I would say that LFC and HFC
during the budget framework
process and through the
committee hearings HSD hearings
LFC firmly believes that the
expense you know the just the
disbursement and expenses
program areas that we are
recommending are allowable
expenses and I think that one of
the key take aways is that.
The additional disbursement of a
hundred and twenty five million.
those funds you know if they are
not in if if house bill one
ninety one does not pass which
is perfectly and it you know
that's a policy decision however
that affects directly the
ability to fund you know fifty
three million of child care
assistance the family first and
family infant toddler program
and early childhood system
coalitions the family success
lab the home visiting marketing
campaign infant mental health
N. as well as you know those are
the key components that are
being funded and LFC and HFC I
do have a fairly extensive
process for vetting and building
the framework
thank you and and Representative
I fully understand the
importance of getting this to
get the other monies to them I
guess what I'm concerned about
is the embedding of things that
are not early childhood into the
same fund so that those get
funded other places because of
the need that we have to fund
the other part that is early
childhood that's the the whole
system that I'm not comfortable
or happy about doing and so I
would very very much be
interested in pulling those
monies off of this bill so that
those are not going to that.
At the end please understand I
fully support
The school based health centers
I fully be support behavioral
health increases but that ought
to be funded separately not out
of this bill that is focused on
early childhood education thank
you Mr chairman members and that
actually right now the Senate
finance committee has H. B. two
and so that's where those
changes would need to be made.
Well we're could be made in this
bill.
this bill does it that's not
within the purview of this bill
I mean this is just increasing
the disbursement amount.
Okay I guess I would ask them to
maybe of the finance people is
how do we go about fixing that
so that people so because I'm
concerned that this is
unconstitutional because it does
not meet the the requirements
over here the early childhood
education trust fund my
understanding was not consulted
about this additional scope of
the monies that is dedicated
towards that department and is
outside of that.
How do we we fix the problem.
Yeah just go over and and
consult the people who are in on
Senate finance to don't know
anything about this they haven't
heard they weren't part of the
discussions at least not at the
level of knowing that these
actual things were happening.
Mr chair members of the next
order for this committee is
Senate finance.
Okay
I'm not sure what to do because
I'm not comfortable voting for
this bill when the money's being
there are being transferred are
not within the scope of the
early childhood education
department.
Second.
Thank you Mr chairman may be yes
we've done with some other bills
that have many attach that we
send it on with no
recommendation and and let's get
this going because we do need I
do support the idea that those
dollars don't need to just sit
there in the early childhood
trust let's move it on in in
certainly that gives us time
your analyst time to visit with
Adrian and Senate finance maybe
sit down and and see if we can't
work through this but to hold it
here in trying to make a fix
when we don't know for sure
what's in house bill two I don't
and let's let's just move it on
with no Representative would be
my recommendation thank you.
But
I know you had some of thank you
Mr chairman U. addressed a lot
of my concerns as well but up
but Mr Chairman up
Representative Dixon.
The ex presume and I you guys
are kind of just in my book so I
appreciate all that you do
but just the PED okay here's my
question on on page two line
nineteen says the money shall be
distributed from the fund to the
early childhood education and
care program fund.
Why isn't it transferred.
To the Department or why isn't
transferred to the general fund
for the department you could
explain those nuances to Mr
chair that is just a mechanism
so that it can be appropriating
can't just you the legislature
has to appropriate the funding
so it's just an account to hold
it so it can be appropriated by
you as a body understood thank
you thank you for that and then
so we
But even if money.
Goes to a department.
We what's.
The we would still have to give
them permission to spend the
money
But the weight.
The the LFC accounting is is if
we send it to the program fund.
It's just it's basically for the
department is that fair to say.
Mr chair members committee like
any fund in the state the
legislature has to appropriate
out of it to the executive for
to be able to be Spence so it's
like the tobacco fund money goes
from tobacco the tobacco fund
and then the legislature
authorizes that for certain
purposes okay thank you so
Mister chairman gentle lady
Representative Dixon is it
Is the plan to appropriate a
hundred percent of the early
childhood program fund.
The Mr chair members of the
committee this is.
The program fund it would be Inc
on top of the program funds so
right now the distribution into
the program fund would only be
sixty seven million because that
first years as zero as were
saying take make that transfer
into the program from from S.
ice we're giving us I see that
direction to make that transfer
into the program fund a hundred
twenty five million and then
appropriating out of that
account to these purposes okay
but is but is do you know Mr
chairman gently and helpful to
us as currently written is the
plan to appropriate the entire
hundred twenty five million
dollars Mr chair yes okay great
and then
Do you appropriate that in
twelve to to maximize the
financial returns do you
appropriate that in twelve
increments each month or just
one.
Big transfer on July first Mr
chairman I believe that goes in
the twelve increments and then
gets into the part of the the
the wrecked.
From the department says it
comes in one point at so we may
want to revisit that Mr chairman
gentle lady and and
And you know the the the the
nuts and bolts of the accounting
and the cash flows and stuff but
to maximize investment in the
long run from if I what we
learned is there in twelve month
increments so that cash stays in
the investment account as long
as possible
And then but I I sure that
determines concerns up I think
I agree with the hundred twenty
five million I think frankly we
should.
Remove the five percent just
appropriated I'm going each year
with regards to what what we
choose I think it's got to be is
problematic because it just
prohibit spending this money on
other stuff I think would be
more intellectually honest if we
transferred you know fifty then
to the general fund and then did
those programs that you
described
So I I I I think that
conversation still needs to be
had with the executive I think
the.
I think
I think the LFC is work is just
tremendous my hat's off always
to LFC in the staff but I think
the.
The good that chief executive in
that that the secretary
also have a vision and and these
to be.
Needs to be consulted with and
then lastly Mr chairman the
As we all know you the it's you
cannot right something that
belongs to you.
So so none of this is the right
thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Dixon and
LFC staff
it it as we go through this this
to me sounds like you know it's
a brand new program and we just
don't have a lot of experience
with the kind of an oversight
that we didn't get enough money
in for the first year maybe when
we were putting it together but
you know a lot of this stuff out
by we're way out ahead of so
many other states and it's
incredibly wonderful that we're
doing it there are bound to be
these little stumbles and and
and things that need to get
worked through so
so my sense is that the court
the bill as let's get some money
to be able to be spent this year
because we have the needs to do
it this year I mean that's
essentially what the bills
trying to do there it is raising
a number of issues and how it's
fine tune so I just as an
observation I would agree with
uh Senator Kernan that we do
with no rack that with all of
this feedback and the other
departments coming in you all
get together and if you can't
through Senate finance fix some
of this the my senses you're
gonna you have a lot of work to
do over the summer to fine tune
this much more now that we're
finding out some of the
unintended consequences that
need to be straightened out so I
just want to make that
observation Mr chair thank you
thank you and and I certainly
appreciate the the money going
to early childhood and the
increases I think my biggest
concern is the policy decisions
that are being made in the
language in house bill two that
restricts that fifteen million
to some things that are outside
of the early childhood education
and trust fund and so I will
work with.
The Senate finance to try and
stripped that language out up
for that fifteen million that
sends it to school based health
centers and the twelve million
to the increases for behavioral
health type of things because I
don't think that finance
committee should be making
policy decisions through
language like that instead of
this bill that should just
clearly be setting up funding to
early childhood education.
That makes sense.
That's that's the crux of my of
my concern is we should not be
making policy decisions you know
hundred page pages into house
bill two that that changes the
distribution for things.
Yes windfall of COVID I think
LFC and LESC might on a.
Confab or something in the
summer because this is almost
created.
Huge six hundred plus million
dollars being larger than the
overall education budget.
And I guess in growth beyond
that I think it go out hi to
vote we ought to look at these
options.
Re direction of research.
To suggest we do remember
reading Senator.
Sacrament thank you and I agree
and you know just listening to
to LESC during the summer
because this is such a huge part
of money and there are so many
needs really outside of the C.
C. D. that involve children and
if we're gonna do this let's do
it the right way in change the
structure of the of the you know
the big savings account so that
it can be used
if that's the will of the
legislature but I I don't
disagree I think but I do
encourage as this moves forward
that Senator souls analyst make
sure they share with LFC the
thoughts that we've had because
I don't disagree but I do think
that's the place where if
changes need to be clarified
that's probably where it should
be so thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Okay thank you and last minute
questions.
Now Mr chair thing I'm gonna
get out of the motion for a no
REC.
And seconded.
If you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Maestas yes there Novell yes
etcetera Pentaho no.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator also no but it does
move forward on it right thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
the the good discussion.
That's the last bill that we
