The bill number.
And.
I will also be trying did to
verbally let people know where
we are on the schedule between
each of the different bills
we'll have a minute or two
between each bill as we try to
get the next group of people who
might want to make public
comment into the room to get
that started so before we get
started with our first bills is
there are there any comments
questions from committee
members.
I is Senator Brandt I haven't
seen his photo up yet.
Senator Brandt okay looks like
we got a whole committee up and
ready senator bill it's ace
having you but it's probably
gonna be a little while but
you're welcome to hang out with
us yeah until your your bill
comes up.
The committee as well it looks
like we have the other Sanchez
your as well Senator solves this
merry and I believe it Senator
pope has to stand up okay center
appropriates.
Mr chairman and you'll probably
have to remind folks but from
the other committee meetings
just to let folks know during
public comment to turn off their
webcast while they're actually
making their comments we've seen
those issues were interference
and are they being kind of
confused by the by the delay so
we thank you senator and that
the delay on the webcast to be
up to twenty or thirty seconds
which is very disorienting when
you're trying to talk and then
your your voice a few seconds
later saying the things that you
just said we think by having the
people actually in the room on
the the video will we'll work
through that but that's yeah
we're still working all of those
those issues and and pieces out.
Any other comments from many.
Many of the members.
If not we'd like to go to the
the first bill we have today
Senate bill thirty one which is
on full time school nurses after
that we will be doing Senate
bill forty forty one forty two
always Senator Stewart and I'll
give some additional updates
then after that but the first
bill we have is Senate bill
thirty one full time school
nurses Senator Stefanics you are
on.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee it's a
pleasure to be here.
And I in presenting Senate bill
thirty one which is a different
twist on a bill I've had in the
past in the past I tried to
introduce a bill that would have
a nurse in every school this
bill only addresses a nurse in
every school district.
We have eighteen public school
districts without a nurse of any
shake for form part time full
time etcetera so the one thing I
will let you know is that I have
learned that we have many more
school districts than I imagine
and so if this bill goes on.
We would want to Amanda but not
right now I in that and instead
of saying every school district
we would probably say every
public school district with the
physical location.
And let me explain the bill
further I have to expert
witnesses with me today Lisa
Crawford and Rhonda sparks both
of the New Mexico school nurses
association and they are on the
screen with us.
my concern is of multiple.
We have even before the virus we
have many issues with children
coming to school.
You can see the children that
are crying children that are
dirty or disabled maybe children
with Bruce's maybe children
coughing so we have many
instances when a school nurse
could perhaps perceive and
identify that there is an issue
or problem that needs to be
direct addressed.
With the wrong of COVID virus we
have even more of a need to have
a health care professional that
could be called in the school
district to address this.
I have six
Counties in my district and I
have about thirteen school
districts but out of all the
physical public school districts
in the state we have eighteen
school districts that do not
have a part time or full time
nurse and that is what this bill
intends to address my.
Was not to we can discuss this
further but my intent was not to
have an appropriation but for it
to be absorbed in the school
budget like it is in other
school districts that currently
have a school nurse at this
point if
it's okay with the chair I'd
like to turn to my two experts
Lisa Crawford and run the
sparks.
Good morning Mr chair Senators
good morning and thank you for
your time and very much agree.
She hated I.
Take a moment to consider what
it is that a school nurse does I
think many people don't really
truly understand what school
nurses do.
And why so very important to
have a school nurse.
Let me just give you a short
list if you would consider the
things that the school nurses do
just on a daily basis and what
we would consider to be a normal
school year.
To begin with they do care
coordination between families
schools medical providers they
do continue of coordination of
care between special education
planning IEPs I will force they
develop care plans the
development education schedules
treatment schedules for students
they review health files for
chronic conditions the
legislative occasion and
training to school staff
regarding chronic conditions of
students leisure care adamant
here cardiac care and severe
allergic reactions.
The provide medication
administration and education to
students regarding their
medication they do health
education to students with
Christian handwashing hydration
safety they provide health
education and training to staff.
I social and emotional support
to students and families.
Okay provide resources for these
families need.
They provide screenings of all
sorts vision hearing the money.
They're involved in policy and
procedure development for
districts and this doesn't
include the nearly two million
health visits acute and
emergency care The New Mexico
school nurses saw last year
alone.
Believe me when I say this is
just a short list of what school
nurses do on a daily basis now
let's consider the COVID school
year.
Not only are school nurses still
responsible for everything on
their plates.
Writing education training for
COVID.
How to properly use PP how to
properly distance cough and
sneeze handwashing contact
tracing for students and staff.
They're developing developing
safety plans for re entry and
administering comment vaccines
to community members and
provided food assistance to
family or quarantine.
They participated food banks.
Knowledge distribution to
students and staff.
And while there's districts you
know what it means to have a
school nurse in their ranks
there are so many more schools
and districts that don't know
what they don't know and they
don't have the benefits of the
school nurse.
Just some right data does
independence schools has three
campuses within moments of two
hundred ninety one hundred sixty
nine of one sixteen at each
school they have no owners.
John Valley has for schools no
district nurse.
Senator also consolidated has
five different schools and
there's only one nurse between
those five schools.
West Las Vegas has ten campuses
with over thirteen hundred
students and only one school
nurse.
This is just a small sampling of
districts within our state.
Almost twenty four schools that
have no full time nurse on
campus.
Thank you health disparities
that are present here think of
the safety issues facing
students and staff in the
schools.
The school districts are the hub
of the community and so many
different places and with no
school nurse access to care is
to nearly limited.
So I ask you the question
without a school nurse who is
providing the care for the
students when there's an
emergency who was looking after
the students and the staff.
When there's a crisis was
meeting the needs of these
families who is really a quit to
do this the principles the
secretaries.
Legally can they provide this
care.
These districts really need a
school nurse they have to have a
school nurse to provide health
care to so very very important
to the students coming in.
I think of some of the students
that come in
You know I hear so many people
talk about how EMTs our
paramedic to take the place of a
school nurse.
Well Jennifer who comes into the
kindergarten student just got
diagnosed with asthma.
Money comes in with a huge that
sets it on the desk because I
don't know what to do I've never
use an inhaler before my
daughter's kindergarten she's
never used any other what what
do I do.
Any anti is not prepared to do
health management they're
trained in crisis care.
Principles of secretaries they
cannot to health management it's
the school nurses gonna sit with
Jennifer and her mom and explain
what is asthma what happens when
an asthma attack occurs how do
you understand your triggers how
do you avoid those triggers when
you have three different
inhalers which inhaler do you
use when how do you use the
inhalers properly and how can we
manage this asthma and how can I
teach Jennifer chair asthma so
that when she's in third fourth
and fifth grade she can control
things herself but she
understands for disease process.
It's things like this are so
incredibly important why is
school district wide school has
to have a full time nurse.
At this point I would also like
to turn this over to our
executive director Mysteron
sparks and let her make a few
comments as well she's been a
school nurse for a very long
time and has quite a bit of
expertise to offer.
Thank you and miss sparks was it
yes Sir.
Thank you.
Good morning committee members
thank you so much for this
opportunity to speak to you
about this bill we as the New
Mexico school nurses association
have been passionate about for
many many years
I'm gonna read you something and
and I need to see if you
superintendents are past
superintendent sitting out there
and I think they'll understand
it good morning stand
remember when everyone thought
school nurses fourteen men and
submissive helpers in the school
dealing with bumps and scrapes
and vomit
and then a pandemic came and
superintendents and districts
who were.
Well thought out and and New the
value of school nurses realized
that their nurses like a Swiss
army knife providing and
finding ten million ways to save
your life your district and
money for your district I want
you to think about that for a
moment as we come before you
asking for nursing presence in
those districts that have none
in addition to some money to
help fund those I know that this
bill does not have
appropriations.
I also know that many districts
who don't have a nurse are not
poised with funding to come up
with that
I spent many many years
directing school Services in
Clovis New Mexico and in my
tenure we were able through
creative funding ways
and a district administration
team who really felt the need
for nurses
to find creative ways we use
general up funds we used IDA
money we used advocate money
To improve and increase and
potentially more than double the
number of nurses in Clovis.
Parents understand why their
school nurses important
secretaries who are being asked
to do things that are way out of
their scope of practice in
addition to superintendents and
principals understand why school
nurses are important not only
for those kids who care has been
put into law as my kids diabetic
kids but those regular old kid
to fall down who break teeth who
make bad decisions who are at
risk who go to the nurse to tell
them the most terrible thing you
can imagine
nobody else really wants to deal
with that nor has time or
training to deal with those
things and so we are
respectfully asking you to
thoughtfully consider this bill
and to assist those districts.
That have no nursing presence to
find a way to make that happen
we'd be happy to answer any
questions that you may have and
we thank you again for your
time.
Thank you Senator X..
Thank you Mr chair my experts
know quite a bit more about this
topic than I and
we did.
This is a mere bill I'm intended
but it is a more build that and
Rachel cudgel had actually
helped Representative Sariñana
and myself on this bill and so
yes see if I will have our
intent and.
I believe that she might think
that the language is correct in
the bill but.
You can weigh in on that but
that's all for right now thank
you.
Thank you senator the lesion
thank you senator up at this
point we'll go out for public
comment and we'll try and make
this work as well as possible
we're getting that set up and
all of the people ready to do so
I want to remind the public we
are working on Senate bill
thirty one full time school
nurses Senator list and it is
the.
Sponsor for this particular bill
will be going out for public
comment I guess it this time and
again we're still working on the
technical side of things are
there any one with.
And then I'm trying to see how
we go about getting that
happening so hold on just a
moment.
Okay I think we're we're all
okay it was a different message
yeah we're trying to multi task.
Is there anyone for public
comment.
Hello.
So I see stand ranch with his
handout we're going to go and go
to heaven and I see Kay current
we'll go after.
Okay Markelle if you want to
just do that if you'll call out
each one in the new Deming get
them started on it that might be
the easiest as opposed to be
trying to call on each one so
please act on my behalf to call
each person in turn for public
comment.
Okay sounds good thank you
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman is in
order to make comment at this
point yes Sir please do please
carry on thank you Mr chairman
members the committee senators
to phonics thank you for
bringing this forward
unfortunately the
superintendents association who
I who I represent along with the
coalition education leaders
still have difficulties with
portions of this bill so we have
to declare opposition right now
it's currently protected let me
get a right just a couple of the
issues Representative quickly
first of all cardinalate this is
an unfunded mandate requires two
point seven million from
eighteen districts who currently
would not enjoy it appropriation
to assessed that's going to
cause offset some of the things
that are there in this time of
COVID were struggling to to put
the resources for the need to be
we don't disagree with the
senator about the importance of
health care students and of the
support there nor the
association for the nurses and
and just put a here string for
those in the committee that
don't know me I was a
superintendent New Mexico for
over thirty years and Center
souls in fact was.
Part of the district I was there
for for ten years in Los crucis
or we took our our R. as nurses
up to a full forty using merit
of funds that we're able to
cobble together including
Medicaid in the schools which
was the greatest driver and that
Mr chairman as part of the issue
as we move this bill along
should ago or as we look at
future efforts we need to
consider and I we appreciate the
the exclusion of those two
hundred fifty and below that
takes care part of our issue but
it still's not unfunded mandate
I would noted many of the
districts a few of those that
were represented in the comments
today are using county health
clinic models and models through
REC to provide services and this
bill is quiet on those as
services and I think that would
assist and how that might move
forward Mr chairman I don't want
to belabor the point
unfortunately have to stand in
opposition thank you.
Thank you Mr rounds Senator
Kernan I believe you want to
make a comment or now.
I just want to make sure Mister
ransacked a chance to speak us
this and so I have nothing at
this point maybe under a.
Participation under Canadian.
Okay my calories or anyone else
for public comment.
Yes I C. Schoch Killian yes yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Jody
and I'm the executive director
of the New Mexico school boards
association representing all
eighty nine school boards
similar to the.
All comments provided by our
superintendents association this
is an unfunded mandate this is
one of three of our guiding
principles that we we support
during legislative sessions no
unfunded mandates sufficient
funding and
we feel very strongly that.
Of the this is a very important
issue however there are no funds
are provided with this there was
an indication during the interim
Ellie S. C. meeting that the
Sanchez would seek an
appropriation for this bill and
unfortunately I I don't see it
we were ready to support the
bill if in fact there was an
appropriation with that I don't
see that.
Are all of our districts would
love to provide nursing services
to all of our students it's just
a matter of choosing between
teachers and nurses and they
should be placed in that in that
of position of having to choose.
And if there's any possible way
to add an appropriation to this.
We would certainly be in support
otherwise I'm afraid we cannot
support the bill so thank you
for allowing us to comment we
appreciate it very much.
Thank you Mr again M. Martel at
the start get the next one
going.
At this time I don't see anyone
else who would like to make a
comment if you would like to
choose your reaction with your
hand up to current your cameras
isn't working and you do want to
make a comment.
We don't know what else.
Was there someone else yes I see
Steve's more scenes yes.
See that within the a I think it
is yes.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the Senate education
committee my name is you see is
with any in New Mexico I am the
government relations director
and still.
I'm more members we we believe
that having a full time nurse is
indeed aligned with our.
Twenty twenty one any a New
Mexico legislative goals.
I'm you know I
think believe that we should
provide all students with
adequate high quality health
care and to do so having a full
time nurse employee.
School district is is no doubt a
critical step in the right
direction.
And and of course you know it's
more so during this pandemic.
And I'm.
We believe the bill is
structurally sound
and will help our students
overcome health barriers.
Provided with the basic health
care and and and actually you
know that would really help
close the academic achievement
gap for up for students and
those in the in Yazzie Martinez
for those reasons we do support
us thirty one and and we do
encourage you to vote in favor
of this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you say.
is there anyone else Martel.
At this time Senator I don't see
anyone else for public comment I
do see okay there are senators
ready to speak okay we'll now go
to Senators up before I do that
senators to panic is there any
comments you'd like to make
based on the public input before
we go to Senator comments
questions.
thank you
Mr chair and I believe that
director Rachel cudgel could
clarify some of this out of the
eighteen of public school
districts.
That don't have a full time
nurse she might indicate that
only three of the eighteen would
need to do so and that the other
fifteen would receive a waiver
now our goal is still and I I'd
like for her to clarify that if
you permit that but you know our
goal is to.
Help into the schools if this
bill does move on to finance or
does move on it goes to finance
and it I know that it will be.
Address the financial issues but
would you let director cultural
speak on this.
Yes we can then you Rachel good
job and you got any
clarification force Rachel
funding Mr chairman
If you look at a on the Ellie as
C. analysis it lists the
eighteen school districts that
don't currently have a full time
school nurse only three of those
chum about rules in Melrose not
Would not qualified tensely for
away for that they couldn't find
one thank god addition PED and
ask for a waiver.
Martel is there.
Was there another one for public
comment.
I did not see her return hand
however she's available to
speak.
Okay was one of the expert
witnesses.
Are you available yes yes I am
at eight if I may for the
committee just wanted to clarify
something and one of the points
that Mr Qian brought up
well I understand that districts
are finding difficulty even
paying for teachers under
current mandates I would ask you
to remember that if there is not
a health care professional
present teachers are using
valuable time not teaching
because they are dealing with
the stomach aches the headaches
the mental health issues the.
Nigel COVID
exposure the ads meant the
diabetes so while we're spending
money for teachers in districts
would now health care they are
often being asked to spend all
of their valuable time providing
health care not teaching
students and so adding school
lessons to the funding formula
will solve much of this problem
thank you.
Thank you.
And typically when we have thank
you I appreciate it how but we
have public comment the experts
would not be part of the the
public comment afterwards in
last the sponsoring senator
asked to refer back to you and
so would not be under the public
comment area as one of the
expert witnesses but those are
things we're we're all new while
working things out so no problem
I will go Note etcetera but the
a you have questions I thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
Senator Stefanics I'm a hundred
and twenty seven percent behind
you on this effort I really
appreciated you know I was glad
that I was able to go now Mr
chair because I really
appreciated the sparks comments
in her original presentation on
the following comments you know
teachers are being asked to wear
in you have to in the of all the
other half their work every year
and this is just another one of
those hats and I I really
appreciated the fact that not
only are these are the teachers
being asked to be the classroom
nursed they're also being asked
to do the classroom social
worker also for the the portion
and and the percentage of the
classroom that is.
dealing with a number of things
outside of the classroom so that
they can get school that day so
that they're not hungry so that
they have transportation so that
they can get their homework done
so I I completely appreciate
those comments I'm coming at
this at this moment because I
just I think you know Mister
chairman I'm very supportive of
this this initiative in this
effort
my comments come from a
financial standpoint
I saw some analysis that there
were there would be a need for
an additional two point four two
point six million dollars to
place a school nurse in every
district of some districts you
know what one person is going to
run the entire district you know
it's not be run ragged and
probably run out of school
because I have a district
because it's just so much worse.
How is it and I don't know
Senators to panic this is for
your this is Rachel
Not how how does money flow now
to the districts that do have
them our is at the school
district making the decision
with monies to make that happen
because he doesn't know we have
a regular and I think that's
what you're trying to write
Centers act a regular way of
working to get this done do you
want to comment on that.
Thank you Mr chair and senator I
would defer to director cudgel
for that.
So the director did you.
Hey you Mr Mr chair and Senator
I would assume they are using
their operating budgets whether
it is SCG funds federal funds
based health centers that are
funding some school nurses there
are Medicaid matching funds are
Department of Health funds and
maybe Mr rounds if yes and in
L.
but it's not coming through
typically direct appropriation
safe from the legislature
through a variation of different
funding sources.
So Mr around I don't know if you
want to comment.
Mr chair Senator Padilla as I
stated in my comments there's an
array it's not specified
anywhere in fact in statute
there's no recognition direction
relative to those person and so
district for making difficult
choices that's why we're
encouraging a discussion about
state resources as directed to
this to make this bill better
bill.
On that I also appreciate Mr
young's comments Mr chairman on
how to get this done so so then
Mr chair Senators manager
there's no prohibition on the
SCG to use the money that way.
I'm trying to figure out how
it's coming together that that's
the largest you know I'll talk
to money to the districts yeah.
Nothing prohibiting the school
district for making that
decision some of those dollars
are coming
Mr chair representative that's
what I understand but as one of
our experts indicated
there's no prohibition from
reducing the of grant private
foundation grant money for this
and we have the Robert wood
Johnson we have catalog we have
in regards to that have been
very invested in community
schools and public health in our
schools so I would encourage us
to think about
it.
Those few schools in acquiring.
Outside funding to get started
on such a project thank Senator
more president Mr chair Senators
depending on so just just kind
of a follow up on SCG component
them out then maybe you said
this I apologize we did I'm I'm
trying to learn how to do
everything and hear everything
and pay attention everything
that's going on in these these
are meetings now I might miss a
few things.
Does your bill call out making
money is available to every
district through SCG.
And and and what and why
wouldn't you do that I'm just
curious that way you know for
sure there's a flow of money
going in for this purpose and
it's called out that way.
Chair and senator money intent
was to allow each school
district to identify how they
were going to get this going and
if they could in fact find.
The patron the foundation
private our system that it would
not need to come out of the SCG
and I would like to make clear I
am not that school SCG experts
here you all are thank you thank
you Mr chairman and senator as
my ninety on this committee and
I'm still trying to figure it
out myself so I appreciate your
comments I support you one
hundred and twenty seven percent
as I said just want to make sure
there's the money to do this
because we have a couple of
other things that were taxed
teachers with right now and and
you know we we we hear all these
comments oh my gosh you know
we're we're giving more money to
the teachers well heck yeah
we're given more money to
teachers because they're doing
seven jobs in the classroom and
so I just want to thank you for
on this one thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla we
have senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
SCG.
Doesn't necessarily accommodate
the very instant scale of the
school districts is very small
districts like Magdalene or
something like that I don't I
don't have to list up to what
are school districts they are if
they have their one room
schoolhouse fifty thousand
dollars for a nurse or seventy
five whatever the cost is a big
percentage of their budgets
that's probably real problem
here the larger screen will
office salary or two and it
doesn't it's not a big
percentage of the total budget I
think the.
If the sponsor Senator Stefanics
with the go ahead and plan on
the meeting before Senate
finance of the million Bucks in
the bill for purposes of funding
this then let the the financial
guys figure out how to split
that up I would recommend that
I'd like to support the bill
this is something I think very
good idea we are
and nurses in most of our
schools up here so I think it
would be a real soon not to be
able to have access to nursing
school so I would encourage of
Senator you doctor our
commitment to prepare and then
between now and the next
meeting.
To take care of it two and a
half million dollars would be
six of the cost and then let the
the bureaucrats figure out
before to the SCG for that
might.
Just a suggestion I thought
which.
Is there anything else I can.
I don't know sponsor has a
reason they didn't but the
appropriation in.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr Senator
thank you senator Neville
anything else Senator.
If not we'll go to Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
appreciated Mr chair Sir funding
did you reach out to all of
these districts and talk to the
doctor one of school nurses
situations and there is for for
your office building.
Senator I did not I have is a
indicated I have thirteen.
School districts plus.
Senate district and in looking
at their needs an unfunded
mandates I'm very aware of that
so I understand that there are
very sources of funding but no I
did not.
we're bringing.
Everyone understands.
Given what you're saying and I'm
not arguing that nurses charged
for each but this is going into
Wall non suggestions nana you
really think about this is going
to go into law just that
districts by the way that's
every.
Because.
We'll have to do this with their
doing it now becomes mandate all
those districts so we have to
understand we're this is.
My suggestion this is later this
is going to all and we didn't
provide any money Senator and
honestly he was funded it's
still another mandate are just
another way that we are taking
away local control for more
school districts we're sorry the
state better than you state of
what's happening in your
community more than I do and we
didn't even reach out to the
districts to find out why the
school or what yeah stand to
talk about we're seeing already
through the local health we can
reach out to the east side
forces and from all so I am
wrong.
Let me ask you also use of the
only applies to the three
districts is the waiver
automatic your honor to our
students.
And now it those of the.
We'll district of well it does
say that the department may
grant a waiver to rural school
district so that is able to
demonstrate.
so I think I would leave that to
the director of LFC to answer
whether.
Would I or whether you know I
would assume that they would set
up rules that have a public
hearing and
follow the rules that they set
up.
That is the state automatic
waivers actually after playing
requests all.
Mr chair Senator the word may
indicates it is not it would be
it PED's discretion if the
district can demonstrate the
criteria and the bill that they
couldn't find a school nurse or
couldn't hire a full time nurse
Russian.
But even if they could
demonstrate all that PED could
still say no you have to have a
school to that because you said
that yes I they showing the way
these requirements are met
choose they may.
Correct.
Mr chair senator that would be
correct.
One of the other concerns I have
is we continue to see more or
administrative costs and
districts are administrative
costs and some district is is
approaching fifty percent of the
resources that we're getting to
districts
in other words the president of
the resources are going to.
We're both.
So through two superintendents
paid to nurses to
principals vice principals
everywhere about the question.
That really concerns me most
states are not anywhere near
that and we've done that because
we continue to then school
districts have.
We continue to take away the
local control from the school we
did reach out to the school
districts we didn't reach out to
the school board members we
didn't reach out to anyone we
just decided.
This is what we want to force.
That's my problem with the bill
again it's not a problem.
We we should.
Provide the resources school
districts to believe that's a
priority in their districts to
be able to do that we need to
quit mandating everything Santa
Santa Fe is not the all knowing
god the state.
They don't know every.
We get along a lot just look at
the last year.
We don't know everything we
can't mandate every and the yeah
this I I can't support another
mandate on thank you Mr we
should.
Your review and found to be very
dynamic indicated that on
average of the children with
pediatric as not there emergency
room visits and and they're
quite frequent went from twenty
one year down to five.
Secondly the days lost at work
for the parents went down from
about ten.
Two three.
That's an impact.
Now when you take that and you
apply those.
The costs for those advance I'm
going to the emergency room some
of amending up in
hospitalization so they can be
very expensive.
And you look at the generally is
the state now is structured
really in terms of the are in
the fee for service basis.
That is a huge costs to the
state.
And so I would like people to
look at this as an investment
not only in savings for the
state in terms of what is rate
in the the service basically
through the are for all the of
the agencies there that's two
hundred thousand people the
state is paying for a fee for
service basis.
And look at the cost of what it
is there should actually be is a
school nurse in every school one
one for district is is
inadequate every school should
have a school nurse and and I
know this isn't the year to
bring that up that Senator
Stefanics I would be happy to
work with you for next year the
year after look at how we
actually get and then do the the
financial analysis and show that
the R. O. Y. the best team in
the school nurse in health will
reduce the cost of the state not
only in the state employees but
also in Medicaid words huge and
again that's analysis of that's
not difficult do but I want to
point out that we we tend to we
tend to isolate our budgets we
don't look at how one can impact
the other particularly in terms
of return on investment and so I
think that that at least
starting with this having the
nurses in the school district
work on pediatric yes ma'am and
now wasn't so much of a problem
back when I was CEO of loveless
back in the late nineties that
that the potential for older
children and drug abuse issues.
And that needs to be spotted by
a professional and and to get
them into some sort of treatment
programs and that's basically a
school nurse if you put that on
the teacher you've done what
we've done to the police we've
taken the previous legislation
do public safety and turn them
into social work.
Our health care will.
And they can't do all of that so
we need to invest in the school
nurse on the return on the
investment in the rest of the
state budget is to and so I
would argue that we even though
I understand unfunded mandates
are are difficult but I would
say if we're running fifty
percent administrative costs
Look at those costs there's
probably somebody in there some
administrative function is being
duplicated that money can be
taken from that pays for that in
pays for the nurse as well as
what Senator Stefanics pointed
out there are multiple granting
organizations that would
supply the dollars to pay for
this so the yes this they have
to do a little work to do that
yes they do again what is the
outcome not just lower costs the
better health in the ability to
learn when you're sitting there
wheezing and class you don't
learn anything.
So I think that this bill is
very winds it has immense are
aligned to the state as a whole
and most importantly it has
immense R. Y. the child's
ability to and with that.
Thank you Senator phonics of the
bill Mr chairman for the time to
make those kind.
Thank you senator thank you
appreciate you being on the
committee with SS Senator Pinto.
Senator Pinto I saw that your
hand was up are you there you
will get a test can you get.
Can you.
Okay.
All right.
So one of the things that was
the school district I live in
and we talk about rural and
defining rule that rule is still
not defined we kind of I guess
assume that Albuquerque is the
urban area and everything
outside of some make places are
not real but with the census and
the redistricting I hope we can
come up with the definition of
it as far as population density
and going forward with that.
We do have quite a few districts
it seems like only a few would
End up having a benefit from
this versus the rest so gal
working for Gallup McKinley
county schools there was a nurse
employed by the district and
they say in Gallup they didn't
come out to the schools I we
worked worked at the school I
worked for was twenty seven
miles out and that was several
times when we had to have
emergency services
if that was in our state was a
clinic down the hill and what I
was told working for public
schools that there was a nurse
contracted from the clinic that
was supposed to come over for
the school to conduct whatever
it is we need to the only time I
saw them was with and we did
some kind of a what
And career training when they
came in and spoke to the
students about their state.
So that accountability and
actually getting out there and
seeing the students and where we
say well we need someone to
react to what is happening at
the schools as a teacher that is
your teachable moment as far as
health especially when we talk
about the physical education and
the physicality and some of
these programs would say yes it
did decrease the child's visits
to the hospital but that's all
through education education of
the family education to the
parent education of the student
and their health as we go
through every day and it should
be incorporated into the
curriculum because that is there
a whole well being that is as
teaching as teachers.
So.
You know what we're trying to
kind of go around that point of
money our infrastructure is not
planned for this I would love to
have a nurse in every school but
basically by schools are not
built to have a nurse to have
office too.
These costs are gonna start
layering up we have a nurse she
needs an office she needs
supplies she'll need several
things and I know we do have
students in our schools that do
have special needs and health
care needs.
That is where we have to
diversify especially in our
rural areas entering COVID that
was a barrier for me was we did
have people that were qualified
but their duties and
responsibilities and the
liability cap to have their
hands tied we must make those
opportunities available within
the school so that they can
respond in that way so that
we're not help those liabilities
are covered if we hire nurse
who's gonna cover the insurance
issues contracted who's going to
pay for that insurance
and we see that and a lot of the
rule got clinics and health care
facilities we end up contracting
because we don't have and I'm
not costs double triple who gets
that big chunk of money that
we're paying that person that's
doing the contracting not the
employee contractor takes out
their money to.
So are costs go up and.
With COVID I really we had to
close down the schools some of
our employees probably had
knowledge and knowledge base a
little bit wider that they did
not have to be sent home they
probably could have had been
able to do something else at the
school but those jobs duties and
responsibilities those contracts
they signed kind of buying that
then that way we can get a
little more flexibility.
It's not that I don't want
nurses but I think the plan is a
little bit
need to start from the ground up
as far as the the infrastructure
that's going in right now I have
three schools built right next
to each other elementary middle
school and high school.
But so separated that we can't
even you know have one nurse to
service all three schools we
have to have a nurse at each
school cool and they're not even
a mile away from each other.
So yes and now we appreciate
the.
you know the well meaning of it
but I do find that we say
there's not gonna be that much
financial impact
but I think the communities to
have not really giving their
input and push for this but
that's with telehealth to I
think we're gonna have some
better
outreach as far as health care
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Pinto I have a
Senator Kernan is now is next up
to to speak and ask questions
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair at initially
assist bill was presented I I
thought oh my goodness every
every district at least should
have one nurse and then as I'm
listening to the conversation
today I do see that there are a
couple issues that maybe I had
not thought that
previously worked in here a lot
of bills today going forward
that contain both a mandate.
And require additional funding
and and this really concerns me
as we're beginning of this
session and hearing bills and
and the request for additional
funds and specifically is
related to our schools
but I do believe that that I
would feel more comfortable with
this bill it could have an
appropriation on it I'm I think
it just makes sense
when you ask a school district
to do something in addition to
what they're being funded for
down the road we're gonna have a
problem and the other thing I
think I would like to see in the
bill is change may to shall we
we learned that one word makes a
whole lot of difference and and
we've been working with the PED
over the last year and and I
will tell you I
they have wonderful staff
members working over there and
I'm not being critical of any
one individual but that that has
been a very difficult situation
for many of our school districts
in working with the PED and I'm
not confident
that
the issue of a waiver would be
yeah it's automatic as I would
like for okay because I know
their areas of the state for you
absolutely.
I'm not able to provide diverse.
If you find a nurse you're
taking that person away from
another responsibility somewhere
so so those are the two things I
would like to see in this bill
I would like to see an amendment
that would cover the cost and
then I would like maybe to
become shell because I want to
make sure that we are not
putting districts in a situation
where they're scrambling to find
somebody and maybe some were not
so qualified just to fill that
slot
this a teacher for a long time
and I will tell you at S. then
is as scary thank for teacher
you're in a school and and we
share nurses in my district it
is a school will have a nurse at
a go between two different
schools but if you have an
emergency you can't rely on even
having a nurse and every other
school I'm so you call nine one
one or you call in somebody to
help immediately and not resolve
that issue
This is this is what I thought
this was gonna be amazing bill
just to get through and and of
course I have great respect for
the sponsor of this bill
that but I just wonder if we
could get a commitment from you
going forward that we could put
an appropriation on that we
could change from maybe a shell
and let's see where we get with
this I think we're going to see
get somebody in I think it's a
district had some funds they
might be really motivated to go
out find a nurse that districts
so I wondered Senator Stefanics
good response.
Certainly Mr chair and senator I
would be happy to put on an
amendment for financing and to
change that made to shell I
could bring it back to this
committee if the committee wants
I think I would need to work
with
Actor Billy theme for the
appropriate
Thank because of how many
schools would receive a waiver
and how many schools then would
need because right now we're
still talking about school
districts not individual schools
I mean a few years ago I tried
the individual schools and it
didn't fly because the.
The funny thing when.
Thank.
I'd be happy to look this over
to for amendments or to move it
on and do the next amendment
whichever you prefer.
So Mr chairman and and Senator
purchases Bill go next.
Finance.
I'm I would be comfortable and
certainly take you for your word
that you would add that that get
that number correct and also
change the maintenance.
Shell with regard to the EDD and
and I start would be able to
support the bill with a
confirmation that those two
things would happen that's all I
have thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I don't
see any other members or
everybody is already spoken of
the bill I'm and Senator Kernan
Senator panics I appreciate very
much I was going to suggest and
that's the committee chair I.
I tend to prefer that we come
back to this committee so it has
our full endorsement without
people voting well I hope it
happens and so you know I'm I'm
hopeful that or what I would
recommend Senator Stefanics is
get the amendments we will put
you on first on Friday for kind
of a quick up and down vote I
don't gonna need a whole lot of
additional things if those
things get in there with and to
the approval of the committee
will trying to send it through
with going opportunity for
people to speak up as a
principal at both the middle
school and two different
elementary schools and and a
long term high school teacher
nobody is debating the fact that
school nurses are important in
our districts we know they are
important in the districts we
know they're important to the
education of our children that I
recall very clearly is an
elementary principal I had a
student come in Monday morning
to see the school nurse that we
only had two days a week in the
morning and the student had
gotten hurt Friday afternoon let
hold and had a badly infected
cut that needed stitches but
wasn't able to get it because
they had no access to health
care until the school nurse
gaming the next morning.
And every teacher every
principal has those kinds of
stories about how important for
our children they are and so
Senator I guess what I would ask
you if you're willing if you can
get those amendments done we
will have to first on the agenda
on Friday to finish this then
we'll have the full endorsement
is my guest from reading the
committee and we want to
finance.
Thank you Mr chair I will do so
and Mr chair if there any
potential co sponsors on your
committee they can still find on
that.
Get ready.
Thank you centers the panic
because again I don't think
anybody is debating the fact
that nurses are important I know
of no superintendents principals
or anyone else who would say
that school nurses are important
it's one of those areas where
when we don't fully fund
education at all levels where
superintendents principals have
to make doubles choices as to
what gets cut out and we really
we know these are important
areas so I'm in less there is
and I will check and see if any
members have an opposition to
doing so if we can lay this over
to Friday
is anybody and I'll look on the
picture thing if you have
opposition that if you kind of
just wait your picture and know
we can discuss that otherwise
will lay this bill over until
Friday with the recommended
changes and amendments.
I don't see anybody making angry
faces at me or anything of that
sort.
And so with that being the case
this bill will get rolled over
and we'll put you on first thing
Friday morning Senator thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you everyone for the the
good debate we are now going to
be moving on to Senate bill
forty which is the K. five plus
extended learning at the schools
with Senator
Stewart as the sponsor for that
just remind the public and
people that are planning on
speaking that you will be on the
main meeting please if you are
watching the webcast it will be
very confusing for you and
others that you still have that
on because there is a time delay
on that.
As we get to public comment on
Senate bill forty mark hello our
webmaster will be undershooting
I will give her the power to
call the next person public
comment is limited to a maximum
of two minutes
Don't embarrass me or yourself
by getting muted in the middle
of a sentence by going beyond
the two minutes.
I hope I said that politely
enough
and with that Senator store if
you would like to please
president Senate bill forty K.
five plus extended learning at
all schools.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee.
As this is a first for me today
having I built all at once and
education so I have to apologize
ahead of time because I've been
trying to prepare for all five
so I may start talking about a
different bill in the middle of
this one I that's what my dreams
were last night so.
This is an alias State endorsed
bill.
it tries to deal with a number
of issues of it two years ago
when we passed a Senate bill one
and house bill five we put
significant amount of money
into a K. five plus an extended
learning because.
Those two programs have shown to
be as so important for academic
growth of the K. five plus was
part of a five year twenty
million dollar study from the
university of Utah Utah state
they found one of the biggest
responses they found was is K.
five plus is done as intended
and that is to extend the school
year.
Then those students I have
tremendous academic growth
compared to students that are
similar.
So we have tried to keep that
fidelity.
Of the the the funding that we
put in Senate bill one and house
bill I was quite significant the
first year it was a slow uptake
and then the pandemic capped.
And what we're all dealing with
now
has really put a strain on on
everything of their several
studies of both in state and out
of state about learning loss and
I think we're all concerned
about getting our kids back into
school.
Us so this also I want to
reference the
A. I. R. study I see
superintendent rosh ready to
talk about this he did that he
was part of that study A. I. are
basically said you know you you
don't have a long enough school
year the research really shows
that if you add a few more days
to your school year it's a great
benefit we're down now to really
around a hundred seventy five
instructional days we're not
eighty one eighty were not one
eighty three like we all talk
about the average is a hundred
seventy five instructional days
so in Senate bill one and house
bill five we put to programs
both of these programs were
referenced in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit.
Judge singleton said you've got
great programs that show good
academic growth among students
but you do not do enough you
don't offer them to all the
students that are eligible you
don't put enough in the budget
to really expand the program and
so we took her seriously and two
years ago we put money towards
those programs so what this bill
is trying to do is kind of re
cope what we were going to do in
the beginning and also to
address the complaints the
criticisms and the issues with
the district so Senate bill
forty in acts eight temporary
provision for next school year
twenty one twenty two requiring
all public schools including
charters to provide either K.
five plus at elementary and
extended learning to middle and
high or extending learning to
anyone there's a lot of local
control in that and let me
remind you that the extended
learning program as ten days and
requires eighty hours a
professional development that
also has funding for after
school programs and it's really
up to the districts the extended
learning program has all these
of pilots that have happened all
over the state we've had a math
boot camp for sixth graders we
Pat math boot camps for ninth
graders moving into middle and
high down in the Silver City
area they did a two week out
door slash through where they
explored the wilderness at one a
one district had a two week of
the ropes of robotics so the
extended learning really allows
some of that flexibility.
The hundred thirty nine million
is appropriated from the public
school reform Fund to the SCG
for twenty two and any remaining
rate reverts back to this
education reform Fund.
Some of the criticisms from the
districts as just give us the
money we want to do things
ourselves.
I want to mention Mr chairman
that over four hundred million
dollars from the federal
government has just arrived in
our public schools that the
legislature has no say that that
PED has no say it's up to the
district four hundred million
dollars to me that is a pot
where you can do whatever you
want course it's COVID really
fits learning lost its internet
it's online all of those all of
that money can take care of
that.
If we do this bill which
requires next year yes we are
back to full in person learning
that it's not no longer
voluntary you either do extended
learning or you do K. five plus
now we've put just a little bit
of a language in there for the
criticisms to K. five plus on
page two of section II a school
district or charter school I
shall not be in the night K.
five plus funding for student
who participates in the K. five
plus program and is later
transferred to another classroom
provided that's it's in the best
interest of the student.
I'm.
So.
We had a lot of difficulty with
the voluntary nature we couldn't
find teachers so we couldn't
find students are they would
drop out the funding wasn't
close soon enough so this bill
endorsed by the LFC and the
funding in both LFC
recommendation and L. E. S. C.
recommendation if we're back to
school in person a full time
then this provision if this
passes would take place schools
would have to extend the school
year by either ten extra days or
at the elementary do twenty five
days we've also put in the bill
that you don't have to do K.
five plus in the summer you can
do it during the regular school
year any time during the regular
school year and that's also the
case for extended learning so we
think these two programs are
evidence based have proved
themselves are part of the
research that A. I. R. did are
certainly eight part of our
response as a state that we're
required to do respond to the
Martinez Jassi lawsuit for extra
funding for at risk students
using programs that work.
So Mr chairman I think I've
probably covered enough I know
they'll be questions and Mr
chair just let me say that I
know there's opposition
opposition to this I've talked
to teachers and they say we're
tired we're tired.
And I know they're tired I'm
tired I've never worked as hard
as I can have with this many
stones I think I've had eight
hours of zoom's everyday for the
last three months and think
about teachers they do zooms
during the day and night they
call parents they try to find
the students that are not online
yes they're tired but let's look
at our students in the learning
loss that we all know is
happening now and when we're
back in school when we can work
on social emotional skills when
we can bring the students back
that are having a home or mental
issues and take care of them
that way let's not forget that
we are under Yazzie Martinez and
that is really our obligation to
try to improve academic
achievement that's what this
bill does stand for questions.
Thank you senator and just for
the public I want to remind you
you are listening in on the
Senate Education Committee and
we are on Senate bill forty
which is K. five plus extended
learning at all schools Martel
as ours to master first if we're
able to if we can take of any
public comment that is in
opposition to this bill so my
kids are you could please a new
the first person for opposition
to Senate bill forty.
Chair members of the committee
good morning this is Dennis Roch
seven the superintendent of
schools in login New Mexico also
president of the New Mexico
school superintendents
association our association has
a platform we've actually had
for several years in a row this
particular one references
instructional calendars any
calls for local decision making
in the design instructional
calendars especially in the
options for extended learning
while I am local to propose an
LTSE endorsed bill as I've said
in the past is my favorite
Canadian having chaired it
myself in the past and while I'm
loath to oppose the president
pro tem first bill before Senate
ad this week this year.
It it pains me nonetheless to
say that we love K. five plus
extended learning time as
options for districts but the
mandate runs afoul of our
guiding principle our platform
that calls for the local
decision making
You there is some truth to the
to the notion that there is no
federal funding coming our way
however that federal funding is
largely designed to offset the
increased cost we we incurred
this year in educating students
in a brand new way we had to buy
lots of new devices new
broadband connectivity lots of
even the text books that had
digital components and so it's
it's it's not necessarily a wash
as far as the funding goes we
are also concerned that a one
year mandate even though it's a
temporary provision of sometimes
in law doesn't always say that
temporary and so we just kind of
fear for the camel was nose
under the tent here in this
situation we we left Senator
Stewart but we will aggressively
oppose the bill because of the
mandate thank you so much I
appreciate your consideration.
Thank you Mr Rajat I always
you're still Representative rush
to us always so thank you very
much.
Okay so the next one please.
Let's have do we have any more
opposers I didn't see any more
hands for that okay let's had
Steve there.
Yes.
Thank you let me just.
I'm trying to fix my hair.
Yes.
Sorry about.
Okay yes I'm.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the Senate Education Committee
I'm Steve standing is that
without any in New Mexico.
And New Mexico supports
increased availability and
access to extended learning
opportunities Sanchez after
school programs academic reach
mentoring tutoring
and programs that extend the
school year for school day for
students
in need of such services
especially those identifying as
the Martinez so and the New
Mexico is in strong support of
extended learning the K. five
plus.
But the six extended learning
programs and research will
clearly and unmistakably
indicate require that each
caters and the community come
together and participate in the
design authorization
implementation and evaluation of
such programs.
So SB forty however.
This.
That fundamental principle.
What should the success of
extended learning and K. five
plus.
Arrests.
So as the forty.
It's.
Limitations.
Educators and community voice.
We've heard from many
legislators.
We should work with school
districts instead of fourteen
mandates.
So thousands of our members and
public school educators thank
you Mr signs that is you two
minutes thank you.
Will now hear from Mr joke in.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jovian again with
New Mexico school boards
association.
we feel very strongly about the
benefits that have come about
through the K. five plus program
and extended learning programs
and we feel that if local
decision making eight two
implementation of those programs
we feel strongly that they
generally are successful and of
love having that option however
this is a mandate and although
it is and we think the the
Senator we're making a funded
mandate
and making it available also for
the flexibility some of the
flexibility that's provided in
the bill it continues to be a
mandate and we feel that it
should be an option for school
boards to consider and the
therefore we we are we oppose
the look of the bill at this
time thank you.
Thank you again but the next
one.
I believe that is it for
opposition unless they see any
chance.
No alright then we will move on
to Amanda are gone she raised
her hand earlier.
So please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you so much
for your work this morning we
I'm the executive director of
New Mexico kids can which is a
statewide education advocacy
nonprofit and we stand in
support of this bill I want to
thank Senator Stewart for really
prioritizing the needs and a
plan in place to remediate and
provide supports for students
after what we all know has been
an extraordinarily difficult
here I'm I understand that we
love local control and we trust
our our local leaders to do
right by our students but after
the year we've had we are going
to have to look at pretty
remarkable plans to get us out
of the learning loss that we
experienced this year and I
think that this bill does that
it prioritizes giving children
what they need which is actually
time in the classroom when many
of them have not stepped foot in
a classroom for over ten months
the one thing that we would love
to work with the sponsor on is
ensuring that there's
flexibility and particularly in
our is equivalency we know that
some schools are already doing
this and in an extended schedule
and I'd love for those our
schools to be able to run the
program that is currently
working for them while still
complying with the intent of
this bill thank you.
Thank you Amanda.
I.
Thank you now hear from Mr
Matthew call.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good to see you
all this morning we support the
idea of providing additional
learning opportunities for
students after school year that
stressed our system dramatically
we believe this bill works works
towards this but we also like to
see a little bit more
flexibility for schools we would
suggest taking the additional
days provided for in K. five
plus and adding them to the
school calendar mandated hours
for next school year's this will
ensure the teacher stay with
their students which we know it
you know cold hearted with them
which we know is a best practice
from the Utah state study and
allow for administrators to
extend hours in a way that works
for their communities further we
believe that the LTTE can be
used to target interventions for
students that are that that have
fallen behind during the
pandemic when we talk to our
school leaders they feel that
anywhere between ten and forty
percent of their student
populations of really falling
behind we think that the LTP
funds should be used to target
interventions for those students
as a flexibility within that
program so again we think the
sponsor we do believe that
additional learning
opportunities are necessary next
year we're just hoping for those
flexibilities thank you.
Thank you Mr Paul thank you will
now hear from Mister Scott
elder.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Scott
elder interim superintendent
Albuquerque public schools APS
does stand in support of Senate
bill forty we also believe
however that we can further
maximize student learning with
increased flexibility for
instructional time we hope going
forward that the sponsor will
consider some additional
language or to recognize
equivalent hours as a method
implement is additional days.
APS supports SB forty and
additional instructional time
we asked to sponsor consider
continue to meet with districts
about ways which we can best
utilize local control most
effectively increased
instructional time for the
students of our state thank you.
Thank you superintendent.
Thank you now we'll hear from
Chris balls on the.
Chris good morning Mr chair can
you hear me yes all right well I
just want to get this as short
as possible.
I'm response on the register
this call LESC business public
schools in Rio Rancho public
schools we are support of this
piece of legislation for the
same reasons that Matt Paul I
will I'll second the comments
that he shared and also APS so
we we support but we ask the the
sponsor that through as this
bill moves through committees
that she could consider that and
work with Boston this
flexibility off hours and days
thank you so much.
Thank you Chris.
I believe that was the last
member of the public Senator
unless you see any other hands.
Most Candelaria did you want to
make a comment.
Yes please sorry I was in
meeting I'm good morning
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney at
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and I'm also a member of
the legal team representing the
Yazzie Kleenex and they got C.
Martinez lawsuit we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill speaking on behalf The
New Mexico Center online poverty
we support this bill in
principle because we know
extended learning time and keep
up K. five plus programs can
provide students with the proper
support to help them do well in
school and to close achievement
gap with that said we urge to
consideration for the future of
these programs first we urge
examination of the K. five plus
an extended learning time
programs to ensure their of they
are culturally and
linguistically relevant and that
parents or can and communities
are involved in the design
delivery and the evaluation of
the programs in order to meet
the needs of the for student
groups identified in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and second we
urge the public education
department to work closely with
school districts to identify any
remaining barriers or
impediments and the need for
flexibility for effective
implementation of these programs
that will likely require
statutory changes so with that
thank you again to the sponsor
into the committee members.
Thank you.
Do we have any others.
At this time Senator I believe
everyone from the public who
wish to speak on this bill has
spoken.
Thank you again remind the any
public watching this is that
Education Committee we on Senate
bill forty which is K. five plus
extended learning at all schools
now we'll start through the
questions from committee members
and I see Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you madam up pro tem at a
question on that I'm just just
are we is this piece of
legislation is a dealing with
two issues are to two different
things wanna make sure I'm
understanding exactly what what
you're trying to accomplish
here.
So Mr chairman not quite sure
what you're referring to are you
referring to the two different
programs that this is K. five
plus extended learning yes so
those are the two up programs
mentioned and a judge
single from this lawsuit
a ruling college eyes and it's
what we started two years ago.
K. five plus is an extension of
twenty five extra days for high
poverty schools extended
learning is an additional ten
days with other things like
professional development for
teachers at the school
programming both of them have
flexibility as to when you do
the extra dates so our A. I. R.
study suggested minimum of ten
extra days a so this would put
us in line with that A. I. R.
study at the that districts have
used the extended learning more
than the K. five plus I'm not
quite sure why that is of course
we have you know twice as many
students outside of elementary
that might be part but this bill
is designed to be as flexible as
possible putting in some things
that have been problems in the
past but to for at least for
next year for the learning laws
that we're all experiencing once
we're back in school in person
then it's an extension of the
school year.
You are Mr chair madam our
programs so.
Therein lies the maybe the
challenge and some of the all
state sponsored a may have
because why do not do this
separate items.
The reason I this committee my
line you're right to be here
another twenty nine years on
trump's learning exactly how it
all comes together.
What why did you put them
together was our.
A critical reason for that.
Mr chairman of this this is what
we did and Senate bill one and
house bill five this is our this
was our first.
As as you just saw was we could
to answer Yazzie Martinez they
work of the K. five plus works
better works for elementary
although there is a suggestion
to move that into even higher
rates they to work together they
complement each other and
they're the two programs that we
want to move forward with I have
heard the US suggestions from
the supporters and if this
committee wants this to go
forward I will meet with them to
look at other flexibility I
can't really I can't think now
about what else we could do we
but in the flexibility for K.
five plus we put in the
flexibility flexibility for the
extended learning so I don't
know exactly what else they
would walk.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam president I appreciate
our.
I'm sorry for what one one of
the you know I will say the
reason that I'm corners because
I really have a lot of feedback
on both sides I just while
working on it or not you do not
already
was no more conversation I.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator for for the
bill I at.
I think I participated in Senate
bill one when we talk about
funding both K. five plus and
extended learning how are.
This is.
Senator your screen is locked up
I don't know whether you got
that and then stable broadband
down there in whether it's on
our end.
Senator I believe it's on her
and however she can turn off her
camera maybe that'll help ease
this.
The effort maybe we lost our.
It appears we lost Senator
Kernan will come to her when
when she gets back on okay they
are here and.
All right so so I want to talk
about the money in the reform
Fund so when those dollars were
not utilized the first year the
money flowed from there down to
the reform Fund am I correct on
that.
Mr chair.
Mr chair okay.
Okay some of the money that
we're going to use now Mr chair
is money that's already in the
fund we are not asking for an
additional program procreation
to do these two additional these
additional programs okay I see
that is correct this is that we
designed the bill that way
knowing that we probably would
not be able to do that take the
first year so this year we
should have used a lot more and
because of the pandemic it just
stopped so that reform Fund
remain.
All right and so I'm Mr chair
when that money is after you
spend this amount of money for
the upcoming year what will be
left in the reform fund or will
it just a money continue to flow
into the SCG year to year at and
so there will be additional
dollars that could flow into the
reform Fund after this year
correct.
Mr chairman Senator a yes we
kind of have to see what happens
are we back in school in August
September are people going to do
these programs
but right now all of the bill
and the LESC recommendation in
the LFC recommendation uses that
sends it to the SCG hundred
thirty nine million to the as
the that should funding and I
believe there there will be
funding left in that reform Fund
but I don't know exactly how
much are right thank you at Mr
chair at just another comment
with regard to the calendar and
I didn't you know I I do have
some concerns because I think
you mentioned that the average a
calendar date would be one
seventy five so if that's the at
now okay so Mr chair what I what
I said was that the average
right now.
Is one seventy.
So this would be one eighty five
if you did extended learning.
Yes this that Mr chair and
senator for those districts that
are above the average say if you
have a district that's already
one ninety.
Deceptive them at a disadvantage
because when you have districts
above the average then that
seems like we're really asking a
lot of those districts so I
wonder if those districts we
might not maybe they're already
doing what we're asking them to
do with it with that additional
dates so how do we address that.
Us so Mr chairman and Senator
Kernan.
You know that the question I
have is my hours are the funding
that our state funding ten to
fifteen more days than the
average so I believe the.
And I may have to ask Rachel for
this but I think if you're
already above.
I'm gonna have to ask Rachel
about this issues requests are.
Rachel can you help us out on
this I'm Mr chair senator if you
remember the original version of
Senate bill one and house bill
five on extended learning time
programs used to the language.
In ninety instructional.
So the intent was to fund a
hundred ninety instructional
decays and the governor vetoed
the word instructional guidance
that came out from PED and I
think Mr centers on here
make sure he nods in agreement
with what I'm sharing with you
and it's not incorrect but they
have asked folks to add ten
additional days.
Pursuant to the extended
learning time program and are
you John wiring I think the
question is my understanding
initially was they weren't
requiring people to go over one
ninety but I'm not I'm a little
bit and clear on that.
John senator you want can you
clarify.
Mr chair thanks yeah that's
right Senator Kernan that we we
require that school districts
adding additional ten days
compared to the to the to the
calendar from the previous year
so if they have for instance a
hundred and seventy five
additional instructional days
prior to implementation they had
to add get up to a hundred and
eighty five.
So your your right that some
maybe already have hundreds of
hundred eighty five hundred and
ninety.
I'm assuming then that the the
bill would require schools are
already participating in U. L.
T. P. to add additional days.
Not at go ahead Rachel.
I would I would agree with Mr
sent on that the link which says
a hundred and ninety days it's
not defined what kind of day but
that there couldn't be a
requirement to provide more than
that.
Share all right so Mr chairman
and I wonder if that answers
some of the concerns turn from
the districts that we we the
goal is to have more days for
our children and I understand
that the loss of learning is
significant and the states are
going to be funded and I think
that's critical we need to make
sure that each district has the
money to do what they need to do
of the flexibility
I I know the sponsors are going
to work with with that going
forward with the advocates for
and against to see if we can
make sure that there is
flexibility so
you know I it's a hard thing I I
never like to mandate to school
boards impact I have a bill
coming up saying that that is
going to give school boards more
authority and I will tell you if
school boards had had the
authority to determine whether
our students go back in person
at like many states have given
that authority to school boards
across country.
We would not have seen the loss
of learning that we're seeing
now because many districts in my
area what if return to in person
learning much quicker so I think
school boards have great should
have greater forty to make those
determinations so when you you
take that authority away at I
don't think it benefits our
students but.
I'm really torn on this bill
because I I don't see districts
having to add days when they're
already at the top and so I want
clarification for certain on
that.
And I also want to make sure
that none of none of the money.
Allocated for this purpose would
be used in any form or fashion
for hybrid learning.
That these children have to
receive those additional days in
person and it can't be a
substitute or supplant in other
words if you're still an hybrid
is a school district.
I don't think this I don't think
that you should be a.
Use it any of those dollars for
for additional days so that's a
real concern for me that would
be to me that would be just that
money that's not well spent.
So I guess I'm I'm concerned
about the flexibility I'm
concerned about them the ability
for for districts at that are
yet over the average of one
seventy five
That they're gonna be required
in some form or fashion to to
even add more and I have a
question for for the senator I.
You mentioned something about
how many districts
are utilized at the extra days
and you talked about
opportunities to do some really
interesting things whether it's
going out in in doing that
thanks outside school site it
that how does every student
benefit from the additional days
we don't have enough programs
that are unique like that hello.
That means that in classroom
time is it time used a.
Doing after school at I think
that's I think those are the
choices that districts have that
just trying to make sure that
they are utilized in what I do
really does.
Create an opportunity for
recovery from the loss of
learning it's wonderful to do
very unique and special things
that but I do think we have lost
classroom time so I don't know
if there's a response to that.
So Mr chairman Senator Kernan I
just want to refer you to the
bottom of page one it.
For the twenty twenty one twenty
two school year yes in.
Person.
Instructions.
Is not prohibited by executive
order or resolution of a local
school board.
Then districts will use K. five
plus or an extended learning
program so I I bet you that the
districts that are at one ninety
are there because of extended
learning.
We have extended learning that
sort of part of instructional
years this past year even though
we're in the middle of the
pandemic so as you heard from
from Mr Senna they were not
required to do you know you
can't I have ten every year if
you've added ten through an
extraction through an extended
learning one year you get to
keep doing that not not go up to
two hundred so.
I I hear your concerns I mean
part of the reason that the LFC
decided to do this is that the.
The voluntary nature just makes
it very hard to control and are
to promote and hard to do.
And.
Trying to think of your other
issue.
Yes those programs I talked
about ten days for the school
year is ten days for everyone.
Now some schools you know chose
groups of kids to do this pilot
with not I loved math here and
that was designed for kids
moving into sixth grade that
we're not doing well in math so
you can design those ten days so
that you really do get to those
kids with issues I'm pretty sure
the robotics that they did was
because they had these groups of
kids there are ready involved in
that and so they gave them that
time so it's you know it it's
hard to do a state mandate and
local control our intent was we
were trying to do both trying to
really let the districts use
this and you've heard the young
woman say we want to bring in
the parents we want to make sure
it's working that districts
should be doing that
but the learning lost really is
is my biggest concern and not
losing this reform money.
Not putting it in a bucket and
say oh well let's you know let's
just give it all the PED and let
them decide where they're going
to spend the money it's one of
the reasons why I opened with
that four hundred million
because school districts do need
money and they have spent extra
and it's going to continue This
bill really looks at students
and getting them back in person
getting the more instruction.
SO Mr chair one last question if
the school board determines
which I think they have the
ability and authority to do that
they are not prepared to go back
in person in the fall the
upcoming school year and they
are continuing to do a hybrid
model are they going to be
required by this legislation our
to do so so again that and and I
guess that's a concern for me
because they have made the
decision to continue virtual
education which is going to
continue to create loss of
learning for their students.
And so you know we're forcing
those districts who are what
they're going full force they
want to be back at one all kids
here we did down here in
southeast New Mexico we've been
begging to go back and so now
we're going to be required to to
not have the opportunity to to
make that determination for
ourselves with regard to the
additional days in yet schools
across the state that have
chosen so we're not ready to go
back we're gonna be virtual so
they have no burden at to figure
out how to do the ten days so
can you fix that in this bill.
Mr chairman and senator.
Again it's the local control
versus the state
no I don't want this to go
forward unless we're all back in
person that's you know that's
what I would like but you know
the that's I I just don't know
if I can do that that's why
we're saying that from the local
school board if they say you
never resolution that they're
not going back in person that
they don't do this
so I'm because you said earlier
you know do they get the ten
extra days of money but they're
not really in person so the
answer to that is no this is got
to be in person.
I just want to also say that you
know a hundred thirty hundred
thirty nine million dollars into
the SCG tweaks in to increase
the schoolbased how long we've
been trying to do that how long
all this of thought about
extending the school year every
year Senator Joseph Cervantes
bring Senate bill saying schools
not long enough we need to
increase it use this money we
have the money now.
I don't believe we'll have it in
the future I could be wrong but
to me we have to deal with
learning loss and this is the
this is the way the LESC decided
to do it and this is the LFC
recommendation also.
So Mr chairman and senator and I
I agree all right we have got to
address learning loss but I
would agree with you that that
really this bill should require
it.
For to go into effect that all
school districts are back in
person because I believe
To do otherwise we we we all
need to be back in person at in
order to to do this and I agree
with you also with regard to the
funding I think to spending will
not be available in fact I think
we're going to see significant
decrease in funding going
forward implied as many of the
policy decisions that have been
announced of the last couple of
days and so
I don't know I'm really torn on
this because I know my districts
we've wanted to go back we've
wanted to be in person for many
months and have been denied that
and now we're going to go back
and we come back and say okay
now that you're back in person
while other districts are
choosing not to you're gonna
have to do this so I don't know
with we can fix that are going
forward I just think that's that
that kind of that.
Problem for me with this bill
but I listen to the other at
comments from the members thank
you thank you.
Thank you and we Senator Brandt
I see your hand up.
Journal revenue sure have one or
two good questions or
restaurants with good so just
want to
but the.
Yes it was Matt Paul to mention
that the study showed that the
J. three plus three plus not K.
five.
Show that it didn't work wasn't
state teacher of and I know.
Search your your I had this
discussion for how many years
now all right to about the J.
three and J. I and and all that.
And it really did make it very
clear that study that is not the
same teacher in our facility
that is a total waste of.
And so.
That really.
You know I've never supported
bill gets away from that and so
you know the other issue
you know that we have is we
already have a huge shortage of
teachers of our state and by
forcing them to teach even
longer in a longer school year
especially if they're around
work areas they're just going to
say
they're not going to each of our
state and that's just gonna make
that problem even worse
we value a the success of this
mandate for schools one
currently valuation system are
we gonna be able to come back
and you're gonna built LCS this
work because we saw the
Senators.
Thank you Mr chairman center
Brandt those questions first of
all when you mandate this you
get away from voluntary nature
of well let's just throw these
kids one teacher for the summer
and have a nice program and then
we start with the new teacher
this would say the school year
for your district is a hundred
and eighty five date end of
discussion
your for your elementary school
year school year is a hundred
and is two hundred dates end of
discussion so you take away the
problem with the fidelity by
making this a school year.
I just wanted to answer that and
I also want to tell you that.
You know the average increase in
take home pay for teachers is
fourteen percent.
You know we that serve I always
put a requirement in these bills
from the beginning for the Cape
three Kate plus eight eight plus
K. five plus that we pay
teachers their regular salary
because it's a regular school
year.
So I believe this is one way to
address that issue that you and
I agree on a been talking about
for so long and as for whether
or not it's going to work I I'm
expecting the districts if we go
forward with this if we can work
out the Kinks on the districts
of tell us whether or not it
works you're not we will be
looking at accountability
measures it cetera so you know
it it's a work in progress like
everything else we do an
education but you know I believe
the I believe what we're going
to see if we do this is an
increase in academic achievement
from the beginning of the year
to the end of the year that's
more that's better more
substantial than a normal school
year.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
center of your sheet those
answers but the fact of the
matter is we pretty much done
away with value waiting
effectiveness of our schools
last two years under this
administration we are re
evaluate anything more and so I
have to tell students are
performing better performing
works what we have set up today
Your under federal mandate we
still are required to tenants
you know eight through nineteen
once in twelve now I was on a
conference call with other NCSL
education leaders major people
want the US department of
education to not give waivers
anymore to reinstate that so I
believe that standards based
assessment will not be way for
this year and we will have to do
that yeah.
Thank you.
The government agreed to
actually know whether students
are learning or not it's really
hard we've lost.
Regis the each district to
determine that salts and there
needs to be a Stander
just I guess my biggest concern
with this bill and I wish that
we would just leave the solitary
school districts for them to do
as they wish I understand why
they do but I just you know just
like it's the last bill yeah we
just continually mandate every.
Gross.
You know house bill two twelve.
Many years ago to call all the
control it from a little
districts.
Discussed that many times also
in we just continue to take away
local control take away local
control and and it's almost to
the point I don't even know why
how.
School districts and we don't
just let setting they run every
because that seems to be what we
want and.
Yes well we continue to drop
further further behind the rest
of the nation so it hasn't done
us any good.
To take all control it from the
local bodies they're the ones
that go through training with
the The New Mexico school boards
association understand the
educational issues not the
legislature they're the ones
understand what are going on in
their communities so I'm not
going to support any bill take
the control thank you.
Thank you I saw Center pintos
handout for a moment and then it
went down Senator Pinto did you
have questions.
The.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Stewart we're bringing
this forward especially in
response to COVID and what we
have been through this pandemic
so I appreciate that we are
going to find it correct.
Senator fully funded and it is a
The program would be developed
by the school district.
In some sense.
Good
so I think all all districts
already used for these programs
because we've had we've we've
had them for two years so yeah
the local district and they they
know how to do this they've been
doing it not everybody but yeah
designed by them okay.
Thank you that's all I have Mr
chair thank you Senator thank
you.
Thank you I'm looking I don't
see other hands up right now I
just had one very short question
of Senator Stewart knew would
commented as far as
implementation that K. five plus
could be done during the school
year.
Is that as part of this is the
whole year how would K. five
plus being done as part of the
school year when it's additional
base.
So Mr chairman that language you
know for the most part the
original language really really
suggested that we start K. five
plus July one this language
says.
Do it elsewhere I've heard one
district that has a three week
Christmas break they could do
one of those weeks instead of a
three week vacation well you
could ended on you could add it
to the end of the school year
you could do some of the
beginning some in the middle
some of the in the idea is have
an extended school year we kind
of want districts that decide
how they do that there they
start talking about
instructional time they know how
to design it let them design it
same way with the ten dates that
be anywhere me it is where you
want to but it.
Thank you senator and yeah and I
kind of like the thing about
putting one of the extra weeks
maybe during the Christmas break
or it does kind of a hi good
catch up the people where you
all of the high before you wait
till summer well and it's too
late sometimes they get so far
behind okay that clarifies at
this point I'm open for a motion
on this bill from and the of the
my I out there just a nude
yourself and make a motion.
Make a motion to the past.
Senator Pinto pass from Senator
Pinto is there a second.
Second second.
A second I think that was
Senator Hickey was the first one
the the jump in with absolute we
have a motion of for a us though
a second room Senator Hickey if
you will call the roll please
merry and Mr chairman Mr.
Senator all the giants
I want good suggestions today I
just want to sit down with
people up you've heard them a
plus Senator Kernan I'm willing
to do that I just wanted you all
to know that.
Thank you Senator out there yet
if you will please call the
roll.
Yes Sir.
Can everyone hear me.
Now can you hear me oh that's
wonderful okay I had a head sits
on that are quite working as
well as the expected so
Senator Brandt.
The
Hickey.
Yes.
Your current.
Yes explain about the.
Senator Neville yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator souls.
Yes we do have a due pass but
Senator Kernan would like to
explain her vote.
We have a new path on Senate
bill forty up Senator Kernan
please explain about thank you
very much and I'm I'm counting
on the opportunity to sit down
with them Senator Stewart and
address some of the issues that
I'm hearing from from our
superintendents association I
think it's really important to
make sure that we get this right
even though it is the temporary.
Provision here that we're just
gonna do it for one year we
really need to address some of
the issues that were raised
today not thank you very much.
Thank you and thank you
committee that was very good
debate and we only up we've got
the two bills they got we got
the two of our get the bills
with very good debate from the
members up for people watching
you are watching the Senate
Education Committee the next
bill we will be hearing is
Senate bill forty one school
funding changes again it is with
uh Senator Stewart those of you
who wish to speak on this bill
make sure that you are getting
into the real I think we're cal
has the list getting started
already for those in support
those in opposition we will call
on you after the presentation of
the bill for public input and a
reminder public input is limited
to two minutes Senator store if
you would please start us on SB
forty one school funding
changes.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
members of the committee.
So this is a bill to try to deal
with the four or five your
argument we've all had about
impacting.
In the early seventies when we
created our state equalization
guarantee are equalized formula
everyone cool though their money
and we tried to distribute it we
took credit for some money that
was coming from the federal
government Representative of
forestry Sir and impact date
this bill.
Takes away the credits all of
them for impact Aid forestry Sir
and a half mill levy that school
districts imposed for technology
and other issues of the of both
the LFC recommendation the L.
ESC recommendation and the
governor's recommendation
replaces the roughly sixty seven
million dollars that would come
out of the SCG because of the
credits that replaces that in
the SCG so the SCG remains whole
and remains a good equalization
formula I will be the first to
admit that this does if you look
at all funding well looks like
it the sequel licenses some of
that funding.
This decision over the years
because in part of the Yazzie
Martinez in part just because of
the issues around native
American education I'm I'm I'm
really hoping that this if this
succeeds that are native
American districts will be able
to use this increased funding to
improve the academic achievement
of their students so this bill
does several things as I said it
it removes the state credits for
those three issues it amends are
faced with the public school
capital outlay.
That's the part that shows the
state match and the local match
this takes eight ten year
average.
To give these native American
districts time to continue what
they started with those a public
school capital outlay council we
have schools in process and in
Gallup in SUNY we have other
things so this impact aid that
will come mainly to nine school
districts of they will have a we
will look at this funding to be
part of their local match over a
ten year average so it's a
junior average unrestricted
revenue for capital outlay that
we will then use to set a higher
local match so but we we just
need to give that time.
Secondly.
Thirdly.
We have the we have put in place
a provision that
we want does any lawsuit to be
dismissed but it didn't do any
lawsuit began fifteen years ago
and everything we put in place
as a result of that our public
school capital outlay council
our public facilities authority
the mechanisms we have but we
have but
over I believe that's almost two
billion dollars of state
severance tax funding into our
schools including over the last
twelve to fifteen years
including three hundred and
forty million to Gallup McKinley
alone we have really tried to
improve the physical structures
of those schools so.
They continue to say this is a
problem I do believe that by.
Having these credits go away
forward so that the impact aid
can be used for these purposes
it is time to do it.
provisions in the bill they we
want them to report to us what
they've done with the money and
how it's impacted their schools
so they have a requirement to
report to the PED and then the
PED must report to us so that
that's very general I know
they'll be discussions I'm happy
to answer any questions Mr
chair.
Thank you senator start I will
not go for public comment and so
again Martel at you can assist
me in getting people of up and
ready to go on public comment
and please invite them for their
comments.
Yes if people would be so kind
as to the choose the pantries
reaction just so I can keep it
nice and orderly I believe show
can was up first to speak.
Thank you Joe.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again Joe again
we're representing our school
boards association are eighty
nine members passed a resolution
at our last meeting
indicating that they support a
hold harmless provision for any
reductions to district operating
budgets as a result of the US
department of education's recent
ruling on federal impact aid and
it's distributions we feel that
this legislation does do that in
fact in the of fills that hole
that is created for all
districts as a result of this
action so we are in support of
this bill we thank the senator
for bringing it forward and all
the time she spent in putting it
together thank you.
Thank you Mr get the next one I
will go to Mr Martin remains.
Good morning.
Sure.
Members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak this morning I appreciate
the bill that Senator Stewart
has brought forward we've had
many conversations with role as
few years regarding this I it's
been a very contentious issue as
you probably know US department
of education ruled in April of
twenty twenty that they did not
they did not find that New
Mexico's educational system was
equalized that determination was
upheld by an administrative law
judge who ruled property two
weeks ago I'm glad to see that
we're.
There is legislation proposed
out there too finally addressed
and rectify this contentious
this contentious issue I however
do have some concerns about.
D. B. R..
Yazzie Martinez and Judy capital
lawsuit issues is in the capital
lawsuit was at a status hearing
decision made at the end of
December I honestly don't know
how you how you pull out of the
lawsuit the judge just recently
decided he cited and I'm using
Martinez the state was not
successful on their.
Request for dismissal I would
hope that we can probably we can
work on
Modifying or eliminating those
conditions in this bill but on
the whole has as many public
school district and also in a
combat conversation with central
consolidated we are in support
overall of Senator Stewart's
Bill thank you.
Thank you and the next please we
will hear from peers.
Yes thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is person
style and the first time the
governor for the pueblo back
one.
Thank you for the opportunity
gonna legislation before you act
must closely follow many of the
issues surrounding impact date
is been concerned about the use
of federal impact aid by the
state as credit towards the SCG
we are well aware that the
issues are many buried around
the regardless we have taken the
position the impact aid should
remain with the school districts
that generate those federal
dollars should be used for
classroom instruction along with
capital improvements we have
always been supportive of tribal
consultation by district
especially when it comes to
governance budget and
accountability on the surface SB
forty one appears to address all
of that but after careful review
this is not the impact aid bill
that could get support.
The bill unfairly and unjustly
forces tribes and districts
internet uncompromising
position.
We support legislation to grant
will county school district
where most of our students again
will be asked to choose between
keep an impact eight which our
students are entitled to.
And relieving the state of its
obligation under rule in the
Ozzie Martinez lawsuit.
This bill blurs the lines
between two different distinctly
different cases of which the
state has an obligation to me
and rectify impact aid cannot be
the source of funding to meet
the obligations under the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit.
For that reason we asset this
body reject this legislation
with a do not pass thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
this concludes my comments.
Thank you Sir and the next
please.
I believe Mr Conrad did you want
to make a comment.
You're still needed Sir.
Who have a next will.
Yes all right Mister Connery my
apologies.
Scott Martina.
but good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Khan right you know and I am
the registered lobbyist hearing
any audio Mr Conroy is the
committee hearing this what we
are getting it work out.
Go ahead and continue my
apologies not a problem
All in a very challenging
situation.
But again good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Khan
reaching out and I and the rest
of lobbyist for Aqaba and tells
Public thank you for the
opportunity to speak on this
piece of legislation before you
Mr chair over the internet
working with a group called the
tribal education alliance.
And us is the historic ruling in
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit back
in twenty eighteen the alliance
has been working closely with
tribal educators parents tribal
leaders education experts and
tribal communities in crafting a
response to the court's ruling
and as mandate
the result has been a
comprehensive set of solutions
called the tribal remedy
framework to address the court's
findings namely that the state
of New Mexicos Phil provide a
sufficient and adequate
education for several groups of
students including native
American children many of whom
ten of schools in districts that
have been at the forefront and
calling for a fix to the issue
surrounding impact aid.
Now this bill forces districts
into a quarter is telling them
that if they choose to keep
impact aid the federal funding
to generate they must withdraw
from the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
Mr chairman that is not fair and
that is not equity.
If this bill passes you'll be
dying native students the chance
to benefit from the outcome of
the lawsuit as well as the
opportunity to benefit from
legislation currently pending on
the house side that contains
solutions identified in the
tribal remedy framework
you know we're well aware ten
seconds of the issues
surrounding hat HAW rolled into
address the court ruling Yazzie
Martinez to must be kept
separate however that's not the
case for this bill so they're
asked that Timmons staff you.
I'm in now we hear from stand
rams.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee a good morning
again the superintendents
association stand in support of
Senate bill forty one we
appreciate the bill and the fact
that it treats all credited
sequelae and the.
Moving them all from the credit
taking and it actually will
generate about a so little over
sixty million dollars of new
revenue flow for critical
capital outlay issues in
districts that are there we
recognize the issues are being
raised by previous speakers we
know that as this moves forward
we can work through that but we
stand in support of this and we
appreciate Mr chairman the
sponsor her diligence and that
as Sam her multi year effort to
try to find answers we can also
and so we'd certainly appreciate
the effort and stand supporter
to vote in favour thank you
thank you Mr Allen's next.
I'm not seeing any other hands
at this time Melissa Candelaria.
Thank you good morning chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Melissa Candelaria I'm
an attorney at the New Mexico
Center online poverty and I'm
also a member of the legal team
for the Aussie plaintiffs in the
Yazzie Martinez case we thank
the sponsor for her efforts to
improve the education system
however the bill that's right
and poses strong concerns for
the Aussie plaintiffs as you
know the Garcia pleaded for
really in requires comprehensive
changes to the public education
system to meet the
constitutional rights of
students and it also exposed
serious funding deficiencies in
our public school system and
deep inequities for both native
American students English
language learners students with
disabilities so low income
students it's important to
recognize the impact aid is not
a solution by itself to lawsuits
like the on C. Martinez case on
the case they're requires
distinct obligations that the
state must meet to ensure equity
and sufficiency and public
school funding and to meet the
constitutional rights of
students including native
students will require
comprehensive changes and not
only fixes to the impact aid
funds second the bill would
force clean of districts to make
an unfair choice between the
federal impact aid and state for
filling its basic obligations to
fund and to resource the public
school system by conditioning
impact aid funding on school
districts dropping out of the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit not only
diminishes the importance of our
students constitutional right to
a sufficient education but it
also infringes on the students
right to petition the state
government on behalf of their
students so we strongly urge the
sponsor to remove this provision
and lastly the bill needs to
ensure that any funding
withdrawn from the SCG will be
filled through the general fund
without a plan to fill the hole
in the SCG all school districts
will experience a reduction in
state funding I don't have to
fight harder to get sufficient
money to pay for education
programs services and and for.
Picture.
Concerns the New Mexico Center
on poverty
opposes this bill thank you so
much thank you.
Is there anyone else.
Thank you one moment I'm not
seeing any heather Bassett.
Other please.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is heather Bassett with
Albuquerque public schools and
we wanted to ensure support for
this bill in the respect that it
was a way to listen to a long
term discussion and disagreement
across the state and start to
trying to find a way to hold
harmless and the financial
impact of removing impacted my
credit but also kind of a line
into the rack request for
hearing from districts across
the state thank you.
Thank you and Michael is there
anyone else.
If not we'll switch back over
and go to questions from the or
first Senator Stewart any
response to the public input in
that we will go to questions
from the committee.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
you know I've never liked that
section six I'm happy to remove
the whole thing it was voted on
an alley a C. that provision
about the contingency language
had to remain in the bill as I
introduced it I've heard all
those concerns up it would be
terrible to not a supported bill
just because of that contingency
language and and it section six
it can just be removed but we
can do deal with that later.
Or you can do you.
well let as we go through the
committee and see maybe someone
will make a motion to for a
short amendment to remove that
section if that seems
appropriate I have Senator
Kernan and then after that
Senator pope.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator I know how hard you
have worked on this issue over
the last couple years and I
think it's been very difficult
but I do have a couple questions
and and maybe a commenter to
You know the US department of
education for many years
considered New Mexico along with
maybe just two other states as
having one of the most equitable
formulas in the country and I
think that needs to be noted
because that is something that
that is very important to me
that that.
That that beetroot I remember
back well I don't remember but
I've heard back in nineteen
seventy four when the changes
were made with regard to the
funding formula and property
rich communities and and I will
admit that at the time that was
my area
Swept all the money to do to
Santa Fe and then it was re
distributed in an equitable way.
so it's disappointing to me now
that we are talking about New
Mexico as not being equitable
funding formula state and and I
I quite honestly I think
probably some of the the factors
that were.
Included in that decision it was
very close percentage wise we
missed it that by not too much
so I still believe that New
Mexico was was in a position
that we could be proud of our
funding formula I'm.
So I have a question with regard
to what impact Aid replaces and
maybe this is a question for
Rachel or Joey or maybe Senator
Stewart so tell me what impact
Aid replaces with regard to at.
That source of money.
Us Mr chairman Senator I don't
understand the question the
question with a question is
impact Aid is is is allowed to
those districts that are.
Lacking in property tax can you
explain that particularly for
new members because we need to
understand what impact aid why
is it stripped into certain
districts yes I'm sorry Mr
chairman I understand so
A native American students on
reservations tribal lands
it it reads it's it's centrally
replaces property tax those are
not taxed it replaces
students living on military base
up for example Alamogordo
it replaces
I I think those are the main
ones and and.
Hello so Phillis on most
national laboratories because
everything I've mentioned are
not able to generate property
tax and so of course our our
formula is not based on property
tax unlike
most other states if not all of
them and one of the reasons why
and I agree with you that are
formula has been has been very
equitable and I just want to
mention also that the impact aid
funding to these districts has
always gone completely to the
districts it's their state
portion of the SCG that we have
reduced by seventy five percent
because of that credit so this
says we're not gonna do that
anymore we are replacing all of
those funds in the budgets in
the LFC LFC and the governor's
recommendation so that those
districts are held harmless so
in crafting this bill I I I
considered a requirement to be
used for Google outlay but I
don't want to do that I just
don't want to require anything
except that tribal consultation
which is so important did you
find that.
Tribal consultation and then an
adjustment of our state local
match for capital outlay many of
the districts have said to me we
want to use it for capital
outlay.
But others have said we want to
use it for students so it's up
to them but but that but to
ensure question and much you
kids well it thank you Mr
chairman thank you and I think
it's important information that
that everyone needs to hear
because when you talk about that
the purpose for the impact aid
it is because those districts
cannot
at they cannot tax in order to
raise money for.
I'm for the for their particular
areas so I I probably disagree
with you a little bit on how the
money should be used because I
think in in in trained for that
that many of should be used for
capital projects because that
appears to be the area of
concern particularly with the
Senate lawsuit that that they're
not able to provide the type of
capital projects that that at
your other districts can because
they are property quote rich so
to me if that's what we're doing
that's how the money should be
spent but it's my understanding
this bill does not require that
so.
To me that Disick will rice's
are funding formula even further
because that amount of money
that's going to go to those
districts I think can be spent
on operational
Then to me that disable licenses
even more I know that when you
look at districts across the
state and you look at per member
funding at Senator Brandt I
argue all the time about which
district is at the lowest funded
per member and it's either Rio
Rancho or tops so operational
funding is very low in my
district and certainly property
tax we have a lot of property
wealth today but I'm going to
propose that in for five years
we may be in the same situation
so I'm not going to post this
because we we actually we may
not be a property rich community
any further so that being said I
do have another question with
regard to why we are changing.
The rolling average I think is
it currently five years and now
it's going to ten on the public
school
capital outlay at.
So Mr.
Yes FIR and senator what we're
trying to do is to account for
their use of capital outlay
funds so that we not just the
state and local match we don't
want to do it immediately
because we have so many projects
in place and it's going to take
awhile we'll see you know how
much they're using for capital
and we're doing that for
everyone we want to ensure that
you know everyone is treated
equally so removing it to ten
years so that they can catch up
so that then those local matches
for those districts that use
their impacted for capital we'll
go up and the state match will
go down you've got a chart in
the Ellie S. and doubt that
shows that we think it's
important to right size our
capital outlay process with this
new funding that they will get
and let me also just say yes we
lost our disparity calculation
for for twenty.
and we have funded that partly
through the budgets in the
special session and last year we
received the credit calculation
for twenty one the US Department
of that said you are not to see
you are not you that you've met
the disparity calculation for
twenty one so we're this will be
if we pass this bill our final
year that we do take those
credits.
Thank you very much and and I do
appreciate again all the work
you've done on this support the
bill at the end and I think is
today your birthday yes.
Okay Happy Birthday thank you Mr
chair that's all I have.
Thank you senator next I have
selected pope.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
thank US Senate pro temp Stewart
for bringing this forward as
well I think this goes a long
way to addressing some of the
disparities in the Yazzie
Martinez
lawsuit but I just do not feel
comfortable tying it to where
they get this impact aid that
they have to withdraw from that
because I think
there's still more that needs to
be done and we need to be able
to address that so I will let
Senator Pinto talk after this
but if it's okay and listening
to the sponsor it sounds like
she would be you know okay with
someone making a motion to get
rid of section six and I would
be willing to do that maybe
after but I want to give Senator
Pinto an opportunity and thank
you Senator and thank you Mr.
If I could respond for a moment.
So we we would need to just put
a very brief language in section
six if we take it out and once
you get that motion and I'll
review that language.
Senator Stewart I have already
gotten some language from Rachel
forward it to merry and that we
will bring up as of that that to
remove section six a look at
that that after Senator Patel
Senator Patel.
Yes that was with them it's
close train and make sure I was
at the end of the list is to
make that motion to strike that.
To say section six and then to
insert section six and affected
date at the date of the
provisions of this act is July
first twenty twenty one.
Yes in the that is the language
that I have forwarded to Maryam
and million have you gotten that
language.
Very independent and I don't
hear me.
Well and that she may be trying
to and you can.
I'm here I where did you forget
to Senator because Joe had said
that to you and I can read it
and I will read flow if that
helps hi it's not long at all.
But it would be to strike
section six.
Yes Sir.
Okay section six effective date.
The effective date of the
provisions of this act is July
one twenty twenty one.
And I believe that's a friendly
amendment very friendly I'm
sorry for all the consternation
this.
In the however since Senator
pope wanted to motion that's
fine but I'll second to welfare
of whatever order you want to do
Mr chair.
Thank you and first I want check
and make sure that merry and it
has the language is comfortable
with that.
I yes Sir I received from Rachel
on I I am comfortable with that.
Thank you at this point well
we've got a motion and a second
we are discussion of the motion
and so I'm looking for hands
raised by any of the members if
they would like to debate or
about this particular motion and
I'm watching for that I don't
see any up at this point.
That's the one more time and the
members of the committee that
would like to.
To have a debate on the motion
to strike section six.
Again saying that Marianna if
you will please call the roll on
the amendment to strike section
six and insert section six
affected date the effective date
of the provisions of this act is
July one twenty twenty one.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes passionate
about.
Yes Senator Pinto I excuse me
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes I hope yes and senator souls
yes can we have an amended bill
them you haven't amended bill is
there any other discussion back
on the main bill I'm looking for
any hands up in the participants
of anyone who has not spoken.
Seeing none I will just make a
couple of very brief comments is
that Senator Stewart died so
appreciate you bringing this
this is been very contentious
for for many years and that is
because real consternation on
both sides both sides very much
wanting to do what's right for
our children across the entire
state I think you tried to come
to a good balance and phasing in
the fact that this will be of
use as far as changing
calculations on the capital
outlay of state local match I've
been involved in essentially
this for the last twenty five or
so years from when an initially
we were at a ninety five five
percent match the reason being
that wealthy districts could not
tax themselves in order to
increase their money on the SCG
yet so it was to try and stop
that and that was changed to
seventy five twenty five I hope
that this finally puts us on the
other side of this issue and
that we really start moving
forward in in all ways to make
sure all of our children across
the state have what they need
with that I am open for a motion
on this particular bill Senate
Bill B. one school funding
changes Senator contamination
for to pass a motion for a new
path Senator Pinto.
As Amanda at Amanda yes thank
you.
And I would like to second
Center pope second thousand
bandit of and yet if you'll
please call the roll.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Neville.
Yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Sanders Sauls yes we have a
due pass you have a bill passed
Senator and thank you very much
I want to remind the committee
we are at eleven thirty right
now
we will what we have a hard stop
at twelve o'clock I think those
were some of our bigger bills
for this particular time we're
going to be transition for the
public to Senate bill forty two
we have rolled over Senate bill
thirty one that some amendments
right the that'd do pass on
Senate bill forty we have a due
pass on Senate bill forty one
we're not gonna move the Senate
bill forty two and again we do
have a hard stop at twelve
o'clock if we are in the middle
of the bill we will roll it over
to the next one Senator Stewart
you are still up it is your
birthday and so we wanted to
make sure that you have lots of
positive love the bills coming
your way today.
Thank you Mr chairman I I miss
you guys.
so this this bill very simply
would add one percent every year
for four years the employer's
contribution to the Education
retirement fund.
The there have been these issues
of equity and parity for years
but we certainly have the issues
of these funds a needing to be
sustainable we've worked very
hard on both P. E. R. A. Anne RP
I am I'm very proud to say that
the E. R. B. a budget has been
up lower and more tuned into the
fund Madam para for many years.
E. R. B. E. us for for and and
and Mr up Mr chairman again good
one will correct me when I make
these mistakes I would like her
to to be my experts in and have
a chance afterwards up but so
the educators have paid much
more into their fund then pair
members for many years that's
finally changing increase the
pair contribution the state has
put in tremendously more to pair
up then the RP over the years of
for many years it was thirteen
point nine for ERP and seventeen
point nine prepare for most of
my twenty six years in the
legislature now last year we
address the pair issue and by
twenty four the employer the
state's contribution to pair
will be at nineteen point two
five percent currently E. R. B.
is at fourteen point one five
percent this bill over four
years would raise that to
eighteen point one five still a
difference but we I believe in
the reason I brought this is
that this this will go a long
way towards the solvency of the
ERP fund so colas have been tied
to that solvency for many years
in twenty thirteen we made it
even more tied to the fund so
eight E. R. B. retirees up might
get a one point something
percent Cola
for many many years parent got
three percent compounded
including they could leave
earlier teachers don't get a
call up till sixty five years
old or sixty seven if they start
teaching late so.
You know we've really borne the
burden of this fund we pay a ten
point seven percent in now
that's one of the highest
amounts in the entire country we
move to ten point seven I
believe in twenty thirteen a
general correct me if I'm wrong
so this right sizes the RP it
helps the fund I believe it's a
a reasonable way to move forward
it's about twenty eight million
dollars a year.
And with that I stand for
questions and if you could let
you and good one speak for a few
moments I would appreciate that.
Okay
thank you very much.
Can you hear me now okay.
Yes.
Great thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
and I'd also like to thank
Senator Stewart for bringing
this bill to increase the
employer contribution rate for
ERP.
Yes this committee very well
knows over the last several
years beginning in two thousand
nine we've been working on right
sizing the budget for year B. as
Senator Stewart said we've
increased the requirements for
eligible retirement eligibility
we have reduced the Cola we have
also.
Increased member contributions
one thing we haven't done is
increase the employer
contribution rate which is what
this bill will do this bill will
bring in more money to ERP each
one percent increase in the
employer contribution rate will
bring in approximately thirty
four million to ERP however the
cost to the general fund it is
less than this is twenty three
point eight million
approximately twenty four
million dollars so and the
reason why there is a difference
is that there is some federal
funding for both schools.
For public schools and then at
the higher end level there's
also tuition as well as federal
funds.
With that I'd be happy to ask
answer any questions you might
have thank you Senator Stewart
to anything else.
It was pretty for questions or
comments.
Thank you and so more tell if
you will people that are open
for questions or comments and I
will be my people commenting you
have a two minute time Backstrom
so please make sure that you are
succinct.
Excellent all right we're gonna
turn to marks of the truck.
S. thank you work all thank you
Mr chairman and members the
committee marks rather I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico council university
presidents Representative the
seven four year universities in
the state of New Mexico I just
stand in support of this
legislation I just want to point
out that the sponsor and the
director of the R. B. about the
stakeholders practitioner in
public education and we think
this is long overdue and I agree
with everything is for
everything that the Sanchez at
this point thank you so with
that House university president
stand in support of Senate bill
forty two thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you Mr Senator and Markelle
others that are we need to
comic
needs Mr Russell would like to
speak as well.
Here thank you and board members
thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak this
morning my name is Russell Goff
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico association of
education tolerance on behalf of
the socialization we stand in
support of Senate bill forty two
we believe increasing employer
contributions by one percent
over four years will have an
impact on the solvency and the
unfunded liability of fun thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you Sir okay next.
We're gonna turn to Roger Greer.
Mr Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roger Greer
I'm here is the volunteer state
president with A. R. P. New
Mexico and as a retired educator
AARP New Mexico is in support of
Senate bill forty two it is one
of our main priorities for
twenty twenty one because we
want to ensure that retired
educators at the funding needed
to receive their earned benefits
thank you Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill forward and
thank you committee.
Thank you mark hello next and
now John.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the Senate Education
Committee and my name is John
urged I am with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we first want to thank
the sponsor for being a champion
on this issue it is an issue
that impacts all of our members
statewide at every level of our
education system and we do want
to not reiterate the points that
we're really well made by both
the sponsor and the expert
witness but for our members this
is an issue of equity it's good
public policy it's good for the
state in terms of our credit and
it would really impact in both
active E. R. B. participants as
well as our large and statewide
retiree membership of the RP so
we stand in full and strong
support of Senate bill forty two
thank you thank you John and
Michael of who's next stand
rounds around.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee stand around for
the state superintendents
association you've heard the
reasons this is good policy we
support this we urge its
inclusion house appropriations
and finance committee or the H.
B. two as it moves forward and
we urge your strong support
thank you.
Thank you Sir R. Kelly who's
next.
I believe show Gillen would like
to speak again.
Yes I apologies jokey and thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee Joe again with New
Mexico school boards and we
support this legislation and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
Thank you for calling next.
I'm not seeing any other hands
at this time Michael Sanders
would like to speak our Steve my
apology Steve say that thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
Senate Education Committee on
states young is with them in New
Mexico on behalf of our members
I would like to thank I thank
the senator up for sponsoring
this bill Senator for sponsoring
this bill take this opportunity
to say Happy Birthday to the
senator.
New Mexico support sufficient
funding to maintain the
commitment made by New Mexico
said since two what public
employees as per the legislative
education study committee and I
quote currently the ERP does not
old enough cash and investments
to pay for all of the retirement
benefits so we support this bill
let's keep the promise to our
educators and provide sufficient
funding for your building I'm
thank you very much.
Thank you say.
There anyone else Micaela.
No I think we are done with
comments from the public not
having others I'll go back first
to Senator Stewart for any
reaction comments and then we'll
go to committee members.
The so Mr chairman I I think I
failed to say that.
This is not in the LFC
recommendation I am working with
us the appropriators I
understand that this is hard to
do this is recurring money in a
year and and in future years
where we're nervous but I think
it's important to move forward
with the ERP in this way we did
with P. E. R. right and when I
try to do a bill a two years ago
I was told not this year here B.
will be next year and that
didn't happen last year and what
about this year educators seem
to always get pushed back on out
of the way when it's time to
deal with them so I'm working on
getting the money in the budget
and frankly if you do pass this
and it's not in the budget it
just won't pass so.
Not going to be an unfunded
mandate thank you.
Thank you I will now go to
questions from the committee and
I see us under current.
Thank you Mr chair and I I just
want to say right up front that
I support the concept one
hundred percent and that I
appreciate this bill being
presented to the committee but I
hi I have to say that my
greatest concern is the ongoing
requirement for funding for the
for this bill and I want to just
I'm reminded of the members of
this committee that twenty
nineteen
piece of legislation was
introduced that that would
Is the fracking ban and just I
want to review real quickly what
that would mean to the revenues
to say New Mexico it would
impact the permanent fund the
general operations budget by
over one billion dollars the
general fund research by three
hundred twenty one million on
the bottom line three point five
to nine billion dollars just
based on a ban on fracking and
so I I'm telling this committee
and anyone who will listen that
with the policies that have been
at announced over the last seven
days that the state of New
Mexico is going to have to be
extremely careful about spending
money.
Over the long term.
And I will say this in every
committee I'm not going to be
able to support the bill because
I understand what's going to
happen to the revenues in this
state.
I'm.
I just don't know I don't know
what else to say that we are not
going to have the money to
provide this additional
Contribution to the ERP so I'm I
support the idea the policy that
until we get a new revenue
forecast update from LFC and we
know where we're going over the
next two to three to four years
I'm New Mexico simply is going
to have to readjust this budget
and so I'm not going to be able
to support anything that's going
to increase funding requirement
for the state of New Mexico
until we get that revenue
forecast update thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I about
senator Neville.
Save thank you Mr chairman I
voted against the indoor smoke
from the.
Adhoc committee this summer but
R. this fall.
Not because I'm close to the
concept don't misunderstand when
I Madam para Task Force but
together the plan years ago
and and that's that was my
concern we did not have a task
force for Iraqi and I think we
should note that make this
government.
Want to blame anybody but we
should have had a task force
that went through and evaluated
whether this is the right way to
do it there somebody brought up
the concept of bonding in I
don't know that that's a good
idea probably is the facts are I
think we need to look at the a
little more.
Outside of just I I your B.
staff I think we need to look at
a little broader.
Posing for a little broader
thought process that considers
things like what Senator Kernan
just set the future funding the.
What the fund actually does
what's needed and I'm not
opposed to try to fix this
absolutely not I want to try to
make sure we get something solid
but I am concerned as Senator
Kernan said it
has been brought up that maybe
this doesn't even solve the
problem for one thing we may
need more money we need to know
exactly where we at I think we
need to look at it from a
broader perspective.
I did that and whether their
formula is right or wrong sure
sure that we.
I think we need to look at the.
Have a broader perspective from
in and outside of the state
government and just the year
before so that's my thoughts
again I'm not opposed to concept
I think I need to close the bill
just because same reason Senator
thank you.
Thank you senator Neville us
under grant.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir bring this to you now you
mentioned how much the employer
based on peer reviews and then
you cover both employer and
employee on the year of the what
is the employee side of the of
parent you know that.
Mr chairman and senator grant
well for for probably at twenty
four of my twenty six years it's
been a seven point.
Four seven point five their
contribution is now going up and
that will be I think when it's
fully phased in it'll be I
believe ten point nine
I think that.
Let's prepare
for para yes E. R. B. is been at
ten point seven for.
I don't know what to do seventy
eight years at least and longer
not enough to bring that up I'm
remembering the discussion from
two years ago as part of the
problem C. Salah during that we
forget the yeah what we learned
couple years ago
I thank you for that I do think
that you're right that we need
to bring those more into
alignment I think it's actually
you know the right thing for one
group of employees public
employees to be taking a
different product than the other
group but I have to really I co
chair current answer to bills
service.
I think it's really interesting
I think we have to be really
careful so the same group that
is pushing to get rid of the oil
and gas industry in our state
and we can't deny that that's
exactly what we're pushing to do
they're trying to drive them out
is the same group that wants to
continuously increase the budget
in the state of New Mexico and I
don't know how they expect to
pay for the experiences bring
money down from the sky the
plantations money trees that
I've never been able to find out
how to pay for everything that
they want to keep can you to
increase the budget state New
Mexico from but over the last
twenty years we've we've also
doubled the state's budget even
though we've had and really
increasing population we've got
a massive increase in public
employees and teachers of the
site for the Texas state rooms
that
we have just increased and
increased increasing government
we've increase increase increase
the budget and then now we want
to slit the throat literally of
the source of the funds all of
those increase and it doesn't
make any sense is it is not a
work now
Miss you the young as we of you
look at your.
I have no problem solar.
But they don't pay any taxes in
your system that will help
recover.
Yes replaced one source we're
gonna have to add another source
you're free to get rid of one
were spent at.
So we're gonna push the oil and
gas out to Truman and solar then
we need to start taxed when the
solar so they could start
picking up the bill.
Because otherwise it's not gonna
work and we can't rely on the
federal government
you can't rely on there being a
COVID every year to save our
rear ends because we miss
budgeted the money thank you.
Thank you so to read the and
senator thinking coming up next
we are going to vote on this
bill before twelve o'clock and
so we're we've got about nine
minutes so Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
the Senate pro temp thank you
for bringing this bill forward I
will make my comments brief
although I'd like to say a lot
more about
the energy issues in the state
and how.
The R. the price of an
electrical unit is much cheaper
through renewable energy and and
we have so much potential around
that I agree with senator
requests comments that we have
to start investing in wind and
solar imported tax on that
secondly though
the teachers do bear the brunt
I'm aware of this as I've been
very aware of the I. back how
they always get hit more and
more every year with the
contributions and and that's
another topic but again I think
the teachers are in easy March
to take from and I'd like to
change that because I really
want to make New Mexico
attractive teaching and that
will maybe have our students
become much better have much
better potential to earn higher
is going to jobs with much
higher earnings with the create
more taxes so I don't think we
can put this off any more I have
faith that we will figure it out
in the budget and I would urge
my colleagues to vote for this
bill thank you very much thank
you Senator Hickey I don't see
any other hands up Senator
anything that you would like the
commission I'm open promotion
and all from members please.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to say in answer to a
Centerville there is an active
workgroup a study group that
involves public higher ed that
have been working for years on
these are proposals that group
increased I mean decrease the
budget for us in the decrease
significantly the budget for new
people coming in we've already
made all those changes this is
the one piece that was also part
of the workgroup the state
continues to ignore just wanted
to say that thank you so much Mr
chairman.
Thank you I'm open for a motion
I see Senator pope your hand is
up.
Yes I'd like to make a motion to
do pass on Senate bill forty
two.
Motion for a due pass on Senate
bill forty two is there a
second.
Also the.
Second.
Senator Padilla
second for the motion million if
you will call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan no send me a
bill.
No.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator schools yes.
We have to have a new path of
we're going to be ending the
meeting at this point members
don't blink off quite yet I have
a couple of times been nonsense
we got through only about half
of the agenda today and I
realize that was very good
discussion I'm not commenting
about that at all some of the
other bills they think are going
to grow a little bit quicker
than that we do have a floor
session on Monday scheduled for
eleven o'clock many of you I
know are doing this remotely and
may be driving up that morning
but it looks like we're getting
behind in in order for bills to
be read out on Monday we
do that through our committee
and so I am asking what how many
of you will be available Monday
morning to continue our regular
meeting then that would run from
nine to about ten forty five to
try to catch up on the bills
that we have not
Completed in so go and and let
me get over to the you know the
general picture type of thing is
there any easier way is who
would not be available for nine
to ten thirty meeting on Monday
they're trying to get through
the bill that that right to work
committee.
And please yourself they may.
I know this is I believe that
our caucus maybe having a caucus
meeting sometime this possible
would be having to walk.
So I just wanna let you be aware
of that is not sure yet we're
talking about.
Okay I'm we we could will this
and started eight thirty and run
eight thirty to nine forty five
or so to try to get a couple of
last bills but I'm very open to
hear from from you as my
committee on of what your
recommendation is to do so.
Mr chair it's that in others
Mimi Stewart date.
I think we will be through many
stored it they do a bill souls
they of course couple of the
other members of the bill that
look like they're up there's a
student athlete of course of the
meal a career readiness Gonzales
I think we're gonna finish maybe
stored on Friday and then had
the bill full day so it's
probably gonna be school
depending on how far we get with
thank you.
I will be in the capital at
eight thirty and then I would
try to be in the capitol eight
thirty four committee and then
go to the floor so I'll be in
Santa Fe thank you is anybody
not available for eight thirty
on Monday I'm not.
I'm not able to money.
Okay.
There anyone else we may be able
to start without you Senator or
yellow of will be sprightly
working on that but again will
kind of check in on Friday
Senator Brandt I realize that
things may be changing on your
side we certainly want to try
and accommodate that so if we
need will look at meeting on
Monday for a couple of those and
merry and I know it's going to
probably stress you a little bit
if we have anything on Monday to
get those reports out quickly
but the for Social run an hour
two and so hopefully we'll be
able to get that done this so
just want to thank everybody.
That as we move forward Senator.
Mr chairman at first I just want
to thank the committee for this
morning this was a good birthday
present for me I got a picture
on my phone of two years ago on
my birthday then we passed
Senate bill one that was also
fun I also want to tell you that
the floor session will be longer
than an hour or two so Marianne
has a little bit more time to
get those reports a ready and so
that's all thank you so much
okay.
When you said that.
Senator so this is Mariann of
million we are always in the
past on a regular back when let.
we're always on a time crunch to
get him down to the floor anyway
so it'll be more like being back
to normal.
But I'll see all of you on
Friday thank you we all looking
at getting back to normal again
I break I've got the best
committee of the world to work
