we what time is the floor
session schedule do we know at
noon and if so we should be able
to get through all of these
bills.
The one order change that will
do my bill will do last so that
if we have the other people if
we're waiting on Senator
have bill or centers home and
we'll put money in there and put
that on but just so we try to
keep things moving.
Any comments questions before we
get started from committee
members.
If not Senator Stefanics if you
will please Senate bill fifty
six nursing student loan
repayment thank you Mr chair
members of the committee with me
today on zoom there should be an
expert witness and another
expert from the higher education
department Gloria do already is
my expert witness who will
testify with me N. Harrison
Rommel is from the New Mexico
higher education department to
answer technical questions about
how to how the loan repayment
program works.
So Mister chair members of the
committee we have heard several
times that nurses and teachers
are much needed in our state so
this bill specifically talks
about student nursing student
loan repayment this comes to you
from the health Legislative
Health and Human Services
interim committee the bill has
three hundred and seventy five
thousand dollars for financial
aid for nursing students one
three hundred seventy five
thousand dollars for loan
repayment for nurses in advanced
practice that's graduate level.
Pursuant to the health
professional loan repayment act
of with me today I have of
Gloria Dorothy who also
testified in front of Senate
finance yesterday she I believe
she's the president of the New
Mexico nurses assessors
association but she can speak
very personally to the loan
repayment program so Gloria are
you on.
Hello there can you all hear me.
That yes ma'am.
Okay wonderful thank you Mr
chair finished Planning thank
you so much for sponsoring this
bill members of the committee my
name is Laurie Authority and I'm
the immediate past president of
the New Mexico nursing
association and I am the vice
president of the New Mexico
nurse practitioner council as
you know the pandemic has
brought the nursing shortage to
the forefront of everybody's
thoughts we always had a
shortage of this isn't new I've
been a nurse for thirty one
years and practitioner for
twenty of those years.
There are lots of statistics
that I can share with you that I
did some research and literature
are you on last night.
The average nursing student
undergraduate nursing students
that's associate's and
bachelor's the school with an
estimated that for student loans
from forty to fifty five
thousand that's before they go
on to their graduate degree and
that's from the American
Association of the college's
nursing.
The national student nurses
association also has RN's having
up to eighty thousand dollars in
debt and that's obviously
because there are in seats in
regular state colleges community
colleges and some have to pursue
nursing education in a private
institution revenue the cost of
tuition is much higher.
If we go on to the advanced
practice registered nurse debt
which has previously been
predominantly masters that's
anywhere from forty to eighty
thousand dollars and up to
seventy percent of students that
book for nursing as their
profession use student loans to
help pay for their education.
The federal programs that have
nurse loan forgiveness are very
difficult to apply for there's
only a two point eight percent.
Ruble rate acceptance rate for
those who applied for those
loans and I'd like to share my
own personal story.
I started out at Stony Brook in
pre med I am very similar to the
population that we have here in
New Mexico where I grew up in
the projects in the south Bronx
came from poverty and my mother
always counted in my head
education was my only way out
from as long as I can remember
that was her mantra.
Recently both my parents passed
away my mother was a single
mother my dad died when I was
three my mom died when I was
eighteen just before I turned
eighteen.
And so I took the truck to New
York from New York to Florida
simply because I ninety five is
the easiest way to go down and I
had an old beat up sixty six
Mustang wherever my car broke
down is where I was going to
start a new life.
I had an angel who let me into
the nursing program even though
there was a three year right.
and I had to work five jobs to
get my associates degree I did
have a Pell grant but I was
actually considered an award of
the state because my parents
were going on I did have a
program that assisted with
tuition but it doesn't cover
policy doesn't cover the
apartment that I had to get and
I had to pay extra deposit on
because I was so young and
deemed a responsible I was on
food stamps hi.
Had a budget of some of the that
were offered by the state at
that time that still working
five jobs and going to school
full time and even though I had
the telegrams available to me I
still needed to take out student
loans so that I could survive.
Years later I went back for my
bachelors degree in nineteen
ninety five after my first son
was born on a finished and had
to take out student loans for my
bachelors degree.
In a new family I had two
children hi
was trying to do all those
things in society where you buy
your first house you buy your
used cars all of those things I
had to take out student loans as
the primary breadwinner to
support my family.
Move forward I moved and
relocated to New Mexico in
nineteen ninety nine and here I
was able I came here because I
wanted to be an acute care nurse
practitioner and I was the
first.
Cohort of the acute care nurse
practitioner program at
university of New Mexico
hospital.
While I was there at the
university of New Mexico sorry
Senator.
I'm sorry you're going to have
to like summarized in the next
couple minutes okay I'm out
almost at the end okay well I I
was a research assistant I was a
teaching assistant and I had to
take out student loans graduated
with dual master's and PhD.
Now I have a PhD I've just
completed that no student loans
for the Ph.D thanks to tuition
reimbursement and a higher
salary but also then done I had
to refinance my student loans so
I can get a lower interest rate
I am now thirty one years into
my profession and had a hundred
and thirty thousand dollars in
student loan debt dating back
from nineteen ninety one and
nineteen ninety seven as
completions of those programs I
had a eight out for my
retirement to pay off those
student loans because the
interest rate was higher than
what I was getting back to my
retirement made that decision to
do that.
This bill if it is passed will
allow Senator you know.
In the to the tune of over ten
and adding to the health
professional loan also allows
advanced practice nurses to
accomplish getting blown lotus
is payment assistance so I urge
you to please support this bill
and help for the nursing
shortage people cannot afford
tuition and if you have a single
mother if you have somebody who
comes from poverty they are
going to be able to look to
nursing as one of their choices
were profession if they know
that they're going to have this
for doing that.
Great so Mister chair of also on
the line is Mr Harrison Rummel
but he is here for technical
expertise and assistance in
understanding how the loan
repayment program works from the
higher education department.
Thank you senator and yes a heri
Rommel is we've had in front of
our committees and over interns
and stuff as well and very
knowledgeable after from after
all yes I'm sorry doctor.
anything else Senator I'll wait
for supporter opposition okay
first we're gonna go in the room
those in support of Senate bill
fifty six we do limit everyone
no longer than two minutes
please it is shorter than that
that would be wonderful after in
the room for for and against
will go online if we have
anybody there anybody's watching
wants to testify online please
raise your hand now when we
start with those we will
probably cut it off at that
point so please raise your hand
if you want to give testimony
online so first pillar if you
would.
More often registered lobbyists.
Medicine this is one of our
critical initiatives the
evidence shows that the doctors
and nurses serve in an area for
two years or more likely to stay
there it's also a good way to
bring doctors and nurses in to
help back though we were lacking
out of our own medical schools
and it's super important for
rural New Mexico so I guess you
have to support it's really.
Thank you the I like lobbyist
you have to support them thank
you for life yes ma'am.
Thank you.
I just want to say Planned
Parenthood votes to Mexico is of
course.
We also accept access for
reproductive right thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
room related to speak in favor.
There anyone in opposition.
No will go online last chance to
raise your hand.
Mister JD Bullington if you
would please Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman this is JD
Bullington registered lobbyists
for community health systems
which operates Mountain View
hospital in Los crucis call that
Medical Center in Eastern
Medical Center in Roswell and
also Representative quorum
health care which operates Alta
Vista hospital in Las Vegas and
members Hospital endemic and I
just wanted to say that both of
these companies and all these
hospitals strongly support this
bill thank you Senator Stefano
thanks thank you Mr billing to
do we have anyone else are you
doing.
So no one else in the in our
virtual room I will now go to
questions from the committee.
The Pinto.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee
senators serving in the sport.
is there.
In the.
As far as the mechanism that
triggers this loan repayment
because we did hear that the fed
loan repayment process is too
long do we have an idea as far
as the fabrication process at
what point would be triggered
would it be after they get their
license or
they just said to to start
entering classes for it.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
I'm gonna turn to Dr Rummel to
answer the question.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Pinto for the question for the
loan for service program which
is for students who are still
pursuing their nursing nursing
program they have to be admitted
to the program our financial aid
directors at the public post
secondary and tribal colleges
will then administer the funds.
Based on their particular need
their cost of attendance for the
loan repayment program which is
for practicing advanced practice
nurses we have a committee that
reviews all of our applications
applicants and we try to.
Maximize the distribution of
those funds and those
practitioners across the state
and focus on serving the really
underserved rural areas I hope
that your question up.
And any details in the.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Z. those that
are in the.
B. R. I egyes contracted nurses
that are out there serving the
our rural areas.
Do you would you know if they're
exempt or if they could
participate in this.
Mr Chairman center so they do
qualify.
They do qualify and.
If they're already.
I think it's just going to be
for Mister chair members of the
committee just for the balance
that's owed are will be be any
other.
beyond that I mean it doesn't
matter where the where they are
in the in the long.
Mr chairman and senator Pete so
we will pay up to the balance of
their their student debt not
asked that the maximum award in
the health professional loan
repayment program is twenty five
thousand dollars a year.
And Mister chair members of the
committee.
So the criteria as far as this
loan prepayment it would not
matter what their income is
right now as far as the gross
because we know that many of the
contract workers.
Do not get their health benefits
rate they have other other out
of pocket costs that are not
reflected with and they're gross
we.
So Mister chairman Senator Pinto
we do not review the income
level of our participants but we
do look at their overall that.
Mr chair members of the
committee so a credit report
would be I mean how are you
determining what that that level
is our what criteria using.
Mister chairman Senator Pinto
all of our applicant submits
their most recent loan
documentation from their student
loan servicer the that the
department of education or a
subcontractor suspend loan
servicing so we get the most
recent a report of their current
student debt level when we're
evaluating the applications.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you senator
thank you for your thank you
senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Along the same lines I think
they're really my notes the.
Analysts notes there's enough
money for about thirty one
additional students at twelve
thousand each and.
fifteen at that for the Banced
at twenty five thousand and but
would that very depending on
what the
Actual needs are the student I
mean not every student
unnecessary need twenty five or
twelve percent of fair statement
Mr chair before Dr Rummel
answers up I want you to know as
well that the LFC in the DFA.
Recommendations have to be
reconciled for the amount of
money first of all that might go
into this program but I'd let
let Dr Rummel answer your
specific question thank you Mr
chair Senator.
So thank you Mr chairman
Centerville just to give you a
little bit of additional data on
that in FY twenty one we had a
hundred and forty four
applicants for the health
professional loan repayment
program that includes both
advanced practice nurses also
allied health practitioners
physicians primary care position
we only had a funding to award
twenty two new works we do a two
year commitment every year and
to get back I think more direct
your question yes if a student
has a lower debt limit you know
I I hate to use the phrase but
you know we have low hanging
fruit a student of a
practitioner that has a very
small amount of debt say five or
six thousand dollars and we can
just pay that off for them we
will we will you know
preferentially try to support
them as well.
Right there is going to ask is
like someone college I think the
cost of the actual screen is
relatively low
no actually living during that
time where you're going to
school is is a problem so you
might need a bigger loan values
trying to figure out if we're
paying for just paid for school
costs on loans I don't have a
long career works but trying to
understand exactly whether it
exists enough money or do we
obviously we probably could use
a lot more but I just wondered
where we're at as far as whether
we're actually meeting in need
enough so trying to analyze
that.
Thank you Mr thank you for the
questions in the committee.
There's a very short COVID in we
hear regularly the shortage of
nurses in New Mexico I think
it's somewhere between five six
thousand or more currently short
nurses.
But during the pandemic with our
hospitals full we are we are
over burdening the workforce
that we already have and we need
to do something to do better and
I think this is part of a
strategy for doing that.
If we're going to solve the
problem no one should leave
nursing school in New Mexico
with any that are hospitals are
paying two hundred dollars an
hour for travelling nurses to
meet the need that's expensive
compared to providing loads for
nurses who are going through
school to increase more in the
state of New Mexico so thank you
senator for bringing this and I
think it's really important that
this continue and many other
fronts to to make that crisis in
the nursing profession because
it's costing New Mexicans money
in.
Help in paying for out of state
traveling nurses in multiple of
other places and this is a much
cheaper solution than the
others.
Thank you the motion.
Mr chair I move a new path
motion to pass by Center pope
seconded by Senator Pinto
million if you will call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes centers sold
yes we have a compact there's
you have a due pass for Senate
bill fifty six I will keep right
there in the hot seat was Senate
bill fifty eight which works on
another area of this crisis on
increasing school nurses so
thank you Mr please do you want
to deal with the amendment first
or the bill let's deal with the
amendment first did fix is a
small piece and then build.
chins members of the committee
on page two of the bill.
Line two I would propose that we
after the word the eliminate
public education department and
the and then also on the third
line school and I'll explain
why.
The board of nursing licenses
nurses.
They would be up to the public
education department to hire
licensed nurses so of the Public
education department does not
license.
They would only hire so that
shouldn't be in there that
particular language so Senator
exactly what are we strike
adding that on the end to get
that online page two lying to.
After the we're the.
Eliminate public education.
Online three.
Eliminate department and the.
And later on in that sentence
eliminate school.
So it would read.
Is licensed by the board of
nursing as a nurse and so school
also off of line three that's
right.
That's right.
And and then provide services as
a nurse at the school right and
while it was still state
schoolers because the PED would
hire school nurses sorry I it's
the licensing the school on the
third night on the second right
so the.
So the only the board of nursing
licenses nursing.
Okay of that I'm not sure
there can be but different ways
of doing it can we have a motion
to.
Yes to review the bill as with
the proposed amendment that
works.
to.
A motion to the most shocked to
achieve that but right now.
I move without the motion to
adopt the verbal amendment to
make the changes on page three
as we just discussed.
Senator.
And so we are now on the bill
with the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee this could this
particular bill could is from
the health and Human Services
interim committee and it could
potentially higher twenty one
school nurses at a low rate but
with the change in the formula
for education it might even be
less because if we're racing the
rates for everybody in the
education system so today this
is eight to the discretion of
the Public Education Department
where those nurses would be
placed we do have in your
analysis.
It talks about eighteen of the
New Mexico is eighty nine school
districts lack of full time
nurse this is not a nurse in
every school it's up to the
public education department to
decide where those nurses would
go forty three percent of our
students in New Mexico have been
identified medical need two
hundred and sixty three thousand
eight hundred have hearing
vision special education
substance abuse and depression
screenings of twenty one
thousand nine hundred have
students prescription
medications they a school nurses
can treat asthma diabetes they
can reduce absenteeism help the
families and also provide
physical and mental health
services with me today Mister
chair I have an expert witness
he is an APS Albuquerque public
school nurse Jennifer herring.
She online.
This very you watching online
you're not on the zoom.
You don't see here.
Jennifer I have Jennifer
hearing.
Senator maybe we can proceed we
can go ahead without that that's
okay.
If she does come on and has
something else or there's a
question directed directly to
our during questioning we can do
that at that point.
Thank you.
So if you're ready for questions
I'm ready for supporters
opponents okay anyone in the
room in support of Senate bill
fifty eight.
Yes ma'am.
Hello three five of Mexico also.
Great thank you anyone else in
support.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Do we have anyone online with
their hand raised in.
We have two people there's
anyone else raise your hand now.
Katie prevent so Mister
Burlington I think you are a
first for Sir.
Can you hear me yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee JD Bullington
Representative community health
systems and our health care
total I will hospitals in New
Mexico we support this
legislation and thank senator
symphonic.
Thank you Mr Billington Joe
again with the Mexico school
board association Joe you're on.
Joe are you there a new.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee jokey N.
executive director of the New
Mexico school boards association
we represent eighty nine of
school boards one hundred fifty
members we strongly support this
legislation as this the the
sponsor indicated earlier we
have several of our school
districts that lack full time
nurses and we strongly
thank the senator for bringing
this legislation forward thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman we have to
mourn that will cut that off of
the hands raised Emily wilt thou
followed by Lisa deal.
This will tell are you with us.
Yes I am good morning Mr chair
members of the committee and I'm
like well about with New Mexico
voices for children and I'd like
to thank senator Sanchez for
missile forward and we stand in
support of SB fifty eight we're
specially for some of our
lowincome children and schools
reformers might be their first
point of contact health care
system so we fully support this
and ask that you join us today
the.
Thank you Lisa deal.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is a lease deal and I'm
returning of New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty.
Member of the legal team for the
Yazzie plaintiffs millions
Martínez lawsuit we strongly
support this legislation for all
the reasons given here today and
thank the sponsors appreciate it
and hope that this is just the
first of its kind of getting
funding from the spot
significantly that our schools
face thank you so much thank you
is the and Senator was Gloria
Ann Dockery with venture expert
the I believe last we do now
have Lori was on the first one
but she does represent all
nurses so if you'd like to hear
from her quickly Gloria maximum
two minutes please.
Is that fair to worry I think
you need unmute I'm being told.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of course two
senators the fan expert for
bringing this to our equity City
of the children who are
attending school now has
steadily increased over the past
two decades and enters is needed
and so the professional nursing
organizations The New Mexico
nurse practitioner council and
the New Mexico nursing
association strongly support
this bill and hope that it needs
to get in a nursing every school
as recommended by the American
academy of pediatricians.
Thank you.
We are now Senator anything else
will go to questions from the
committee.
The I presented a bill similar
to this Mr chair members of the
committee a few years ago and
there was a lot of debate so
this bill is simply to allow the
public education department to
have extra resources to hire
nurses.
Thank you thank you questions
from the committee
senator bill.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Senator.
I didn't bring that she we just
saw downstairs hello rex from
the governor and the
the LFC and the DSR the politico
ledge finance.
Is there any numbers and any of
those recommendations that would
cover some of the same thing and
it increases that and one of the
budget rex that might come over
and H. B. two.
The Mr chair my understanding
and I hope public education is
here to get more specific but
the understanding is they have
an amount of money that would
cover of the hiring of nurses
social workers and counselors
but they could perhaps speak to
that Mr chair do we I don't know
if we have higher it may be on
we certainly have L. E. S. C.
PED not be PED.
Right education but the NASA
might know or Johnson of your
own do you have.
So done if you did you hear the
question.
I did Mr chair good morning Mr
members of the committee.
Think there's a couple of places
where school districts can can
pay for the sorts of folks one
is obviously operational at risk
funding is is often used for
school counselors nurses and
that that sort of thing the
executive recommendation also
did include four million dollars
for.
To behavioral health and other
sorts of resources like this
and so because often times
school districts will use
Medicaid to pay for school
nurses or social workers that
kind of thing that's that four
million dollars is included to
help school districts do that
especially as we expand Medicaid
in the state to schools for
schools and so that would help
them to to front the cost for
some of the services.
Thank you Mr chairman what the
reason why I mention is what
happens is this bill goes to
finance and they have already
got other numbers and they're
going to say we've already
covered that or that we haven't
covered it was K. maybe there's
another on having this inventing
it but I just you know have
system works I'm just throwing
that out is to make sure that
one with the other going to
cover the the potential need for
this because I understand the
need for school nurses where we
don't have so that's all center
this is a little bit like we
really really need it the that
we've put money in for school
nurses.
Other questions would you like
to respond also from LFC.
The LTSE funding recommendation.
Has fifteen million in it four
excuse me yes the staff
framework has fifteen million
and it to support students
mental and behavioral health and
then there is the forty nine
million for flexible rate
increases in hard to staff
positions which would include
the school nurses.
Thank you Mr thank you center
picked up thank you Mr chairman.
And thank you senator and PED on
because it's more of a comments
going talk about the eighteen.
School districts that don't have
nurses.
Of in my particular to school
districts the reason for what
what on COVID reason for not
having a full time nurse is
because there's not a need for
and they share nurse so they
think it's adequate enough that
a nurse comes out to the school
for three hours not just out in
the rural area but also in the
gal that the.
Think of their in the Gallup
area the nurse can just you know
just from school to school but
yet there are students in the
school that probably need to
make sure they're nurses they're
full time so I hope that PED
does take that in consideration
as to what schools are what
areas
That they're going to try to
fill these positions in thank
you.
Thank you other questions.
Not with the committee please.
Though do pass seconded by
Senator McKenna.
As amended.
Thank.
Get all the formalities in the
everything if you'll call the
roll please Merion Senator
Brandt Senator Candelaria
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes thunderstorms
yes.
You have a new path thank you Mr
chair members of the committee I
don't see your other.
Members here of.
Senator pope if you'll.
Thank you things I'll go down to
the the hot seat.
On.
Mr chair we are now on Senate
bill seventy three and you may
proceed thank you and to do this
I need to give you a little bit
of background about what this is
or where it came from I am the
Senate's Representative liaison
to New Mexico F. score which the
acronym is something like
establish programs for
competitive research.
Something or other the terrible
wording that score makes more
sense it consists of the re the
vice president for research from
all of our research institutions
also from Sandia laboratories
from higher education department
from national Los Alamos
National Laboratory.
They get together to talk about
collaborative research.
It was a national program of
which New Mexico qualifies for
and every year.
New Mexico F. score is allowed
to advance one large consortium
project to the National Science
Foundation NSF for funding
typically on the order of
fifteen million dollars.
This year as we were sitting in
the committee we had three
amazing projects all of them are
consortium projects so it's New
Mexico state it's U. N. M. it's
tech it's Los Alamos it's India
and other partners.
We were only allowed to advance
one of those for NSF funding in
the year when we have lots of.
Particularly nonrecurring
funding available in the state
and through F. score we know
from prior projects that one of
the ones it's currently in the
queue through its five year life
is.
Setting up research around micro
grids.
The fifteen million dollars that
was invested in that returns
between four and five times as
much additional money in
additional research grants.
That's all base income money.
And so when I heard all of that
and we advanced one.
To in a self we had two that
were able to advance when I
presented yesterday in
conservation succumbed yes in
conservation that was on
drylands resilience.
This one is on them technologies
when we were hearing The
presentation Micheli I had to
channel my physics professor
father because nano technology
is talking about how to
manipulate literally down to the
electrons protons and Adam
level.
For new kinds of technologies it
is cutting edge technology of
which New Mexico is perfectly
positioned to take advantage of
and to be come one of the
national hubs for nano
technology research the fifteen
million dollar investment that
we make now which comes to about
three million dollars a year
over five years has the
potential to bring in.
Many times that amount of money
I think the R. and analyst when
she was going through found that
currently in the United States.
Grant funding in nano technology
is approaching well over a
hundred is approaching a hundred
million dollars a year and this
is the a baby reserves of baby
area of study and so this would
be based UNM was the lead
institution on this but it does
have partners that New Mexico
state at tech at Sandia at Los
Alamos and so this is the
program for the state of New
Mexico to advance research as a
mechanism for change moving our
economy and more of the research
innovation area.
Many of you have heard the
research triangle down in North
Carolina of Duke North Carolina
state and university of North
Carolina transform to that area
from a tobacco based economy
into a research job or not I'm
it is one of the premier in the
world we have that same kind of
opportunity to create a research
corridor.
That includes even you tap New
Mexico state tech U. N. M. send
the Los Alamos and start
bringing in huge major funding
nano technology is one of those
infinite technologies that has
the potential to be truly
transformative and so a fifteen
million dollar investment.
I would put that away with three
million dollars a year over five
years and bring in the
additional revenue of additional
grant money which is direct
money and it also supports and
this is why it's in the
Education Committee it supports
faculty it supports graduate
student research and support
undergraduate student research
and research also is economic
development so I hope to gain
your support for that Jason
Espinoza with U and M..
Is here I think in support of it
I don't know that we necessarily
have to get into an expert
witness unless you really want
to know about nano technology
but it's up it's pretty detailed
and technical to get into the
details of how they're
manipulating electrons on
individual atoms to do
new ways of doing computing of
materials of
Communications other kinds of
things that it it truly has the
ability to be transformative
stop with that I'd be open for
questions or for for support.
Right thank you senator sold up
did you have an expert witness
online or anything that we
weren't able to get that fully
coordinated the listings and you
know of anyone from UNM was able
to to get on with us Mr chairman
of the committee my
understanding is I think David
Hanson the interim assistant
vice president of research from
UNM biology I believe he was
gonna be online so easy on it so
Mister Hanson a doctor Hansen I
suspect if you could please a
couple of words about this
particular project and its
ability to to transform
researching in New Mexico.
Right can you hear me yes Sir.
All right
yes thank you the the chairman
and members of our having speak
here I'm very excited to have
the opportunity to review of the
New Mexico has been of it's
really supportive of a quantum
technologies in the state right
it's a it's an area where New
Mexico the state has led for a
hundred you know really be on
the forefront of what is now we
do you know we do all the many
of the major innovations in
information technology from on
in both
The information tied to a you
know algorithms and and theory
but this is a lot more on the
material side for you know the
sensors and all kinds of other
important
ways of of.
Understanding our our world
really so expands a whole bunch
of industry that this connects
to and will be leading efforts
and it is something that that
New Mexico has been visionary on
as a state has been leading for
a long time and these are the
opportunities to really take
four the the quanta the proposal
that that is
Stimulated this us so much with
that was a great statewide
efforts and would really like to
to really support that bill that
build both the need to educate
people to to continue to
innovate educate our students to
grow the workforce in this area
if we as we build a big we're
risen in this area we can
continue to attract large
industry part we've got
educational and governmental
investments through universities
and through the national labs we
really need to to also be able
to pull in the big industry here
and there is a big opportunity.
And so that I can take any of
the questions and and thank you
to the to the committee thank
you Sir and if you'll stay
nearby if anyone has questions.
All right I we are currently on
Senate bill seventy three for
those online that would like
to comment please raise your
hand to be prepared for that
once we go in and I get the list
that's what we're going to cut
it off but first we're gonna go
ahead and go to the public that
is in the committee room do we
have anyone in support of Senate
bill seventy three yes and
please have need to limit to one
minute chairman members of the
committee for the the talking
about half the New Mexico
technology council today we do
stand in front for the
legislation really developing
entrepreneurship around quantum
materials and technologies is
vital for New Mexico's economy
really will strengthen our
already bustling sort of
technology sector here in New
Mexico service industry for
legislation thank you.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee claim that we would
New Mexico State University we
to stand in support of this
initiative and the collaboration
approach I think this is the
sponsor for bring for this bill
thank you.
Thank you do we have anyone else
in the committee room.
All right will now move to those
that are online do we have
anyone that would like to
comment.
Online all right I will give of
Senator souls before we go to
the committee members if you
wanted to close or make any
other comments my only comment
is I use the wrong words it's
quantum materials not nano
technologies quantum
technologies they're very
similar they're both dealing
with the Adam level in very very
small changes in that but I
wanted to make sure that
correction.
There educators Centerville
first okay.
But just this isn't the stuff
they're injecting in this in the
vaccine that.
I just I just want to mention
save Senator not that any of us
would be aware of it so small.
I just wanted to
Was there a of Guinness the same
question I just pretty much the
other two bills was there a
request to get this in house
bill two somehow another earlier
during LFC I just see those kind
of things that you're on L. E.
S. C. you might know that Mr
chairman and senator
L. E. S. C. is is almost
exclusively the K. twelve budget
and this would be higher
education I have had discussions
with the secretary of higher
education within health bills
bills to there is a fifty
million dollar fund that is we
think going to.
Higher education for a couple of
initiatives in research this
bill for fifteen million there's
another one for fifteen million
that also would be used for the
research grants closing fund it
could potentially be used for it
and so it may be in the both of
those of if we could get
additional money we know that
money spent on research
stimulates additional research
if you're a tier one research
university you tend to get more
of the large tier one large
research grants and so as we
make investments in research
it's going all the way around
there is some money the answer
more specifically there is some
money in some pot somebody in
house bill two for higher ed
reserves the language as to what
qualifies or not is not entirely
clear but I believe the way it's
being written is this what you
just.
The I know how these bills were
going to go to go over the to
the next committee they may or
may not do if it's already in
there somehow then also that's
great the bank is a rubber stamp
social make sure that
it's good idea and I think we
ought to do it but for make sure
that if if it doesn't work this
year we're gonna figure out
another way to get it in the
system thank you Mr thank you
thank you senator bill next we
have Senator McKenna.
Thank you vice chair and thank
you chairman for bringing this.
Of to us this morning and I just
love committee attending
committees because I always
learn about incredible things
happening around our state and
I'm curious vice chair and
chairman.
assuming that this bill succeeds
to the end you mentioned that
there were two.
Candidates who were not able to
get funded but yet they met the
threshold would they be able to.
Reapply if they're so interested
with does the program allow for
that or are they just not
allowed are they ineligible I
would probably have to refer to
my experts from UNM who knows
more about the details I've been
on that score for a couple of
years it and I don't know
whether they can reapply another
year for for that same.
Funding for in our next cycle.
Is Dr Hanson are you still
online.
I am the judge chairman members
of happy to elaborate on that
process so that that competition
is for the statewide at school
or program at the experimental
we're cursed sorry Mr Mr Graham
to to support research and it is
a it comes up every five years
so this is this competition
would come around the end of
five years again that would be
the next opportunity to go for
this funding in less we didn't
with us we were unsuccessful
with the main proposal we've
been successful for amazing four
times in a row for for the state
it's on
so there's a high chance will
continue to be successful so
only if that fails we have a
chance to go again next year and
otherwise I.
I'm so Mister chairman Senator
did that make sense that once we
get a project in the one that we
are the cycle The we're
currently in is the
small the microgrid when that
runs out of them were eligible
to start the next one.
If the ones that we advance this
year for that five year cycle
are not selected at the national
level for NSF funding then we
would be eligible to apply for
whatever research consortium
programs we have come up next
year.
Thank you bye chair thank you
chairman and thank you doctor
Hansen is it.
Thank you center mechanics we
have Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr vice chair and
thank you Mr chair for bringing
this forward I'm always excited
to see us using what I call seed
money to essentially create the
gift that keeps on giving I mean
it really does because once you
are able to establish a base and
the credibility of doing
research in this area and again
with all the credentials that we
have here in New Mexico which
are phenomenal it then be gets
the ability of the individuals
who get the seed money to get
more requests and more requests
and more grants and so fifty
eight you said I think initially
fifteen million could turn into
sixty million and more later on
to say nothing of the jobs that
are gonna come out of this is
you do the research and the spin
off of the gonna come with it so
again it is I mean this in a
positive way think if that
really does keep on giving so
thank you for bringing that the
I didn't know too that in the
FIR there was a question
you know we're administrative
costs being covered and again I
sometimes wonder if.
People who are evaluating I
understand the nature of federal
grants the nature of federal
grants is that half of the money
that is received by the
applicant goes to the actual
research salaries and what have
you
the other half is called in
directs in the end director what
support.
All the I mean this support the
the institutions which is
housing
the the grant and the reserves
but it also helps to hire in
postdocs a post doctoral
candidates we working on this
and and other people so the I
mean I'm not worried about the
administrative costs of this I
mean it's going to take care of
itself for sure but again this
is the seat the other thing that
I want to point out and really
is I've been working on the
school of public health what's
wonderful to see particularly
now is the collaboration between
the universities then that
that's phenomenal and the NMAA
you you and them
the the Sikora and and what have
you are coming together because
that's really the strength of of
our state and the ability to get
continue to get these research
dollars so thank you for that
collaboration I I know it's not
easy but for those who who
worked at so
I potentially be I was going to
ask about the they they have one
thing the quantum.
Mr Chairman the center for
quantum information control is
duplicating that could you
clarify that the question that
was asked in the FIR by the Mr
chair Senator Hickey I can't
clarify that Mr hence their
doctor Hansen might be able to
clarify that thank.
Dr Hansen yes.
Sorry yes yes thank you chairman
and members the committee for
the opportunity I can find that
the area of Longines science
really has two major sides to it
one is information science and
the other is a materials science
that does actually get into a
very small metal things just
come up but and really this bill
was or this bill and that the
preference we're focused on
building the collaboration
within the materials side that
that
Missy quick is the revision for
that information center is on
the theory and information side
of quantum we do have other
efforts that we will work on
statewide again in both areas
into can export all of those but
this one is is is focused on
that material side program.
Thank you very much a doctor and
I would also Mr vice chair
Mister chairman if I could point
out it just be seventy three is
not duplicating the efforts it's
it's energizing the efforts and
it actually will help the center
for quantum information control
is rehearing itself be able to
get more grant money especially
with the collaboration so I just
want to clear that up the case
was any question and I thank you
if you have any other thoughts
uh around that otherwise I've
finished thank you Mr chairman
and senator yes research begets
research.
Thank you Senator Hickey next we
have Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you senator.
Do we have the any numbers as
far as how many people are
involved or consent how many
people were putting to work or
employment and in that sense as
a if it's a new industry eight
suspected members are pretty low
but also
the other area schools are in
other states if we have any
input on that.
Mr chair and senator.
It's an emerging technology and
so it is still somewhat its
infancy but the doctor Hansen
probably can give some insight
as to other places that are
working in this area and where
we will be setting up competing
hubs or other types of research
thing so if you would please
Sir.
Absolutely I think again in the
Mr chairman and members the
committee this is an area that
that that are several it is
growing and expanding is a
almost exploding area right now
some of our colleagues intend
the initial rents have been
tracking the the job
numbers that are that are
popping up and you can see when
you look around maps around the
US of them being you know
hundreds of jobs in different in
different areas to be thousands
of things growing up you know we
think X. exponentially so it's
about ready we're just going to
take off just like general
information technology and
things have taken off you know
Decatur to go
the
I think the best way to think
about some of the service
centers are large competing
yours across the new the nation
is there was a recent
and current call for a the
economic development agency
build back better program that
was a seventy five million
dollar two hundred million
dollars a program
that was nation wide
the New Mexico quantum both both
sides put put together a
proposal in that area the phase
one that was one of six groups
in the nation that that put
forward to handle large
initiative in this in this area
so that gets you know the.
You could say easily six majors
are regions and it's very clear
that you at that.
Of the New Mexico is of a leader
and we have we're out of the
front none of those
got through that the first phase
of the.
economic development area very
very likely because it's hard to
for for people to understand the
the hello.
Know where the industry is right
now where that where the
opportunities are for growing
for growing up the workforce
people are familiar with that
with quantum and understanding
how it's to the next level of of
I. T.
and and so I it's growing
rapidly it's a decent size now
and and we are leading one of
the leading areas in the nation.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Senator souls.
The.
Do do we foresee any issues as
far as
business coming in you know
because we're high desert
community and with our E. T. A.
but it sounds like the industry
in the sense to the very low
it in addition to or anything
like that but we don't see
foresee any of what we will be
implemented in law for a
business to come into New
Mexico.
Mister chairman Senator and and
certainly let Miss Mister Hanson
respond afterwards as well this
is a very high tech area it is
not an extractive or a polluting
kind of an industry and in fact
they're working on areas at the
quantum and then level that
would prove could potentially
building industry away from
those that are doing the same
kinds of things so I think this
is exactly the kind of place we
want industries and businesses
coming in that our high tech
high brain power.
And hi dollars kinds of jobs and
not based more on minimum wage
labor kinds of jobs but Mr
Hansen if you'd like to respond
as well it and it did I get that
correct.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee really I I
actually it's it's a fantastic
question because to me this is
the the the most when the most
exciting things that that we're
gonna hear it will do is that
what we really need is to build
a workforce to bring that
industry we have connections
with large industries partners
from you know Microsoft in and I
and you and other Honeywell and
other groups we have these that
they have their places in other
parts of the of the country now
you can look around the city as
Matt also showed you know where
industry was right now and and
our big argument was you know
there isn't the industry were
attracted here we've got the
other two legs when we when we
talk about when when center
souls mentioned I do have a
research triangle one of the big
components there was but it's
not just a multiple institutions
but the kinds of institutions
and that there were government
academic and industry and is
that are built in there all
together no other place really
you can of the six other areas
really has all three of those
and we've got one of the
strongest thing we've got huge
government and academic
funding and initiatives here
that allow us to
track industry but what we have
to do what's so great for the
state is we in order to get out
here we have to work across the
state to build a workforce right
to really work harder to get
your to get our students in from
across the state in the trained
in the skills they need for this
this high wage a workforce that
and it's so to put that money in
there really is going to help
bring in a and an increase that
workforce that's that that's one
of most exciting things about
this opportunity.
It's not going to love the
reserves.
Mr chair members of the
committee so we've got to put in
our part in the federal give us
some.
With.
Mister chairman Senator this is
not one that's being funded
through National Science
Foundation of this it would
essentially instead of getting
National Science Foundation this
is going to be the state funding
it but typically these kinds of
large research consortium
projects bring in multiple
additional requests around them
that will more than cover the
cost of the state is putting in
on the initial side.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you senator Pinto do we
have anyone else I think we went
through everyone
thank you senator for bringing
this up four
you know I I love this idea I
love the science give me a
little bit and I members of my
pecan classes an undergrad but.
But this is where we're going
and I worked on satellite
programs of the Air Force and
what we have today are totally
different and smaller and it's
because a lot of this research I
mean we have it right here in
our hands every day recently we
have something that.
Was a computer you know thirty
years ago it's basically
handheld because a lot of this
technology so I just think we
have a huge opportunity here
And and I'm I'm going to support
it like many others I'm sure
thank you.
so what is the will of the
committee.
Seven we have a motion the
passer Senator Pinto an
effective from Senator McKenna
if we can.
Senator.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Senator McKenna yes the bill yes
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes centerfold yes.
Mr chair you have a due passi
Nancy regulations thank you do
we have any of our other.
Senator Hemphill.
Please come join us.
And.
With.
Senator if you will please if
you'll take us through.
W. N. M. U. indigenous student
program thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee good
morning to you I really
appreciate this opportunity to
introduce Senate bill eighty two
which is the western New Mexico
indigenous student program and I
have with me this morning Dr
months and not just he is the
western New Mexico university
vice president for external
affairs what Senate bill eighty
two does is appropriate fifty
thousand dollars from the
general fund to the board of
regents of western New Mexico
university to operate and
support an international
academic and cultural program
for indigenous students so WNMU
has been working diligently on
different programs with the goal
of fostering relationships with
other indigenous universities to
offer students cultural learning
opportunities and as a Hispanic
serving institution one of the
goals is celebrating and
highlighting Hispanic and
indigenous populations so the
the bill will cover expenses for
the first by a National
Conference were institutions
from the US and Mexico will hold
a conference on the campus of
western New Mexico university
and the goal of that conference
is to showcase western New
Mexico university and the state
of New Mexico to the indigenous
universities of Mexico and
demonstrate that our state's
institutions of higher education
are a competitive option to help
transform New Mexico into an
international education
destination for indigenous
people and with that Mr chairman
I'd like to turn it over to Dr
month so not just for any
additional under that's please
come join us up at the table
for.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
And I'll just add to what
senator Penfield infield said
that the purposes stated are
ready but I think we have done
at western New Mexico university
we have done a good job of
trying to create this by
national relationships with
different programs by one
especially that I'm proud of is
the creation of a consortium of
all the indigenous universities
New Mexico eleven of them with
western New Mexico university we
completed that I think you heard
me a couple years ago on that
and we have been having programs
with them
different programs in fact this
semester we have a couple
programs going on with them but
I think this is the opportunity
to really embrace them and bring
our own indigenous students
native American students
whatever the term we want to use
that is appropriate up to then
and to make them feel that this
is participate.
They can send their students to
pursue education because we care
about our indigenous people are
in I think this is is is sort of
the soft part of things
although specifically in terms
of money obviously will help
that cause the other part of
this conference program will
bring scholars and students from
other parts of the state we are
working with someone college on
that to bring this conference to
western New Mexico university so
unless you have other specific
questions anything that's for
the second time thank you Mr
chairman and I'm not sure if
there's any public comment but
we're ready for public comment
thank you first we'll go out to
the people in the room is there
anyone like to speak in support
of Senate Bill where are we
eighty two.
No one in support a what in
opposition.
Thank you do we have anyone.
No online so we are then the
questions from the committee.
The committee questions Senator
McKenna.
Thank you chairman thank you
Senator Hemphill and I'm sorry
for you get your money the
Lindemans introduce funds in
this thank you for being here
this morning
I really like the theme of this
program.
But what I but I do have a
question about is why is it
considered a nonrecurring
expense that's number one and
then I see that the Indian
Affairs Department was consulted
about this but I'm wondering
about.
Following genuine consultation
with indigenous tribes what was
the all pueblo council
governor's consulted
There's just a whole host of
other stakeholders that I don't
see on the analysis and I'm
wondering what they think about
the program thank you chairman
thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator McKenna for you for your
question and I'm gonna turn it
over to documents and not just
for further clarification no it
that that Mr chair men and
members of the committee no
there was no consultation
whatsoever we were pursuing what
we have created in the
international arena for western
in terms of the indigenous
universities of Mexico and the
programs that we have
established with someone college
along those lines and so no
there was not to consultation
and and that.
Our chairman and senator and
doctor Maseratis I think that's
really important
Going forward because for me and
I think for Senator Pinto
Senator Shendo and others when
we see the word indigenous.
and and it should be capitalized
throughout the legislation
That begs us to say okay.
Have we been asked about this
what we think about this it just
seems to present itself that
indigenous communities have been
consulted and are in agreement
and have added there
their opinion comment for it but
I I absolutely the theme of it
is is wonderful so I applaud you
on that thank you chairman thank
you senator.
You other questions.
Just a short question sort of
along with the same lines it
seems when you're talking about
indigenous cultures and and
people you're more looking south
into the indigenous cultures of
Mexico rather than what we
typically think of in the New
Mexico indigenous cultures is
that accurate or where the the
focus of this would be.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'll
turn it over to Mr Chairman
member of the committees it no
we a the the efforts to created
by national
and and if I may add.
A couple years ago three years
ago
I think it was in this state
come same committee or the in
the Indian Affairs Committee
drive out Senator Shendo is the
one who actually.
Encouraged us to to do this and
that was that obviously this
time around we we didn't do that
okay yes is is an active I
national effort in it and that
will include
Students native American
students from New Mexico that.
We are talking about public to
fifty students okay thank you
so.
Re clarify my understanding is
for us in New Mexico instead of
when we talk just about
indigenous cultures being The
New Mexico indigenous cultures
to expand our view of that to
include indigenous cultures of
Mexico and Central America and
and other places as well is that
a better characterization Mr
chairman that's correct great
thank you of the other one is
the some of our analysis
indicates.
That this was not on the broad
W. in and you.
A request for funding and other
types of things is this
supported by the upper
ministration at western Mr
chairman and members of the
committee absolutely a hundred
percent.
Okay.
Pleasure the committee.
Alright listen would you.
Have a motion for a do not pass
is there a second to.
I don't see a second.
Question yes.
I don't know my protocol I have
a question that didn't get
answered the first time so
should I wait for those of you
would like Senator okay thank
you chairman withdraw the motion
and okay thank you I'll get this
protocol down I practice bill
Fund okay thank you chairman and
and senator for professionals in
this one of my my first
questions is why
Under physical in fiscal impact
why is it considered a
nonrecurring expense.
Verses recurring I.
In my mind nonrecurring is going
to give it a try like a pilot
program.
And I think you would want this
to be more than a pilot program.
M. I. tracking correctly.
Mr Chairman it's my
understanding that this is an
existing program and the fifty
thousand dollars would go to
fund a conference this by
National Conference and I'm
gonna turn it over to drive
mountain this to further
elaborate Mr Chairman centrum
McKenna yes it is an existing
program the propane turn
national program with fifteen we
need teaching this universe's of
Mexico is an ongoing program by
the way there is no where
anywhere in New Mexico in the
US.
That there is an institution of
higher education that has a
consortium of connection with
all the indigenous universities
of Mexico only western because
doctor shipper and I did three
years ago so we want to expand
that to make
New Mexico like I say in
education destination from
native American or native
Mexicans students into New
Mexico now.
This will have support the
engagement of native American
students in New Mexico.
To partake in this international
conference
and that will cover costs and
what have you a to to
participate in that so
it will help in the effort that
we are ready doing on that that
is on their way at west.
Okay thank you chairman thank
you senator thank you professor
manzanas so I'm looking at the
bill and it doesn't have any
doesn't have the language of a
conference.
Am I missing something and I
guess is I look at that and I
think you are analysis was kind
of the same thing this looks
like it's setting up a program
at western.
For studies of this area not to
fund a one time conference and
so some of the questions about
whether this is recurring or not
you know that maybe is that the
confusion is fused.
So Mister chairman Senator thank
you for the question and said
the the money would go to
Help go ahead document it
they're they're fifty students
that you would bring in to to
western New Mexico university
and all that you elaborate Mr
chairman members of the
committee yes that will help to
To pay for bringing students
from all over New Mexico native
American students to the campus
of western New Mexico university
take.
The take.
Alright in this program that we
already have.
The international program the
deals with indigenous
universities New Mexico
we are opening up or trying to
open up the doors for those
students to come to New Mexico
goes when it comes to
international students we are at
the lowest.
level of international students
in the US in New Mexico in
general.
thank you chairman thank you
Senator I I just think that the
bill bills language needs to be
to reflect what you just said.
because I'm.
Like I said I just I have some
the confusion about the intent
and the language of the bill so
thank you chairman thank you
senator.
The bill.
Just a comment on procedure this
bill along with every bill today
will be temporary temporarily
tabled it goes to finance
they'll sit on the table to the
committee decides if we get the
money or not and with the you
know if it's if if we get to do
pass out of this committee so
this this will be that they may
flesh out the wording or
whatever they need to do over
there but it will be lined into
the budget if they choose to
accept this as a funding item on
the budget.
Thanks etcetera it's nice having
someone who spent many years on
finance to to help us when we
have good things on how to help
with new rhythms into that final
budget that's very helpful
senators on finance you can we
should over there.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair
sorry had to step out this
question settlement already been
asked is this one time before
but this be recurring the fifty
thousand thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator pope for the
question this is a one time
appropriation for fifty thousand
dollars so I guess my next
question just because of the
amount was there any thought of
this being maybe funded from
some of the junior money that
your bill Mister chairman
Senator yes that it is included
in my junior bill request as
well okay.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you the questions.
The committee.
of the defense motion for it to
pass.
And they'll second.
The motion if you call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt Senator
Candelaria Senator Hickey yes
Senator Kernan.
Senator McKenna.
No.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto no.
Senator pope.
No.
Etcetera so yes and so we have a
three three three at this point
which means it will stay in our
committee that does leave the
potential for.
With the bill to be revived at
some point so.
We were stuck thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Senator home and I saw that you
were with us please serve.
To present Senate bill ninety.
And senator if I can jump your.
Things a little bit the fiscal
impact report according with our
analysis lots of what they talk
about isn't dealing with yours
at all its dealing with an
entirely different thing with a
similar name it that's correct
so pay attention committee as
you look at the fiscal impact
reports that the analysis looks
like it was done on.
A different program with a
similar name that that accurate
about.
That
is not.
Okay so I I hope that helps
Senator.
Yes the food.
Spoke with the mystery early and
she pointed that out okay great
thank you are sorry to take any
of your thunder if you would
please Sir.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman and
members of the.
Committee
the spent fifteen minutes on
fifty thousand dollars I'm
asking for five million that's a
hundred times more.
So hoping to spend a hundred
times more on this thank you.
so.
Thank you for scheduling this
timely manner.
Of the one thousand through just
this bill who question five
million to fund the venture
studios at the end ingenuity
centre at you and I have
Mr chair this program is a smart
innovative evidence based model
for start up company
development it's distributes
capital as efficiently as
possible for the start up.
And surrounds the company with
experienced entrepreneurs this
is a very different models and
business incubators and
accelerators currently found in
New Mexico.
And has proven to have a much
higher success rate.
Mr chair members of the
committee this this venture
studio opens a pathway percent
of students to gain real world
experience with interpreter
ventures related to the required
skills from business classes
coding classes deep dive native
boot camps that the activate New
Mexico entrepreneur training.
Mr chair according to a recent
confraternity this
Studio model has a very high
potential of hitting a thousand
direct jobs over ten year period
and gross regional product
increase of a little over eleven
million dollars.
And Mister chair members of the
committee this proposed venture
studio also address three's
significant issues.
Our capital number two
specialized venture talent and
number three value capital Mr
chair I have a an expert witness
who will.
Your little more
In addition through the so three
significant issues his name is
so T. J. Cook who is the
the should be on the.
Senator right and his title is
executive director and fund
manager for CNM ingenuity that's
all I have open to question
thank you did you what your
expert to to give some testimony
are just part of their
questions.
On it the prince's decision.
For we could have a couple of
brief remarks before we get the
public testimony.
Sure hello
Hello yes chairman souls members
of the committee this TJ Kirk uh
as senator Tom and said I'm I've
been working with and seeing
them ingenuity for the past five
years helping growth start ups
in New Mexico and for the
purposes of what's proposed here
I just wanted to say that
This is a man
plan in planning and design for
a couple years as we have a look
at what the successful one is
not successful for New Mexico
founders with great ideas and
we've seen them sometimes
chipping up because they don't
have the experience that or the
skill set to take on a pretty
high growth idea and get it to
the level funding and and the
team it needs to really become a
national player
when we talk about venture
funded companies we talk about
companies that quickly expand
out of wherever they are born
and become economic base
powerhouses by exporting their
products right
so this model really is a
reflection of all of our
learnings put into a model that
is showing great promise really
around the world which I'd be
happy to talk about what we have
seen in our research regarding
how this model works in other
areas but we specifically think
that because New Mexico's
capital staff is still
nascent you know the capital
available here from angel
investors and venture funds even
like ours that we operate is
much lower than what's available
in Texas Arizona Colorado this
model is a very good fit for
that because it it deploys
capital really efficiently and
the talent that would be built
in this organization within
seeing images noted really does
surround every founder with a
great idea to keep them from
those slips and trips
that they often
a counter when they are maybe
just getting in by or going on
their own that doesn't happen in
Avengers studio which really
becomes the co founder around
them for the idea so there's a
lot more to say but.
I I I think it's best to go to
questions now is your own
curious about different aspects
of how this model works and I
think you to a senator Clemente
for sponsoring this legislation.
Thank you Mr cook Center we
ready go to the public testimony
Mr chair yes thank you up first
in the room of those in support
would like to speak in favor of
Senate bill ninety.
You wish to speak in support.
Anyone in opposition.
We have anyone online J..
Senator road were you would you
like to make any comments about
that there's no one here in
support opposition or online
none of these things are.
Four.
Other questions in the
committee.
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair and I'll just
ask a few questions because I
know you wanted us to go a
little longer P..
so just so I understand this
little better so really is this
you know reading this a little
confused but is this basically
funding to where this would be
used almost in a venture
capitalist type way to fund
me start ups is is that what
this funding would be used for.
hello thank you for the question
Senator OO
to prepare for that Mr cook did
you hear the question.
I did chair chairman souls and
thank you senator pope for the
question
that is a great question and
while a venture studio does have
a fund compliment what we are
seeking here is operational
capital to stand up the studio
as an organization within CNM
ingenuity and what that would
enable is the activity of the
studio and its team and one of
those activities will be fund
raising for the private fund
which we
we have a goal of raising a ten
million dollar fund which would
be a a private fund investing in
these companies but this
legislation of misappropriation
sent in my in my view and and
won't actually be making any
investments itself rather it
will be supporting the
operational start out of this
entity.
What that thank you Mr chair so
this is just for kind of the the
studio in the infrastructure to
support these companies and and
and support the groups are going
to be raising this private
funding.
Mister chairman Senator yes my
rudimentary understanding is
that what makes us unique is
that it combines.
Mentor capital with training.
Great thank you Mr chair what is
I guess what is the current
infrastructure or support for
this right now is this happening
right now or is this starting
from scratch resistant
expansion.
Of this your infrastructure so
thank you for the question Mr
chair thank you senator question
loans to cook to answer that.
Did you know the great questions
that chairman saw the Senate
appropriate question
as as you may know zoom image
noted does have a number of our
training programs both such as
our deep dive coding boot camps
we also run a number of
entrepreneurial training
programs such as activated
Mexico and in partnership with
Afro hyperspace challenge
and pitch competitions that
gather in animate the
entrepreneurial community and
bring investment from out of
state to our local companies
what this represents is a new
model so this will be from
scratch it is a more from an
operational perspective I'm more
intensive model by co founding
masters it by a company that
truly co founding them and
building those products and
marketing their products
alongside these founders
so this this financing is needed
to do to do that well in New
Mexico
there will be a new organization
within the organization as it
works.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you for the responses
You know I I I I'm gonna support
this I I think this is the way
that we really try to support
some of our you know new start
ups and
businesses here in the state so
we can do all we can do to
diversify here in New Mexico and
that's all I have Mister thank
you senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator Tom and for bringing
this forward
this is another very very
important.
Piece of legislation for our
future I will going to what's
happening with gas and oil over
periods of time being replaced
by renewables but we have to
have economic development it's
gotta come from the grassroots
up senator Tom and Mister chair
Mister chair senator Clemente if
you've been to Salt Lake City
recently driven up I think it's
a high seventeen going through
you know I mean it's all the or
and the city and it just keeps
going if you.
It's the.
So it works it is interesting is
her one of the most.
The service cities in the
country be it at the same time
it's very progressive.
They've attracted the.
A lot of a high tech California
growing rapidly.
They have a very expensive what
rail system.
It goes all over the city and I
just up and down the main street
I get those Albuquerque.
And they have a.
We have a twenty thousand seat
multi purpose arena something
over cooked because this is a
very they have a very.
My understanding I visited there
a couple years ago and I think
we had a tour of their
Hospital their health services
complex which was named after a
former governor forget the name
so yes it's three progressive
it's growing and
It's unfortunate we're not doing
the same.
thank you Senator common and Mr
chair what it like to point out
all that is happening
I I.
This is not related I'm I'm a
rafter but I've been driving to
Salt Lake City to different
rivers up in the country for
probably thirty seven forty
years.
The Salt Lake kind of started
out as a sleepy little place.
And then it kept getting bigger
and and in the other cities it's
all one office corridor going
along seventeen today it is
phenomenal and it and it's all
the national names that you've
ever heard of in companies and
they've all moved there they all
have offices and I asked him I
said how were they able to do
that.
And they said would very simple
answer Brigham Young University.
It is the university of
entrepreneurs that may have
something to do with the culture
but those folks there learn day
in and day out how to become an
entrepreneur and as as I say in
entrepreneurship it's the jockey
not the horse that is there are
lots of great ideas like Google
was number fifteen and search
engines but it was the team that
made it successful it is a real
skill base it's a tough skill
base I did a not for profit
start up the about nine years
ago New Mexico health
connections and I I wish I had
done more in my life but I did
learn from there and I also
learned for a number of
entrepreneurs it really it it is
a skill base you think
intuitively you would have it
you have to learn it you have to
learn to provide it you have to
learn the language you have to
know that basically what
investors are looking for are
probably four to five people who
work together well as a team so
you have to show that you are a
team doesn't it isn't just
coming up with the idea it's
will this team be able to
execute on my investment giving
my ten fold return that I'm
taking the risk for and that's
what this entity does and that's
why it is so critical and
crucial to New Mexico it's our
little many have Brigham Young
University Petri plate that will
grow this kind of skill base and
hopefully have I twenty five
looking like I seventeen some
day so thank you for bringing
this forward really appreciate
and I hope the committee passes
it and I know to run into a
funding question probably down
the line but again this is one
of those not gets that is going
to be a thousand fold just
returned thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Senator
senator Neville Mr Chairman
moved to pass the motion for it
to pass.
Thank thank you bye Senator
Hickey if you'll call the roll
please Merion Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan
Senator McKenna.
No and explain my vote.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto no.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes and.
You have a do pass Senator when
you vote please.
Thank you senator and thank you
thank you chairman thank you
senator Clemente
yeah I guess I I should have
stalled before but I I just have
some questions about why it's
come to us as a bill and I'm
wondering you know under the the
FIR it reads.
the coalition was notified as a
finalist for build back better
and so is it in front of this
committee today because we know
build back better has stalled
that's my big was senator at
this is what I explained to the
very beginning that the FIR is
conflating or confusing the
build back better with a similar
name with this particular bill I
miss that they are not the same
at all and so the FIR agency
representative this as part of
that.
On that point so I'm not sure we
need a more than that of the
four.
The budget because they can't
the reason you get the request
and time.
If if if I understand that point
because this is going to come up
a couple more times.
Build back better is heart of
the infrastructure bill it just
that's the name of the program
with in the infrastructure built
unfortunately it got conflated
with build back better and so
there that is the fund that
they're talking about tapping
into existence been provided
it's there.
Thank you of before we adjourn
we have a couple I think a group
of students if you all would
like to quickly introduce
yourselves while you're here
watching Senate education we're
always happy to help people but
you we we thought that you might
be part of this program and then
you didn't stand up and say
things so but if you'll
introduce to you are welcome to
Senate education.
President through the student
government this.
I would student government we
want to talk many of the
senators here the committee of
the kind of our heroes the
committee
Yeah with everybody else in the
office like to.
On it anywhere Sir I work with a
student government affairs
office I'm here to speak with
some of you wonderful.
When I run a lot of on the
street by vice president you
yeah I'm thrilled plan talk to
you later but thank.
Thank thank you my name is Ian I
am the assistant director of our
governmental affairs department
and see some we all around.
Hi everyone my name is Chris
Jericho are is you know director
communications and just like
with your.
Is hopefully today wonderful
thank you all for being here
it's a things are a little
different for our freshman they
never had an audience before so
it's kind of nice having you all
with us one other announcements
for the committee is tomorrow
morning the at age eighty
institute which has lots of
implications for education in
our state and for the well being
of children will be in the
Senate floor ten to twelve if
you haven't gotten any J. books
are some of the others they will
be available to be given away
please help join you and anybody
watching live it will be webcast
I think they'll be zoom links as
well for anybody but the HSD
institute for the prevention of
child abuse that goes upstream
to try and fix communities so
that we don't have child abuse
rather than trying to fix
children afterwards.
And with that we adjourn we will
be here Monday at nine.
