It's all right to to speak
loudly so that people can can
hear everything that's going on
and point of personal privilege
I'd like to introduce at a
shadow with me today this is
sandy Hugh who is the airport
manager at the Los crucis
airport and so he's up here for
Los crucis days and was very
interested in how our process is
working how things aren't so I
invited please comes out of the
I love to have you do so so.
any other comments where we get
started.
If not it just for people
watching we're gonna move around
on the agenda a little bit we
will hear Senate bill twenty
first then followed by Senate
bill twenty four which is a
school reporting on the use of
federal funds and then we'll go
back up and and look at the the
ones up there Senator Padilla on
the quantum science has to be
done by somewhere around ten
o'clock or so so we might move
that went up so we're gonna move
around a little bit on some of
those but the order will start
with Senate bill twenty then
twenty four and then kind of see
where we are as we move through
some of the other bills that
that makes sense for everyone
let me see any.
The ability things from your
side as ranking member.
Okay the the over here it's not
Senator Kernan if you kick us
off please on Senate bill twenty
the education retirement for
changes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee as we
percent owned this is David
Archuleta believe everybody
knows with the ERP and we're
here to present a bill to do
three things the first is to
amend the procurement code to
allow the ERP to enter into a
professional services contract
to operate the agency's pension
administration system for more
than the four years currently
allowed by law it immensely
Education retirement at to allow
employees of the new southeast
New Mexico college to
participate in the alternative
retirement plan called a a RP
offered by ERP the A. R. P. is
an option for certain employees
of the higher education.
Institutions to participate in
the defined contribution plan it
also amends the educational
retirement act to align the age
at which employees retirees are
required to take the minimum
distribution from their pensions
with the H. specific about
federal law and so at this point
I'd like to turn it over to Mr
chair letter maybe to go into a
little bit more detail about
each one of these three things
the bills as thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee just
briefly the first a request that
we're making to mend the
procurement code is related to
the pension administration
system we've undertaken the
process of procuring a new
system over the course of
basically the past two years
started off of business process
improvement plan for company
came in and identified our
business processes opportunities
for us to improve those and how
we administer the pension plan
for the sixty plus thousand
people that are paid into the
program along with the fifty
four thousand that are receiving
the benefit today as we look at
that basically the the pension
administration system that we
have in place today has been
with us for the last almost
twenty years we're now moving to
a new system once this in the
system will be developed and
built over the course of the
next four years
as that for years comes up will
be it is does that for years
passes and we're in the process
of developing it right as we get
ready to implement it will be
required to go back out to bid
and that was sort of the the
reasoning behind the requests to
do this now now there are a lot
of pension systems out there
in in each different state but
everyone is absolutely unique
and any of the proposals that we
evaluated we received three
there's about a handful of
companies that provide the sort
of service we received three
competitive comport proposals
each of those.
each each of them develops a
very distinct system for every
group based on our rules are
administrative code the laws
federal guidelines and so forth
I was trying to develop a good
analogy of how I can explain it
to be sort of like building a
house over the next four years
and then one thousand bill
having to you know go out and
look for another house that
probably doesn't relate well
because you can get a handy man
to upgrade stuff you can get a
contractor to come in and at any
upgrades you might need I think
this is maybe more along the
lines of.
It's not quite as complex or to
that extent but sort of like
building satellites you know
there's a handful of companies
out there following Raytheon
Northrop Grumman to build
satellites once people that
satellite it's up there you're
sort of for better for worse
sort of merry to the company
that built it for the
maintenance and upgrading
everything else you're gonna
have so like Boeing is going to
give you a set of blueprints to
take to Northrop Grumman if you
want to maintain it with them
and that's a lot like the system
is for not trying to circumvent
any sort of process associated
with the procurement of it but
basically once that system is
developed it's gonna be
something we have to use for for
at least the foreseeable future
the second part
related to the the the inclusion
the southeast college right now
they've been excluded when
they're part of the New Mexico
State University we had a
handful members that were
participate in the A. R. P. plan
since southeast college was not
specifically identified in the
statute those members were
adversely affected and they were
no longer eligible to
participate in R. P. A. R. P.
plans reflecting that and then
lastly the the amendment to the
minimum age requirements for
required minimum distributions
we're just simply sinking of the
language in the education
retirement act with what is in
federal law and with that Mr
chairman members the committee
attempting questions Senator.
No I will stand for questions
and certainly any comments or
suggestions you might have from
the committee regarding this
thank you we'll go up to the
audience of those in support of
this legislation.
Mr chair.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Richard role metal
Representative in the New Mexico
association of educational
retired we're a full support.
Thank you anyone else you'd like
to speak in support.
Anyone in opposition.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Raja some
band and I'm the current state
chief information security
officer for the state of New
Mexico I'm also the deputy CIO
for the state what we're seeing
all I do projects.
For the state.
we have an objection for on
section one item be.
Sub item number seven.
Which is.
Requesting your car plunge
exception.
For the process that
administratively is under the
department of ideas well
oversight and this will
secondment.
The existing administrative
process sees and the controls
that requires.
All state agencies to go through
the C. due process and the
morning members of that
committee includes members from
LFC and DFA.
It will bypass all that in that
but you would be if that
exception is provided.
Thank you.
Anyone else in opposition.
So anyone online no Sir.
Okay go to questions from the
committee members.
just to clarify your.
To develop the objections of do
it.
Do you address that before we
decide.
Do you want me to go ahead Mr
chair and senator Neville
I'm sorry I just recently came
to attention as I was having the
discussion with our Senator
Kernan this this now I would
say.
I I haven't really had the time
to sort of process that but I
would say.
Through this up into the state
we've gone through
process the C. to process do
with their enterprise management
organization has
provided oversight of the
procurement of the system
up until now I mean they've been
involved in every step of the
way I would say that I.
Well we're getting ready to sign
a contract will become effective
now July we receive support from
the Legisla- from the
legislature in the
recommendations as well as the
executive so the contract would
become effective in July that
would take us over the next four
years we still have to bid that
out but in the future would have
this we would have that option
for the exemption of the system
related to that so again I the
that's part about the extent of
what I have.
The chair please thank you
Mr chair Senator no so the the
so do it doesn't provide a
pension administration system
there's a handful of companies
to do this for states counties
large counties and so forth Sir
municipalities and I I I believe
maybe the concern is coming from
the procurement process for the
signing off of us being allowed
to be exempted from this I'm not
I'm not sure but it's not a
service that do a provides Mr
chair just at you know it's
really disappointing to me that
this is put before me brought
before we percent the bill and I
would have liked to have had
this information prior to today
so that's disappointing as I
look at at the exemptions that
have already occurred through
the legislative process I think
there six other exemptions that
have occurred through this
process so certainly will yield
to the will of the committee we
we don't want to have to remove
that but if we do have to remove
it to move the bill forward we
can do that that I I guess I'm
just concerned that this was not
brought to our attention the
bill's been filed and available
for everyone for quite some time
and so certainly will yield to
the committee we don't hold up
the other two items of the bill
that it seems as though other
agencies have received wafers
and permission and we certainly
know the ERP has always done a
very good job they've had the
same company I guess for over
twenty years and now moving into
another so we'll leave it up to
the will of the committee.
Thank you other questions as
their Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Kernan thank you gentleman the
start just on that point the
So in other words the that the
current contract goes into
effect July first followed up
the current legal process but
theoretically in four years this
would be come up local the and
my understanding things
correctly Mr chair Senator that
is correct okay thank.
You want those up Google it just
question more like comments as
we were getting through the
analysis.
The COVID was more there's a
problem overall with I. T..
On the part procurement and we
done numerous other ones.
This particular bill is not the
place to fix it with all of the
other ones and so I don't have a
problem with this moving forward
but I think there needs to be an
overall bill in the legislature
to fix this particular concern
that I that that do it has with
all of these kinds of contracts
to make it very clear what is
the process and how to follow it
not to hold up this particular
one because you're doing what
others have done and somebody
now and things we should be
doing these.
It does that make sense Senator
yes thank you Mr chair okay
This money will of the
committee.
Yes thank you Mr moved by
senator Neville and seconded by
Carol pope by Senator posts are
your call will please Senator
excuse me Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Maestas yes senator bill yes
Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator so yes
have a do you have a do pass
thank you very much Mr.
Senator Diamond welcome to
Senate education.
You have to start.
He said with our.
Maybe that you need in the
office of the secretary.
Senator.
okay.
It's.
Okay.
Is when the two years now.
Let's get those handed out.
Thank you.
And then if I can get one of
someone to.
Move the the committee sub for
discussion as opposed to.
Mr chair I move
That we
Not just on.
All that.
Mr chair and move that we do it
do not pass on the regional
center field.
Twenty four and we moved the
committee substitute for
discussion purposes.
Thank you is there any
opposition to such okay.
Center if you would please ends
on the committee set up on the
committee said it's it's a
pleasure to join Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
joined today by adjacent as many
us of New Mexico kids can as as
we sit down review that New
Mexico has received
approximately once point six
billion dollars in COVID relief
funds with about ninety percent
of our federal dollars going to
our public schools you initially
a majority of that money was put
towards good use one time money
to make our schools safer you
know a lot of the H. backs but
what is the money continue to
come in it could be used for a
number of intense including the
purchasing of educational
technology maintaining
continuity of services improving
indoor air quality and then also
to address learning losses
summer learning and after school
programs and providing
activities for students with
disabilities what what this
committee so before us does is
just take a look not as much as
the reporting of inputs which
are available to two of the last
round said than we expected a
third not so much the inputs but
at the outputs with that with
this amount of money we really
do have an opportunity make
transformative changes in our
schools and we would like our
school districts to just report
on how the money's been spent
and if it is how it's moving the
needle so the reports would be
generated need to
need to find the following one
the amount of funding received
the projected impacted the
funding on student achievements
applicable data outlining the
progress towards their goals and
the amount of funding that
remains really an analysis
determining the invested federal
dollars and if if we haven't
seen it move the needle how they
intend to.
Put that money towards could use
and improve outcomes the
estimate time for many of the
superintendents and I've talked
to this information is readily
available it should take you
know what one superintendent
estimated four hours another set
a day of reporting what we're
doing is this is just a
transparency opportunity so that
parents legislators all citizens
can log in and see not just how
the state dollars were used for
how our schools are putting our
federal dollars to use.
I yield to Mr Espenilla said
he'd like to add anything
chairman members of the
committee thank you for having
me here this morning I think
Senator Diamond really explain
subs to really well and I think
when we look at it the one point
five billion dollars in federal
Assur funds really did provide
an opportunity to really
transform our schools and you
know it's an opportunity and
it's really figure out what's
working and what's not and so we
look at this piece of
legislation is we only can know
what's working is if we track
and we report on the impact on
what the student outcomes are so
that we can learn is what's
working what's not and then so
that we can shift our strategies
if we know through year one and
year two maybe we thought this
was going to have the outcome or
programmatic outcomes that we
had but based on our analysis
it's not it gives us the
opportunity in the public to see
what the shift is going to be to
them really enhance the student
outcomes so this from this point
legislation.
This.
Now Mr chairman we stand
available for questions thank
you up to the audience first
those in support of this
legislation.
Early supporters.
Anyone in opposition.
Anybody awake.
How do we have anyone online.
Okay will move to questions in
the committee.
The service this thank you Mr
Dimon Mr speaker also what what
to stream the regional bill
enough.
You the the.
Mr chairman and senator my Estes
the substitute really takes a
closer focus on the outputs we
had some concerns on the
original bill that maybe there
was some some cases a
duplication because they're
already reporting a lot of those
inputs and so we don't want to
burden our districts anymore so
we're not we didn't want we
removed any potential
duplication of reporting inputs
and now we just want the the
then to report the outputs Mr
smears if you'd like to add yeah
the chairman Senator my Estes
specifically the changes are on
the the reporting items in the
original bill we had the schools
reporting a detailed budget for
how funds have been and will be
Spence and explanation of
program Medicaid uses those are
already reported to PED and so
we wanted to avoid in the FIR
had had made that comment as
well any current the location of
existing reporting and those are
inputs and says a Senator was
saying we've moved to the report
to focus only on the outcomes of
which are not currently
reporting.
Thank you Mr Senator Diamond the
up Mr stern was and also if.
If money is not spent you you
don't have to come back with
another bill but it anticipates
another year even a second year
K. monies not spent would given
the same time line correct.
I chairman Senator masters
correct yes we have three
reporting timelines if they're
still money on spat that goes
out to July one twenty twenty
five thank you Mr.
Question under both.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chair Senator so this
information is just really
regards to that the COVID
funding the federal funding
coming in right and that's what
the changes Mr chairman and
senator pope it is this is just
the federal dollars how we spent
the federal dollars what the
money went to and if if if we
were meeting our goals with
those the that those dollars in
if they didn't meet their goals
how are they going to change the
plans that we can start meeting
those goals.
And Mr chair Senator I guess
with this reporting how will it
be reported or who's getting
this reporting is with dishes be
and and a standard report that's
coming out quarterly I guess
just a little more information
on that yeah chairman Senator
pope in the legislation PED is
asked to create a standardized
report that the districts can
use and all the reports are
submitted to PED and and put
online.
Thank you Mr so this will be
just in addition to that report
right thank you Mr I thank you
anyone else.
But a couple of questions.
Who's going to use this
information and for what.
Mr chairman I think it's just
basically a transparency bill
anyone can use this information
I think we owe it as legislators
we owe this to our parents of
students so that anyone who can
log in to see what money is
going into the school district
and and how that is impacting
outcomes for for our communities
we it's a lot of money it's a
lot of money that went into our
schools in our school districts
since legislator we should be
open and transparent and
accountable for how we spend it
a recognized if we didn't meet
our objectives and works to work
to change focus on on how we're
going to and and every parent
deserves that information every
community every taxpayer you
know we we spent a lot of
federal dollars here in just
opportunity be very transparent
of where we spend it and what we
did with it.
Senator are any of the reports
online now.
Yes Sir Mr chairman the first
the first two rounds of COVID
relief money that went out is on
line the differences is it's
mainly just some some
information on the inputs where
it was where how much money was
allocated to what but not
information on what the
objective and how that input
that investment made any change
if if it was a successful
programmer project at all this
report is just additional
information because this
information will eventually
become online as well the the
inputs additional information as
to how the money impacted
outcomes.
And so Senator that requires an
analysis who's going to do the
analysis as to whether it made a
difference or change because
it's not a clear line with any
of our funding that this dollar
resulted in this test score
who's going to do the analysis
on that change that you're
asking about that this funding
is supposed to for this
transparency supposed indicate.
just.
Chairman my understanding with
Yasser funds and the
applications that were put in
with I PED on that outline the
programmatic uses it's very
clear what the doll as her funds
for going term going to schools
in terms of their use for the
program act uses so the school
district would do the analysis
looking at okay we were going to
use it for this specific program
to fund this program around
reading or literacy so they
should be able to tell okay this
program happened what was the
outcome programmatic outcome
that increase student
achievement is our hope.
My question gets back to who's
going to do that because that's
not a one hour fill out a form
internet in that is days of a
researcher within the district
which are act FTEs that are not
going into the classroom were
doing other things.
Who's going to do that and does
that report then go to the head
what does the PED's do with it
some of all my questions is over
the last couple of years through
the LFC and others we worked
very hard as we hear from our
districts about the number of
reports they must do that go and
sit in a drawer and nobody does
anything with them
and so I'm very concerned about
additional reporting in the time
it takes to do that and whether
they're actually being used or
whether they are just being put
up for one person who might be
interested or were a couple and
without any focus on how that
changes anything those are I
mean it's to me this looks like
the executive report we're
trying to get off the backs of
districts yeah chair and
chairman our hope is that
schools are already tracking the
progress and outcomes that are
that they're utilizing the funds
for to align with federal
reporting requirements this
would just allow the state to
put in the state on a public
portal so that our hope is that
policy makers such as yourselves
alley just the LFC and other
school districts can look use
that data and say you know the
school implemented this program
this is the impact that it had
that may be something that I
want to adopt on the road or the
school implemented this program
it didn't have the impact so you
know I'm not gonna try that so
we're hoping that it really can
create some strategy an
important information on where
to invest Ahlers in the future.
I think I understand but.
Money that goes into a school
does not stay in one pot to just
move that it's part of the
bigger programs for things and
to do research to separate out
how much the additional federal
money.
Had an impact as opposed to the
other and what portion of that
which is a very complex
Multiple regression model as to
which one has how much influence
on page piece is pretty detailed
and extensive research that's
not just a reporting function
this sounds like it's mostly
just a reporting function and
that doesn't get to the level
that you're now asking for or
want to use this for that's
where my real concern every week
I have a meeting with
superintendents and they were
very concerned about we put all
this out there already it's
already there this is just
another report of the same
things were already doing and
are very concerned I think
school boards have the same
concern that this is very much
in under those small because
it's only a couple of days maybe
but it's an unfunded mandate
that takes away from what
they're already doing so I I
don't see that this is that all
necessary I think the data is
already there I think it's
already available certainly
through information if there's a
particular district where there
is concern as to how it was
spent contact the particular
district is the appropriate way
and they almost all I think we
still have like dashboards for
each district that they have the
various data on their end of an
information person if there's a
specific question about that
particular data for that
district trying to do a blanket
for all of the districts I think
is an unnecessary burden on
reporting on the day of the
districts but.
So I'm I'm very concerned with
and can't support the bill as it
is did you have it looked like
you were kind of region for well
asked moving that over so I
could at thank you Mr chairman
and senator Clemente I I do
wonder I it because I don't
personally know what's on the
the dashboard currently and of
course we want accountability
for every dollar that our school
districts spend and I I wish
that the PED were here to maybe
help us understand what what is
in place if we are duplicating I
think my only concern is how do
you measure the outcome I mean
if they.
Say they're spending this amount
of money for this.
How how do we know
had a bag like that outcome so I
don't know how we could maybe to
come back and and
learn a little bit more about
about what's being reported are
we committed on with the no red
can maybe get a little bit more
information forecast finance you
know I could support that and
then just kind of see if we
could do something like that.
This is the finance.
Yes Sir Mr Chairman.
Senator thank you Mr just wanted
to go back so
Mr chair Senator
the first report by believe
would be on one July correct
that.
Senator frontal okay and so I
just have questions and concerns
of you know we're starting one
July kind of in the school
getting into the summer
This would they be able to do
that just not working any school
districts working in the schools
some of them will probably be
out of school as well just
making sure that is this even
possible.
It Mr Chairman is a time line
yes yes it follows it follows
some other similar reporting
dates in which which reports are
also generated around the same
time line so the schools Mr
chairs of the school systems and
and the districts are already
doing other reporting anyway
during this type test different
reporting Sir or are on
different cycles but it's a year
round calendar in which
different reports are due
particularly in your federal
reporting of federal dollars.
Thank you Mr.
The committee.
At the no Representative.
The motion for no.
And the second.
The call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you for taking.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator viruses yes to the no
Representative.
The bill yes Senator Campos
Senator pote yes Sanders Sauls
no.
We do but you do forward with
the No REC thank you thank you
chairman I appreciate your time.
So.
would jump around a little bit
here Senator Padilla is you
office some other things and so
they're a little out of order
because we were actually makes
half of.
We'll wait but I requested okay
we're good okay.
Thank you very much one of the
for all of the information.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee appreciate your
flexibility today it's very very
much appreciated I think some of
you may know that this is sort
of a.
Something that's come together
by the chairman and I over the
years that we served we came in
the same day and and live almost
letter over live over ten years
ago and in doing so I I
immediately volunteered to serve
as the chair of the science and
tech Committee Science taken
telecommunications at ten times
fast and then vice chair of the
of the year and that's just kind
of how it's gonna we've learned
a lot of very interesting things
about how we can continue to
diversify the New Mexico economy
how can we bring additional
research dollars into our state
we have some phenomenal research
institutions and this is what
we're before we the with you
today is just another way to
truly capitalize intended to
take about a one hundred X. in
terms of every dollar that we
would invest in something like
this I'm gonna tell you a little
bit more about what we're trying
to accomplish but I do wanna let
you know we have a super
flexible expert witness today
and he's a remarkable New
Mexicans who was here the other
day and immediately volunteered
only asked in the very next day
he got himself appears I
sincerely appreciate that and
then decided to come here again
today so I do have Dr James
Holloway he's the University of
New Mexico provost and executive
vice president for academic
affairs he's a professor and
also of nuclear engineering
nuclear had remember say that
the right wing
I was gonna run I was a TV one
day I said it the wrong way and
all my aunties and all my
teachers called me correcting me
so quantum information science
is a really interesting way of
looking at the next frontier if
you will what we're trying to do
here is looking for one point
five million dollars to seed a
chair in quantum physics at the
university of New Mexico five
hundred thousand dollars New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology five hundred thousand
dollars and New Mexico State
University five hundred thousand
the purpose of the appropriation
assistance to seed and to staff
you know of a small little
office at all three institutions
which over time will bring
research dollars into New Mexico
I'm guessing within about ten
years it could be upwards of a
billion dollars into our state
with this very tiny little
investment that we're gonna may.
Care
If a quantum information
technology really brings
together quantum mechanics and
information technology this you
creates technology possibilities
in computing that could change
not only the speed results but
the broad range of date and
problems that can be solved by
using this type of computing a
great example would be think of
a computer right now is one
person singing a solo song by
themselves quantum information
technology is going to bring an
entire symphony together at a
very rapid speed speed it's
looking the data that that that
has come together on this is the
sensually one hundred fifty
eight million times faster than
the fastest supercomputers that
we have on the planet right now
so very exciting stuff some
companies that are utilizing
quantum computing are truly
moving themselves and setting
themselves apart and I'd like
drive all the way to see a
little bit more because I'm sure
that that was probably a third
grade description he's going to
give you have a very mature very
seasoned that description.
Thank you thank you senator and
chairman of thank you for the
the time in front of the
committee this this truly is a
really important opportunity for
New Mexico of quantum
information science quantum
science and engineering are a
growing area of of economic
development that's a growing
area impact it's at the area
that is growing and critically
important for national security
the the we we won't spend a lot
of time sort of on on the
technologies and and and how
this thing works but for certain
kinds of problems you truly can
get those hundreds of millions
of times faster kinds of of
speed ups you also can develop
ways to communicate that are
literally on crack Google by the
basic laws of physics and and so
that the way you chair and
exchange information can be
really made secure and and and
the fundamental way last year
the economy economic development
consortium had a a study done by
hi Kerry on they estimated that
last year the revenues the
economy of businesses that we
using quantum technology of new
quantum technologies at that
time was about six hundred
fourteen million growing at
twenty five percent per year and
would reach one point two
billion by twenty twenty five
the Boston consulting group
extending that analysis
estimates that the revenues of
these kinds of companies will be
literally in the multi hundreds
of billions by the end of the
decade
this is an area that's I've
mentioned critically important
for national security as well
and New Mexico is uniquely
positioned
at the both national lands at
Los Alamos at sandy
the fundamental ideas have been
developed the same is true in
our universities of some of the
fundamental work in quantum
computing was done at the
university of New Mexico by
Carlton caves
so we have the foundation for
New Mexico to really.
The leaders in this economy and
companies are looking at this
and moving to New Mexico
companies are spending out of
the lance out of the
university's just recently serve
and acts a quantum based company
moved its research headquarters
to New Mexico because they want
to be near the labs and the
universities that do the
research and the produce the
advanced workforce who can't
really develop that so really
this is an opportunity to
jump start a whole new part of
our economy and for the
universities to support the
advanced of workforce that's
necessary for that to happen so
thank you.
Thank you Dr Holloway so there
you have it that was the best
description that we could get
and that's what we assume to be
here I have to say that they're
approximately Mr chairman
members of the committee twelve
primary industry growth industry
in the United States that are
focusing on on folding in
quantum physics to help them
with their work pharmaceutical
cybersecurity financial national
security as you heard are all
going to benefit from this happy
to take questions.
Thank you senator questions from
the committee.
So much this.
Thank you Mr chairman of the US
professor thank you for joining
us that the up that all all for
the sake of the dialogue I won't
get into what physics means but
could you please explain now
what quantum means.
Mr chairman for the proposed to
explain.
Mr chairman Senator masters in
this case we're talking about
the the fundamental rules that
govern matter at the sub
microscopic scale and the the
fundamental physics that
actually under Penn's the way
that matter works involves three
basic ideas and I'll name them
without necessarily sort of
addicting and what they mean one
is called superposition which is
about how different states of a
physical system can overlap
simultaneously the next is about
entanglement which is about how
different parts of a of the
physical system can actually be
interconnected and the
correlated to each other in in a
kind of really up
in really fundamental ways and
and that's a critical piece this
was the Nobel Prize in in
physics was just given for kind
of the the final and ultimate
proofs that entanglement
actually happens despite it so
it's not intuitive behaviors but
this idea of superposition this
idea of
of entanglement allows you to
build systems that process
information in fundamentally
different ways and in particular
we and and quantum information
computing we talk about cubits
on so bits of course people
heard of can be one or zero
cubits can actually be one and
zero simultaneously that
superposition so I can
superimpose different states
simultaneously
and I can also interfere those
systems in ways that can do
complicated computation that's
the third piece of of of quantum
physics that fundamentally
physical systems have these
properties of superposition the
way the different states overlap
entanglement the way the
different parts of the system
can be communicated with each
other or correlated with each
other and.
Interference which allows me to
actually dynamically compute
things in a way that says I'm
going to suppress the wrong
answers and enhance the right
answers in order to get the
right answer using just
fundamental physics and not the
kind of of step by step way that
that classical computers work I
hope that that wasn't do you
concur Senator well so as you
can imagine take take take think
about think about the pandemic
we just survive can you imagine
being able to develop a vaccine
within days rather than years
essentially what with the
provost is just described is is
going to help accomplish things
like that this all the testing
and all the other things are
gonna happen to ensure the
safety of the whatever but the
the the calculations that are
involved in developing those
vaccines literally can be done
in days hundred fifty eight
million times faster.
Exciting stuff all right thank
you Mr pro center Mr chairman
I'll.
I'll support a quantum do pass
when the motion is made thank
you before we move on yeah we're
we're only we're still trying to
get back in habits I forgot to
go out to the audience and ask
for those in support we went in
support it would like to to
speak briefly about this we'll
start over on this side I just
here in support Getty.
Chairman committee members I'm
gonna publication and the
director for New Mexico have
scored.
The associate director the
representative on institutions
in New Mexico when it comes to
research and one of our focus in
this bill is the fact is that
it's going to create for
institutions across the state
when it comes to P.
technological areas such as
quantum sciences we want to make
sure that it's not in the
certain institutions that
benefit but that students all
across the state have about the
to get into these labs for
instance we have a quantum
undergrad research expedients
Graham at UNM that if score
would be supporting this year's
the dense locks and this will
primarily go to route of and.
And I think in in that context
we have these large the you have
expertise that explores the
board this but we need faculty
on the other end to plug the
students into this is an
emerging interdisciplinary area
so we have lots of expertise but
we need more two black in key
technological gaps I've been
distributions and that's why I
think as B. one fifty four is
very critical and and I think
Senator Padilla for junk in the
stuff thank thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
dismissed as a registered
lobbyist with the New Mexico
technology council we stand
strong support legislation I
still do not understand what
funds.
Has been right it take it is
that has great potential one of
things we have a significant
assets here in the state with
the last companies and other
things already this is going to
help build a workforce and
really moves forward in this
area so we stand strong support
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
There's no one online anyone
else's support there anyone in
opposition.
If not now will get you senator
Neville I'm so sorry thank you
Mr chairman I only have one
question that well if I I I'm
gonna get was senator my Estes
afterwards because I know he
picked up everything that we
should yield to clue me in and
and brief me on the quantum
physics of.
It's an appropriation bill do
you have a line in the budget
figured out but thank you Mr
chairman Senator pretty closely
we're gonna.
What's the we're gonna attempt
to to fold it into the UNM piece
of this that's been going to
where if you don't that's right
question that doesn't but I do
also want to remind the
committee one more time that one
point five million dollar
investment is just the beginning
I think which a wind up seeing
itself funding over time in a
huge gigantic quantum way.
Center how long have you been
working on that line well I'm
challenge Mr Chairman which owns
the committee today anytime
you're on the Mike on the floor
today police on the work quantum
it'll be very helpful to me.
Thank you as a co sponsor I'm
absolutely in support of this we
know how much research drives
innovation and economic growth
within the state over the last
twenty years I think we have cut
our funding to it to
for basic research at our
universities this provides the
faculty lines I believe that U.
N. M. New Mexico state and tech
is that correct and so the
funding is just for those
faculty lines within that the
one of the other bills it's
coming up that I'm carrying is
actually some direct research in
those fields that this that
these faculty lines then support
the build out of all of that and
so up as we're and as a member
of the finance committee I hope
you will champion the direct
funding of research within the
state when we have so much non
recurring money these five year
programs and things this is
exactly the kind of thing that
can have huge spin offs and so
absolutely I I'm in support and
though it's when I hear these I
have to channel my physics
professor father yeah when as a
little kid he was telling me
about quirks and entanglements
and spins and all kinds of
things and as you indicated when
you get down to that atomic
level.
The normal laws of physics that
we think of gravity and things
like that it's more magical it
doesn't work that way you have
to we'll suspend belief and look
at things very differently
almost like movie magic makes
things happen that could
possibly happen other places
that's sort of how this is but
it's real.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman the
you I move it to pass.
The motion seconded by Senator
pope if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey Senator Kernan.
Senator Maestas yes the.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pose yes centerfold yes
have you have a new path Senator
thank you members of the
committee thank you so much
appreciate your flexibility to
yes and I'm gonna move down to
the table Center pope would you
take over for me and.
This eight six will start with
the yeah well let's start with.
Well let's start with the the
two other research one because
they're they're very closely
related what we're just doing so
seventy eight seventy nine yes.
So for a.
Webcast April here we're gonna
start with Senate bill seven
eight.
That will be next.
And better so if you have a
four.
Thank you up we're gonna start
we have seventy seven we start
with seventy eight I am the
Senate.
Designate to score which and
then if you told me that I
always can get quite the acronym
right establish programs to
support we're the state has and
to me yet systems to support
research EZCORP which is a an
arm of the National Science
Foundation New Mexico isn't that
score State at scores particular
mission is to increase research
particularly with more
minorities and women up this
these two programs seventy eight
and seventy nine every two years
or so and I'll let you do what's
more the twenties I butcher it
to start with
Consortium programs for more
research universities come
together to do presentations to
F. score which were able to
advance one to the National
Science Foundation for funding
we had three wonderful programs
presented two years ago we could
only advance one which is now
been accepted by up scoring is
going to be find
moving forward seventy eight and
seventy nine are the two other
research programs and the
committee had a very difficult
time we we wanted to put them
all forward.
So seventy eight is Center for
dryland resilience at New Mexico
state and provides five years
funding similar to if it'd been
National Science Foundation
funded to support that
consortium of about ten or more
faculty across universities New
Mexico state is the lead on this
one but it includes eastern New
Mexico New Mexico tech U. N. M.
and our labs to study dryland
resilience how are dry lands can
be better managed do all the
mapping of it it's cetera with
that let me K. handed over to to
get any and yeah if you all will
introduce yourselves what your
role is.
Mr chair advantage by the
question under that act in New
Mexico at school.
Vice chair members of the
committee I'm Selena can really
I'm the associate director for
up for.
So yes if you please kind of
explain a little bit more about
F. score but then also these
particular programs and some of
the ones that we have had and
what the return on investment
the patent spin offs all of
those kinds of things as far as
economic growth and development
stick to SB seventy eight are
all to talk about some.
Just seventy eight now broadly
about things and then
specifically seventy eight so
Mister chair Act court was set
up by the National Science
Foundation and recognition that
some states
deceived point seven fired less
than that percentage of National
Science Foundation research
dollars and this particularly
has to do with the population of
these states
it's it down multiple states
across the United States to
qualify for that score and as
part of this designation there
are some funds set aside for
that score States to promote
research in the state
In in in our particular case
that the flagship funding this
call to track one grant which is
a twenty four million dollars
center that's awarded to a state
for five years four million off
that comes from Cockshutt and
twenty million comes from the
National Science Foundation in
our case of four million came
from the that the technology
fund that was passed by this
body
the year ago last year that was
the.
What was that we call that the
closing grant lines closing
fund.
So Mister chair it the state has
been incredibly supportive
off at school or and and be we
have had a long history twenty
years of establishing key
technology ADS in the state
education programs research
setting up programs that mesh
with the national labs and such
now in this particular case New
Mexico is widely considered an
expert and dry and then the
college I and that's because
that's that's that's our flight
on fund I and and the the thrive
in this environment and be able
do have enterprise with with
minimal water and the we are
experts at conserving water that
we have the using water and such
now a new spin on this is the
ability to use concepts such as
artificial intelligence machine
learning to do better financial
positions to the problems that
we face and these are state of
the arts and Yuxin speed could
cut down the amount of time it
takes to arrive at a solution
and could transform the bait
that that we manage and and use
water and not ecology so that
was a topic that was stage along
with two other topics one
additive manufacturing are are
better known as three D.
printing and another one that
doesn't want to make years of
ages SB seventy nine R. and
these three are looked at by the
state committee of forex court
and this court state committee
consists of of people in the
government people from industry
from the national labs from the
university's and it's a very
potent organization that took a
deep dive into these three
topics that for page and
selected additive manufacturing
of the topic that you could
imagine science foundation but
as a senator mentioned SB
seventy eight the dried and
ecology to update is is rather
important one and if we don't
support this apparently the
problem is that the ex court
officially also.
Boarding it won't happen for
another five years and do not do
anything about this for five
years would mean that despite
having significant expertise in
this state they would not be
competing that act it that that
that other states that are going
to get a head office and I think
that that's that the timeliness
of this proposal is and and I'm
I'm really thankful to the
senator for championing discuss
so limited you and anything in
particular maybe along the area
of other F. score projects and
how they've spun off patents and
other researching requests
coming in place to do that of
vice chair members of the
committee I can talk a little
bit about the return on
investment so gunning told you
it's a twenty million dollar
investment from the federal
government of four million
investment from up the state and
what we've seen to date in in
the four years of our our
current project which actually
has to do with the electricity
grid we've had a return on page
eighty two million dollars of
other funding has come into our
state as a result of that and so
we're really seeing like a five
to one on the overall investment
but if you if you just take the
four million dollars at the
state invested it's it's pretty
pretty significant of so not
just dollars but also in terms
of the number of people that are
engaged about two hundred
students have been trained as
part of our project and so
that's a pretty significant
workforce development training
them to be researchers to be of
good citizens to be innovators
so that that's something that
happens in in all of our of
school awards and then it's not
just research that's part of the
work that we're doing we're also
funding a program at Santa Fe
community college to stand up a
certificate program in smart and
grid resilient buildings and so
really thinking about those kind
of things are happening in our
schools and the building of the
smart buildings we need people
who are good at reading the
smart buildings and so that's
another another piece of.
M. score story but we've we've
had just scored a state since
two thousand so we've had a
pretty long track record and if
you look at those early
investments in mental science
and hydrology and other things
it really changes the trajectory
of research in our state it
really that the amount of
faculty that were able to hire
an attractor state is very
different to them for many of
the other areas and one other
pieces that all of our projects
are very tied to the science and
technology priorities of the
state and so we're we're really
clued into what's happening with
the Economic Development
Department and what's what's on
the cutting edge we're trying to
we're looking ahead to the
future and trying to invest in
the things that are going to
make us competitive on the
research side.
So Mr chair just in summary SB
seventy eight was one of the
two.
Highly regarded research topics
that the committee looked at but
was not able to advance to for
funding to NSF in a time of
plenty in the state of New
Mexico the fifteen million
dollars over five years for this
would directly fund what NSF
would have been funding if
escort advanced it to them.
With the understanding that it
typically has around five to one
R. O. Y. for the investment as
well as supporting faculty that
we just moved forward supporting
undergraduate students graduate
students
of the patents that are spun off
entrepreneurs that have spun off
this helps establish innovation
and research as a movement
towards the future of New Mexico
and because it's consortium it
supports all of those research
institutions up and down and
collaboration between them.
It will stand for questions on
seventy eight you got a little
bit of a preview we won't do the
whole introduction on seventy
nine then in a few moments all
right thank you etcetera so for
folks in the committee room do
we have anyone in support of
this legislation Chopin's.
Do we have anyone that opposes.
We can have some of the folks so
folks make a comment you'll have
two minutes a gentleman in the
back races.
Representative supporters.
So.
Thank you.
Is.
I've actually been.
And he'll.
Support
then solar project and so if we
are organizational.
Members of this act can I have
you just kind of come a little
closer to the microphones
The committee chairman members
of the committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts and we
stand is transported legislation
land management is a critical is
critical for the future of New
Mexico in the innovation
research and potential solutions
that can come out and just have
to projects as very important so
stems from support for thank you
Mr chairman of the microphone.
Again Mr chair members of the
committee clay nephew New Mexico
State University and I don't
want to be too redundant we
obviously think the sponsor
Center souls is been a champion
of research for some years now
and the variety of ways and we
continue to capitalize on that
support by attracting
researchers to the state which
is one of the things that this
type of funding does I do want
to point out that we have
general Eric Sanchez from a
physical science lab where we do
a lot of this great research and
so we this just in great support
great support for apps score and
with that thank you and we
encouraged.
Looks like those are the
comments to the committee we
have to online soon if we could
have Camilleri first.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members Camilleri Maryland in
New Mexico State Land Office
Land Office stands in full
support of this bill developing
advanced statewide ecological
monitoring networks resilient
strategies for sustainable
management of drylands will
provide support to maintain and
grow a healthy agricultural
sector in New Mexico this factor
in turn helps the State Land
Office achieve its mission for
caring for the land in
optimizing revenue generated for
public education and our other
beneficiaries thank you.
And next if we could have barely
Hidalgo.
Yes good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I just
wanted to say that I support
this bill thank you.
Thank you and now we will move
over to committee members
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chairman thank you for The
presentation I certainly I am
supportive of research I mean
this is sent obviously something
that that we all look forward to
special with our universities
but I want to kind of zero in on
the kind of the end goal of
Center for dryland resilience
and and what management of of
that is this is about farming
dryland images anything do
farming that's absolutely and so
Mr chair and senator what kind
of what in your mind or are you
going to be able to do research
that in turn leads to telling
dryland farmers what they can
and cannot do.
Chair and Senator Kernan that my
understanding of the the project
is that it's looking at
ecosystems as a whole so not
just in our widely because
systems but also you
in considering the farming
situation and the interaction
between the living and the non
living on the water in those.
Drier and.
What what are the what are the
drivers of what are the
limitations and and it really
does it will have implications
for Thailand farming or for
farmers that are.
Parting with your nation's
wealth as well as managing our
natural resources like our
rivers and our watersheds I
thank you Mr chairman Senator so
drawing former didn't have any
water so they're not impacting
the water system and and so act
I guess it's just you know
really curious you know people
that have land and they farm
their land didn't probably you
know pretty good have pretty
good idea of how to do that I
guess I don't go down the road
for we're beginning to tell
people that have significant
amounts of land that they
probably shouldn't Farm that
landing more that's not your
goal is to Mr chairman and
senator.
For The presentation I had that
was not at all part of the the
discussions are plans it was
much more working with farmers
on how to maximize that on what
kinds of crops what kinds of
cover crops in the off year so
it holds the moisture when
they're not directly planting
how did of changing climate
might affect their particular
situation so they can better
manage the amount of fertilizer
that they use and gathering all
of that data right now farmers
are often left to what their
parents told them there's some
out of the egg experiment
stations this is bringing all of
those things together with
modern databases and other
things to assist in all of those
to be more effective and
efficient it but is not at all
about the fear of telling people
you can't farm this you can't do
that but assisting them and what
kinds of ways to make it
effective and it's also range
lands not just farmlands thank
you Mr chair and senator and
you know I at.
Ms price don't have Senator
Ingle here is your expert
witnesses of dryland farmer
nation New Mexico and you know
with a degree from issue in
agriculture I would imagine most
of those farmers have pretty
good idea that you know I want
to make sure he is aware of this
and and probably can sit with
you and finance and support you
on this bill but but I do want
to make sure that this is an
attempt to
you know do some research and
then turn around and tell
drawing farmers well you can't
do this you can do that or
whatever so that's my only
concern thank you very much
Mister chair Mister Mister chair
never did that come up in any of
the presentation or comments and
eastern New Mexico the New
Mexico state is the the lead
Research University eastern is
probably the second one and they
do lots around this area already
in so it's kind of combining the
consortium in the brain trust
across the state for for making
New Mexico the leaders worldwide
to come to when you have
questions about drive and
resilience thank you very much
Mr chair.
Have any other questions Senator
biases thank you Mr chairman.
Senator schools just up do you
contemplate strictly analyzing
water is a race to agriculture
or or do you think you would do
what up broadened to just
economic development in general
based on the limited water that
we have Mr chairman and senator.
This is a fairly large view of
drylands and so it's not just
water.
But how to manage all the other
parts of the dry lands for.
Opioid benefit and
sustainability and things of
that sort of.
My guess is it's not going to be
dealing I'd never heard anything
in the presentations correct me
if you all heard anything
different but this isn't about
how I Albuquerque is going to
ensure that they have enough
water for the next fifty years
or or anything of that sort it
was not about urban areas having
enough water for the this is
staying there growth it was much
more about our farmlands are
range lands our national forests
the the landscape more than the
urban areas if that's what
you're asking I think that yeah
that's.
The other questions comments
from the ladies room to be.
The motion or will of the
committee.
Just send all right we do pastor
senator Neville a second from
Senator Kernan we can do a roll
call.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
Senator Maestas yes.
Yes yes senator bill is Senator
pandemic yes Senator po yes
Senator full yes.
Thank you for the full six six
four.
To use.
So it would be passed Senator
thank you.
We will now move to Senate bill
seventy nine seventy nine of the
basic understanding of what it
score does how it supports
research in the state of New
Mexico is all the same as on the
past one this was the other of
the three proposals that were
pitched and it was almost a
shark tank like pitch knowing
that that we could only advance
one and as you watch shark tank
they're all kinds of great ideas
there they don't all get picked
up because they can only fund
some of them this was another
one that deals with as we heard
about would be in Senate bill
one fifty four.
How do we harness the the magic
the quirkiness of Adams at the
atomic scale to do materials and
tech and communications and
other things it is cutting edge
this is mostly basic research
but one of the things you hear
often when you talk about
reserves at universities
research begets you research
funding begets funding so this
would again have the state
commit fifteen million dollars
to be spent over five years to
support essentially the proposal
that was pitch to us at
Representative score on quantum
materials and tech programs and
similar to the ones we have
already done through the app
store program it has a huge
number of additional requests
that tend to come in around this
the large funding organizations
look at universities that
already have lots of funding and
put more funding their research
begets research and so this one
is essentially the same as the
last but in a very different
topic the lead University on
this is U. N. M. but it is a
consortium of New Mexico state
tech UNM Sandia Los Alamos.
And at first usage and airforce
research center and so your
broad range of experts in all of
those collaborating together.
Towards a large project of
research and support within the
state.
Mr chair so
roll tolerate gave you a very
nice broad overview of what at
quantum scientists are if you
think of it this way
traditionally you have software
and hardware to software as the
code you write and hard better
the chips on the to implement
the code in quantum science a
similar to the you're going to
have an advanced quantum
computation field where people
write codes for quantum
computers but the implementation
of the court debates are done
that what's gonna cubits our
appointments and the media's
like silicon is a medium that
into uses to make processors for
quantum science as we envision a
variety of different mediums
that can be used to store this
information and these may DDO
some of them do have started to
scratch the surface some are yet
conceptual and have not yet been
fabricated our New Mexico is the
epicenter I want to make do is
by virtue of Sandia national
labs having one of the most
advanced one to make a video
celebrities in the world and you
and them and second state and
I'll providing students
providing faculty to join in
this effort and push this effort
for their so I want to make
deals purely deals that the
videos aspect of it how do you
develop novel medios using
machine learning using
artificial intelligence using
advanced characterization
methodologies and use these for
quantum computers of the future
and that is what this proposal
is about it's truly spread out
there's pockets of expertise
would you and them at and I miss
you and Dick and these three
institutions along with a bunch
of others schools coming
together working very closely
with Sandia good good good I
sure am
Transformation effect on our
economy and in five to ten years
I I'm glad one last thing for
graduates from going to make it
easier if there are positions in
Sandia national labs right now
so the out of state that is
actually positions available for
for quantum graduates
at the rate at at this moment.
Salinity the like that if not
we'll stand for questions all
right thank you senator and for
those online we are on Senate
bill seventy nine those in the
committee room by show of hands
does anyone support this bill.
All right is anyone opposed.
All right allow few comments of
support
serve you'd like to stand.
Support.
Thank you.
On the side General back if you
could kind of walk up a little
bit just you closer to the Mike
so we can hear you.
find it again goes New Mexico
State University and students
tools for this build those are
notation.
Thank you.
Assessment of chairman members
of the committee dismissed as on
behalf of the New Mexico
technology council we stand in
strong support of the bill.
Mr Abbott.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee I want to.
Thank you thank you do we have
anyone.
All right.
So with that we'll go to the
committee comments questions.
I just
have a due pass from Centerville
thank a second from Santo
masses.
If you could do a role.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Maestas yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator so yes
have have.
Right.
You have a do pass it on Senate
bill seventy nine and we will
now go to Senate bill six zero
Senate bill sixteen which.
First.
Like riding a bike and start to
get the hang of it is.
When you're ready Sir.
You have the force and.
Thank you this bill also has
been heard in this committee in
the past.
As part of the public school
capital outlay oversight task
force and as solar energy and
power become more and more
available what this would do is
for all new school construction
that part of the design design
and planning phase of it that
they be designed to have
photovoltaic systems on them as
part of the very start to
provide for the electricity
within the school it's a way of
taking capital money and moving
it to more operational because
once these are on the cost of
electricity which is on the
operational side of the district
get shifted over to the capital
side and we're able to use those
more one time monies to.
Move more money into the
classroom by providing for the
electricity on site for the
school there was one amendment
that I would like to make and I
need to find exactly where it
is.
The.
Which.
It may take me a moment to do it
the the bill says for all.
Schools that are constructed
after July of twenty twenty.
Twenty three so starting in July
donor built their schools that
are already in the process that
it had designs drawn up would
change not affect those that it
would be to award.
They are awarded after that
time.
that's basically what this does
and now we find aware of here is
on page twelve.
Line nine.
Is so one M. there any new
public school awarded.
To be constructed after July one
award is the date when it starts
releasing money to do the
planning the architectural the
design phase of things so
anything that has already passed
that would not fall under this
new legislation.
And so if I could I would like
to to move to amend.
Page twelve Y. nine to put the
word awarded in there instead of
proposed.
You have acting secretary down
do we have any opposition from
the committee on that amendment
or any comments yes in my
system.
That
make sure that schools that are
already in the process don't
have to back up and and go put
this on after the fact so this
week which would be add
substantially to cost.
Salars.
Syrian opposition on that your
then secretary Senator.
Continue.
On the amended bill.
So this does increase the cost
of buildings by a couple of
percent.
However typically it is between
ten to twelve years that the
cost of them is paid off and
from then on all of the
electricity that is produced
reduces the operational costs
for the district and so it's
it's a big win after that.
As we move to more renewable
energy this just makes our
schools more sustainable.
That's thank you senator all
right thank you senator for
those in the room do we have
anyone in support of this
legislation.
Do we have anyone opposed.
All right.
For those of support if you'd
like to make a comment.
Our schools and for that.
This.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator San Jean
Strickland superintendent.
In principle I can tell you as
an educator we do support the
bill I would like to see some.
Alterations or amendments to it
I think specifically on page
twelve nine nine where the false
about the system was designed.
Of that campus
using simple for the many of you
have.
graciously Hobbs's spent time in
our State Texas a leading that
facilities.
It does have a photovoltaic
system on top of that that
facility.
That system actually provides
about a third of that power.
For that building and.
With the language being a system
designed to meet the energy
needs of a facility we would
need a photo voltaic system that
is a hundred thousand square
feet or to meet the needs of
that facility so from that
standpoint we would like to see
some flexibility there in terms
of what that is I I think solar
is part of the bigger picture
don't believe it will ever.
Secondly I I do agree with what
Senator souls in terms of we do
offset the cost operationally as
regenerating electricity via
solar
after that return on investment
as a school district we would
not be saving money we would be.
Having to pocket that money for
the eventual replace.
Somewhere worries of the public
school cap all the council can
bond for the replacement of that
photovoltaic system at its end
of life or replacement of the
system.
Yes yes sorry I just is with the
circle they're gonna chapter we
just wanted to express our
support for this this bill we
believe that a adding for will
take into schools is super
important and just ask you to
vote yes.
Anyone else in support.
Okay are we have to online we
could have Amy Miller.
Good morning my name is Amy
Miller I'm calling from
Albuquerque good morning Mr
chair and members of the
committee I'm speaking on behalf
of the renewable energy industry
association of New Mexico we
support this bill as the senator
said this will help schools save
on their energy costs but there
are some other important aspects
to our industry one is your
exposing children to learning
about solar energy our industry
estimates that we're going to
need quadruple the number of
employees for the the demand of
solar projects by twenty thirty
and so the more that we can
expose children to this type of
an industry and energy that's
positive for our state thank
you.
Thank you and next we have a
Maryland.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Maryland
Hidalgo and I support SB sixty
thank you.
With that we will move to the
committee Senator Kernan of
first thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you senator and
I'm really proud of Hobbs for
doing what they've done but I am
concerned about the concerns
that he has regarding the size
of the system to make the full
needs and you know I think
school districts are going to be
able to do and want to do the
right thing going forward that
sometimes when we force that
on a school district we kinda
miss what the real need is and
kind of the details so I I
really hope that I can encourage
you to go back look at some of
the issues that we're seeing
from the local level and a chest
because we have another building
or to that we're gonna have to
build and I think that we'll
certainly consider using more of
this but I don't think you can
find one hundred percent for
every building I I I don't think
it's it's possible to do that so
would you Mister chairman
Senator agree to maybe go back
and and do some adjusting to
meet some of the concerns that I
have in my district has.
Mr chair and senator
and I and I are up most respect
for Mr Stricker your
superintendent and I will be
looking at what that word was
when he suggested that and what
if we change it to me the
majority that would be fifty one
percent.
Of the energy needs of that
might on a big building as I
understand it it's like a three
story building so your roof
space compared your heated
square foot is smaller.
But would for a project like
that you can get the extra body
providing shaded parking with
solar panels on top for instance
so instead of all of it the
major that would be fifty one
percent that's a major down
downgrade which would come
what's closer to what you're
currently doing.
So Mister chair I think
You know that's certainly
something to consider but again
I think we're taking away the
ability of our local districts
to to perhaps do do what they
think is best for their district
and I just worry about the the
requirement piece and looking at
the the issues
and the FIR seems that there are
some concerns there as well so
anyway I'll listen to the other.
Senators debate on this center
Maestas thank you Mr chairman
centers sold chairman do you
anticipate this applying to of
but brand new school building
built or any modification of an
existing school Mr chair Senator
this would just be new school
construction.
That's not a modification new
school control thank you Mr
thank you at Center souls than
that I I misspoke so if the if
the new school construction is
done then the solar panels would
energize that new school
construction or the entire
screen that it's attached to.
Mr chair and senator.
If you're building a new
elementary school it would
provide the energy for that
school thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank is our souls so
so I think the answer's yes this
this bill applies to brand new
schools being built Mr chair and
senator it would not apply to
building a new wing on the oil
on an existing school okay great
thank you thank you of course I
would be more more of a remodel
of that school okay so for
example if a high school out of
a new gymnasium this doesn't
mandate that the new gymnasium
energized the entire school no
thank you Mr no.
Right.
Any other questions comments
from the committee.
a motion or will from Mr chair
and.
If I could I would propose to
amend also and and put the the
majority of the Energy need.
Instead of all of the Energy
need I think that would be an
appropriate one.
To do.
That does and that would give
some flexibility of districts
want to put in a large one to
provide all of it that's fine
but you've got to find at least
fifty percent of the Energy in
the design portion.
Senator.
What one of the concerns that
solar in general is two acres of
land as you mentioned that we
the building in Hobbs two and a
half acres this is what you
said.
Some schools would not
necessarily have that how would
we do without the rooftop may
not be anywhere near big enough
to provide the the needs of the
building.
What's what's the Mr chair and
and senator
typically you get about.
It requires about one square
foot.
Per kilowatt I'll get my my
things wrong I think about on my
house is the system I put on is
sufficient for in what's for the
number of square feet that I
have
and so that's a general marker
for how much do you need to put
on a number of schools and
communities are meeting the
needs in this way by providing
shaded parking which I'll tell
you as a a teacher coming out on
a hot afternoon and getting into
a hot cars not real pleasant and
if the school for us find
parking for the teachers
somewhere and put up shade
structures that have potable
cakes honom is a great way of
increasing and you providing
that square footage.
Excuse me you're not proposing
some got a battery storage in
conjunction.
With this are you just this
would not provide not have
battery storage as that
technology becomes better more
affordable on projects of this
scale that certainly districts
would be able to add that or
other energy savings this is
setting a minimum standard.
That's all Mr.
The committee secretary can we
did you get down that proposed
amendment of the majority is I
do not I move to amend page
twelve.
Line wind Levin photovoltaic
system sufficient to meet the
majority of the energy needs of
the public's of the school.
Of the public school.
So system sufficient to meet the
majority of the energy needs.
Second.
All right do we have any
opposition from the committee on
that amendment.
Amendment passed the Senate bill
sixty has to amendments on in
this country like we do on the
floor.
And now we go back to the
committee any other comments
questions.
On the amended bill.
What is the will of the
committee.
Chairman I moved to pass as
amended.
Do we have a second.
Else.
The secretary can take the.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes Senator
Neville no.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes Senator souls yes.
To go to excuse thank.
Senator pass on Senate bill
sixty twice as amended.
The president.
Thank you and alleged Mr chair
let you come up and close
committee.
ended today that was the last on
the agenda.
And thank you for letting me get
some practice.
For the rest of the session.
