Senator also we're webcasting
now.
Okay.
Good morning everybody welcome
to the Senate education on the
Friday March twelfth.
Couple of kind of some
announcements on things first we
will not be meeting on Saturday
we've got I think to stimulate
our two they'll probably be a
couple more coming over from the
house but there isn't a need to
have a Saturday meeting for this
particular committee
today we have some carryover
bills house bill two twenty one
Representative Garrett I'm so
sorry we weren't able to get you
last time and then also house
bill one sixty three with
Representative Madrid and by
just this
this committee always has a hard
stop at ten fifty so that we can
get to the bar on time so
wherever we are that's where we
we end up.
Under new business we've got one
thirty one as amended Assistant
Secretary of Hispanic Education
Representative Trujillo and
Roybal Caballero one eighty
eight secretary computer science
teacher license with that
representative I'm not out House
Bill to nineteen by literacy
development framework task force
with your Trujillo House Bill to
sixty six as amended special
education teacher licenses
Representative they got all up
and house bill two eighty seven
is amended access to culturally
appropriate services with
Representative Johnson
Trying to think if there any
other G. announcements and this
is that time of year when people
are going to be going in and out
of the committee and so we'll
try and make sure we can keep a
quorum together so that we can
move forward.
Sessions or comments from anyone
on May committee before we get
started you so just let me just
open speak up.
I'm not seeing any then we'll
jump right in on house bill two
twenty one is amended.
K. to second grade assessment
changes Representative Garrett
and senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee.
House Bill to twenty one as
amended does two things.
Public school called to include
daily instruction and vocabulary
fluency and writing kindergarten
through third grade this aligns
with our recent advancements
unstructured Water State it also
expands screening and monitoring
for progress in reading and
language arts skills to include
kindergarten first and second
graders using an observational
assessment developer purchased
by PED and that would extend to
include developmental milestones
essential skills social
emotional skills and of course
academic standards the amendment
is what's suggested by Dennis
Ross representing the
superintendents across the state
so it doesn't go into practice
in the twenty one twenty two
school year it doesn't start
until the twenty two twenty
three school year and it's based
in over four years instead of
all at once I would explain that
currently public pre K. teachers
use an observational assessment
called the early childhood
observational says assessment of
the economy
this already includes
measurements up to first grade
our public pre K. places like
shining start Rio Rancho I
center in Santa Fe Bloomfield
asked the consolidated schools
the schools are use them across
the state it's passed on to
kindergarten teachers
also we already use that K. O.
T.
observation to that are
connected to the economy so we
have a whole lot of this work
done currently it's only
required at the beginning of the
year in kindergarten but already
a lot of it has been developed
and I just want to.
Our current can kindergarten
teachers already trained and
observational assessment
in closing before I have my
expert witness speak I would
like you to really consider what
are the best practices to assess
the development of our young
guys learners sometimes when we
strictly go to discreet yes
using computers we we have one
tests I station where some of
the smartest kids they just
punch the buttons because it's
boring we have other kids to
punch the buttons because it's
beyond them there's a lot of
issues with some of the testing
we years but dealing with our
pre K. early learners adding
this observational assessment
the simply a best practice I
would like to invite my expert
witness Dr Ellen a burn sting to
add to this.
Yes please is bursting doctor
prince.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and I think the
sponsors for this very important
piece of legislation
many of you already know need
that yes in case you don't I
spent seventeen years as the
classroom teacher in early
childhood settings and I
received my national board
certification as an early
childhood educator.
I
Say that we've been over testing
and inappropriately testing
young children for a very long
time it's a legacy of no child
left behind and it now as we
switch and we move forward into
modernizing schooling and
looking at issues of equity
we're really re humanizing our
practices and policies to pay
attention to not just testing
but actually informing our
teaching with the assessments
that we yes some people some
educators and and segmentations
like I station however a lot of
people say that it's very
inappropriate for young children
teachers report that the current
way in which we assess young
children is very stressful that
students cry and I believe
strongly that school should not
make kids cry
it's producing an accurate
results so even though people
say we get great data it may not
be the most accurate because it
doesn't match with what the
teachers are assessing on a
daily basis it's developmentally
inappropriate because it asked
five year olds to have the
computer is yes the minute they
walk into kindergarten and
teachers report widely that it's
inappropriate for second
language learners and he and
bilingual classrooms and I think
the issue of equity and
appropriately testing for that
issue is something we need to
pay attention to I also have an
article confronting in equity
assessment for equity by Richard
Milner in which she says
assessment should help us learn
about students and not
necessarily sort them and he
says I quote at this point in
our psycho metric history we
need to do a better.
Our job of using our specimens
to support equity as opposed to
equality or standardization we
should be working toward
assessments and assessment
systems that help us improve our
practices and support the growth
and student diversity of our
students thank you very much for
your time.
Mr chairman with that will to
know will turn it over for
questions I do want to add that
a John Cena from PED is also
available for technical
questions and issues so yes
stand for questions
thank you Representative these
point toe because you'll take is
out to public comment and I want
to remind people in education we
limit people to the two minutes
each on public comment and try
not to just repeat exactly what
other people have said thank
you.
House Bill to twenty one as
amended first we will go to
those who registered to speak in
opposition beginning with Keith
Gardner.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's Keith
Gardner wrestle this for
imagination station and the
state in opposition it's a
discussion about what the bill
actually does beyond what what
what has been discussed here you
know and manage the station as
you know has been part of this
settlement of this cohort of of
children for the last five years
we have five years of normative
data that that has been able to
track those children you'll hear
that that that has changed three
times and that's accurate for
the grades three through eight
but great K. two two it's been
the same assessment during this
period of time these are peer
reviewed published.
I'm assessments that have gone
through with the data experts
that did that have been
validated over these years to be
accurate assessments of this age
group the medicine stations not
opposed to having an
observational tool in addition
to the normative tool that
currently exists but would like
to see at least this dataset for
these children as we continue to
watch them grow having that
normative data that's tied to
what our state based standards
are will be incredibly important
especially during this year
where we've had a complete
disruption of the educational
process for this cohort of
children so as I stated earlier
we're understand the decision
but would like to see language
at all allows for the
continuance of the normative
data as well thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public wishes
begin opposition please raise
your hand at this time.
Okay now we will go to those who
registered to speak in favor of
the bill beginning with rose you
it.
Well you'll Cortinas.
So then she would.
Now we will go to those who wish
to speak in favor you may raise
your hand.
Merry par Sanchez.
Good morning chairman souls
members of the committee.
And.
Chair of the bill
Representative Garrett NEA New
Mexico stands in strong support
of
House Bill two twenty one in two
thousand one is not a nationally
we went to a system called no
child left behind as as we all
know and really it was no child
left untested and we have and
twenty years now of testing and
where is it gotten us in in the
manner that we that.
That we are currently using
nationally test scores have
never been lower so just testing
out of kids has not made the
score higher and this also this
bill also speaks to fluency and
vocabulary and writing which of
the computer assessment.
Does not do so of we strongly
support an observational
assessment I will defer to
Ellen's expertise in this area
I'm of middle school educator
and I know at that level we over
test children and we're not
getting an accurate picture of
what children are what they know
and what they're able to do so
please support House Bill to
twenty one thank you very much.
Thank you your next up we have
to stand around thank you Mr
chairman members the committee
good morning we want to thank
the sponsor for hearing our
concerns and accommodating our
input as this bill is moving
forward we now are able to stand
in support and we think the
committee for your understanding
choose from a superintendents
chair so often we just flip
switches on and off in in doing
that it may create a center in
the system and so are concerns
been addressing Mr chairman
Sanchez thank you so much.
Thank you finally we have Lisa
Lopez.
Thank you for for allowing me to
speak today my name is Lisa
Lopez I am a level three
national toward early childhood
educator.
And how qualified to teach in
kindergarten for the past
thirteen years APS and also VP
for AFT New Mexico as well as a
bad rap in my building
Alpharetta elementary I
represent district to their team
and headed to discuss in support
of H. B. two twenty one.
And so I just wanted to let you
guys know I know we have a short
time so make it quick I just
want to let you know they can
decline has changed radically in
the last two decades children
now spend far more time being
taught and tested on literacy
and math skills than they do
learning to play an exploration
exercise anybody's and using
their imaginations many
kindergarteners are using highly
prescriptive curricula care two
new state standards and link to
standardized test increasing
number of kindergartners
teachers must follow scripture
which they did not win which
they may not deviate these
practices which are not well
grounded in research violate
long established principles a
child development and best
practices it is increasingly
clear that they are compromising
both children's health and a
long term prospects for school
success in school.
Plays an important aspect of
children's social emotional
physical development that is
being pushed Shattuck unified
because of the drive to meet
standards and exceed and
assessments and my personal view
on it.
I have.
I have usually twenty students
in my class and it's very
difficult for them to have the
this the social I mean it the
skills to be able to take these
task and it is developmentally
inappropriate so I just thank
you for being I'm in support of
this bill and and hopefully
it'll move on I really
appreciate your time thank you
Mr chairman members the
committee and sponsors.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you to
I always like to go back to the
sponsor after public comment any
comments Representative Derrick.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I
would I would just like to add
that that the PED is not going
to nor data from the past that
the current the problem with
some the computerized tests is
that we have many students with
individual education plans are
the computerized tests are
accurate for them because often
they're IEPs don't allow time
yes so you actually have to turn
off the timer which makes the
test inaccurate and that's what
we need to really be more
comprehensive so that every
child can be appropriately
assessed and I also want to add
that I believe Dr Glenn of
Warniment from PED is also on
the call to field questions that
come up.
Okay thank you I'll let go to
questions from the committee and
so I'm looking to see if there
are any ends of the of my
committee members Senator
Kernan.
So thank you very much Mr
chairman and welcome
Representative to committee and
just for people that don't know
who I am we have some new
members I taught school for
about eighteen years and most of
that time was in first grade I
spent four years developing and
establishing prekindergarten
programs in my accounting for
different school districts so I
guess I'm I'm pretty well versed
in early childhood and first
rate as well I'm you don't have
to say a couple years ago after
I was out of the classroom and I
station became part of.
Many school districts including
my own I thought you know I
think I'm I'm gonna go in and
watch how this is done because I
wanted to make sure that it was
appropriate for first grade and
so I spent the morning in a
first grade class ring and
observe them during our station
and to be honest with you I I
was pretty impressed and you
have to understand they're
they're two different kinds of
the valuation we we yes kids
to drive instruction in other
words you tested for our to see
where they are so that you'll
know what they're getting what
they're not getting and then you
you change your teaching methods
to make sure that they are
getting all the things they need
to get so so that's one one type
of I'm assessment the other
topic the Cessna is is to to
saying actually where they are
and that's what I think I
station I think it really does
both and so I think it's a first
grade teacher
I need to know I need to know
where the child yes because in a
first grade classroom you have
children that are are reading
and particular grade level and
other children are reading
behind or or head in so if you
don't know that is a teacher you
you can be successful and you
can't get them where they need
to be so I don't know chapter
the observational
assessment I think it's
something I think teachers do
and maybe you I need to
if they need a program to help
them do that effectively I I
certainly don't expect that to
say that our station doesn't
have a place.
And in our schools I think it
it's going a little far because
without something to like I
station I don't think that that
we can really know where the
children are in as far as being
on the computer my gosh they've
been on the committee computer
for an entire year and I think
children adapt to that pretty
well they have adapted to that
in and I didn't see any problems
in particularly with the kiddos
that I observed when I went in
and and spend some time in a
first grade class rank so so I
don't object to the
observational piece I'd like to
know more about it because I'm
not quite understanding how
that's going to tell us number
one it what level is childish
reading for their weaknesses
whether it's phonemic awareness
whether it's comprehension I'm
not sure how you're going to
discover that if you don't have
some tool similar to I. station
that have to be our station but
we've got to figure out how to
do that I know that there'd been
computer programs along the way
that have have actually
been able to determine what
grade level what reading level a
child is breeding on and so by
taking away our station I think
you're taking more a tool that
is really necessary especially
in in those early grades so I
guess you know I I don't know if
the bill can be
Adjusted so that so that we can
maybe get both I did get an
email from one teacher who's
really concerned about the times
when you do an observation on
each child and at one does it
take
you do that do you do that
individually do you pull the
child inside are you just
watching daily all day long what
exactly is the go into
determined kind of their
emotional development I'm not
quite sure what we're getting at
implied this is in conflict with
doing I station as well.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative let
me start and then maybe doctor
burns state are Dr ornament
would like to add something I
will add that for six years I
was the instructional coach and
the testing coordinator for
elementary school and APS that
had eleven hundred students I
have tested
before I station we had the D.
R. A. to we had doubles we had
testing with the reading
programs
as I said.
Our academic development a
child's academic development is
strongly influenced by
everything from their physical
situation to their attention
span and so with the economy and
that K. O. T. and again that the
kindergarten observation tool is
already required statewide the
first twenty days a teacher is
observing
and that and that includes and
as PED develops it would include
those same kind of measurements
some of the issues with the I
station are in and I speak
because I've personally tested
individually small groups and
whole groups of kindergartners
first graders and second
graders.
For example if the child doesn't
like the narrator in the little
animal they'll click through it
in you don't know the child
click through the test because
they were bored because that's
what they did you don't really
know what happens if it's not
accompanied by the teacher
reading with the children
reading with the small groups
you haven't in adequate
observation because it's all on
the computer so that's that's
the problem there's other ways
to measure that but doctor burn
sting would you like to add or
or Mr St or drive Warniment.
I I would Representative just
very quickly before no child
left behind as early childhood
educators we did several things
with our students in Albuquerque
we have a tool called the Katy
P. R. which was used in
kindergarten.
What this is basically what
every kindergarten teacher did
was as they taught they assessed
and they noticed this
kindergartner understands
battles now and was able to
delegate also we're fine motor
their gross motor are there
their ability for
counting and skip counting and
as their development progress
they noted this so that not only
were they assessing the
development and the skills of
the students in front of them
they were able to report
accurately exactly where each
student was in their
developmental progress and it
what that has done has is very
similar to that but what
kindergarten teachers are saying
is while I take the time to give
that you cut at the beginning of
the year which is very much like
what I just talked about it
doesn't give me an end of the
year comparison and then the PED
was actually ready to develop
that tool all the way through
first and second so that we
would have that information
those kinds of things can be
connected with tools like the D.
R. eight which we gave
individually to students so that
we could identify their miscues
as the red individually to us
we're able to identify where
they were lacking whether it was
the ability to sound out there
for me make where nest or their
inability to make sense of
complete concepts and that
connection with right central to
the development of reading so
for able to work with PED and
flesh out the economy I think
all of us will be able to get a
more accurate information and
more information to report to
parents.
To use to inform our instruction
and to report to the state thank
you thank you very much thank
you for that and I appreciate
that was very very helpful and
you know I I remember when no
child left behind came in and I
was that I was a first grade
teacher then and when I went to
my first meeting to be honest
with you I was I was just
curious because I I didn't
support that and I didn't feel
that it was really the right way
to go with regard to the to our
students however.
There is there is a need for
some testing and some
accountability I think it went
too far I don't think it is
appropriate that as I recall I
station and I disagree with this
is well I station should never
have been used as a tool to
evaluate teachers and I don't
think that should be in the
purpose of it but it was used
for that and I disagree with
that as well but I still believe
that there is a there is a place
for pool white guy Station.
To to actually help inform
teachers on on on where kiddos
are in in may not be a hundred
percent accurate but I will tell
you when you have teachers doing
an observation it's not going to
be a hundred percent accurate
either because every teachers
going to either use it with the
galaxy or they're not they're
going to be trained well if
they're not so I think there's
some issues with that as well I
don't see why we can't kind of
you spoke as a first grade
teacher before children were put
on computers I can tell you are
served and I understood
I know you are muted whether my
children were were understanding
different a different path
thanks in and what I was
teaching but but this particular
to it can be used properly and
helpful I don't think it should
should be used for evaluation of
teachers but I do think it helps
drive instruction somewhat so
you know I don't I don't know a
lot about the tool you're
talking about.
I can't say whether I supported
I don't I don't I don't know
that we do a lot of harm I just
don't think it's not I think we
have to use everything we can to
figure out how to help our kids
as in kindergarten apple great
shape at.
That developmental piece is
really important that when you
get the first and second grade
you need to know where those
children are with regard to
their reading level you have to
know because if you don't we're
gonna be moving kids ahead when
they're really not ready and and
of course we've had that
discussion about retention and
that's not what this is about it
all I just yes someone to use
every opportunity to get all the
information I can get and so so
it's it's it's if this bill is
just about adding the pool I'm
one hundred percent behind it
but if it's about adding it to
only taking one away from
teachers that may be is
beneficial then then I think we
need to take another look at
that so I'm and certainly
appreciate that the lady I think
the amendment is helpful I think
too much just too much of our
teachers right now after all
that they have been through is
very unfair you know this is
part of the problem with
education we talk about this and
L. AST that why can't we have a
group of people come together
and actually do a long term plan
so that every time there's a
change in administration we
don't ship this way or that way
that's not helpful to kids and
that's kind of what we're doing
now so we're taking what all
assessment other than what it
teacher observes which I think
is very important but I don't
think it's enough in in in for
five years you know maybe it's
going to shift the other way and
what we're going to date so I
agree with them Senator Stewart
and her no time left behind in
and we just we just have to do
something that in compasses the
broad discussion that includes
really long term goal setting
and so I guess that's why I'm a
little concerned about this bill
but I've said enough so I'll
keep listening and then as
always I appreciate you to come
with a lot of experience and and
certainly do.
Respect that so thank you very
much Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan Senator
Padilla.
I thank you Mr chairman and yeah
I just I just just real quick
follow up thank you very much to
the sponsor and and to Dr grant
stand all the other set of talk
on the bill I I guess I'm also
in senator Cornyn's
Side of thinking on this thing
what why would we just please
help me understand why we would
take this one this tool way
would it be taken away I would
trust the teacher to make a
decision on what is best for the
child for that for the you know
for the classroom I I I
typically am.
You know very much in in in
almost a lock step with with Dr
Bernice king wants to do because
I have the utmost respect and I
imagine a long wonderfully
almost never disagree but I'm
trying to figure out why this
would be.
Not helpful.
Mr chairman and senator I'm
please note I want the committee
to realize that this is a four
year phase in
I station is used I believe that
PED can speak to that it is used
for the next year
this is a four year phase in it
for the very reason that Senator
Kernan explained it's like.
During that time during the six
years that I was instructional
coach we went through four
different testing systems the
last of which was the I station
and then I ready was added
so that for your face yes PED
time to consult to work things
out so we're not really saying
take away at work we say let's
return to looking at the whole
child what's truly best for our
children not just what's where
the adults but for the children
but maybe someone from PED would
like to comment.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it's nice to be with
the Senate Education Committee
at not seeing you all this year
is waiting to see if John would
take the lead here
so let me explain a little bit
about this assessment and
there's some good questions from
Senator Kernan around what
exactly this is I think it is a
very important point that
Senator are part of me went
Representative Garrett was
saying around roll out or time
of this the first thing that I
would like to say is this does
not preclude and all that
another standardized assessment
could take place I think that's
a really important point that
being sent back what you would
want to consider is funding and
how that comes into play and how
that is part of this process
over the next four years
because in addition to to test
one that's more standardized
likes and I station and
something like an observational
tool that we use the card or K.
O. T.
The funding for AI station is
around one million per year so
you could potentially use an
observational tool that become
standardized as your
standardized assessment as part
of the accountability that needs
to take place for schools and I
think that's an important piece
because we all know that
accountability is and a critical
component in this in order to
answer some of the other
questions around this type of
assessment this type of
assessment is really grounded in
something that we call in vetted
assessment so and embedded
assessment is something that
hinges on cycle around
observation what happens when
teachers are really trained to
understand what's happening
daily inside of the classroom
some documentation around that
and it actually happens in a
very technical way using and
I've had then there's an overlap
into curriculum and planning so
there's a cycle around what
exactly is happening and how do
an assessment than impacts
teaching.
I'll stop there in his is more
questions but thank you Mr
chairman thank you doctor Perea
Warniment I just want to make
sure that we're we're putting
all the tools and everything
that might be needed
for because every child is
different I think we all know
that you know when when I was in
public yeah when I was in the
first through I would say six
right why I had so many other
things going on in my life
outside of the classroom that
once I was in school thankfully
I had some very caring and
loving and passionate teachers
that took very good care of me
and my sisters but I would just
want to make sure that every
teacher has every single thing
your everything available to
them so that they can customize
a solution for each one of the
top children that they have an
not all you know and some of our
classrooms you we've got to do a
much better job to not let them
get as large as some of them
have gotten but you know so not
not all twenty eight of those
kids are twenty two of those
kids are going to require the
same type of guidance and
direction and an assessment to
see what they're actually
getting out of the public school
I would just want to make sure
that they have all the tools
available and necessary you know
to to do their work I mean
it's ever so would we be saying
that we're gonna stop doing some
of the things we've been doing
but bye bye with this piece
legislation just make sure I'm
understanding what we're doing
here.
Mr chairman and senator.
Not necessarily at all and I
know I want to add for the
committee that the new literacy
adoptions in schools they also
includes a computerized programs
so so when we talk about I
station yes or no or doubles yes
Sir no or any of the computer I
guess programs increasingly the
bed District adoptions include
computerized
Thanks for learning for reading
tests
just and I don't know if anybody
else wants to add to that so
what we're not really stopping
we're really.
I'm doing what's best which is
the mall to mall type guy
mentioned all look at the child.
But you want to add something to
that.
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla I
will add on to representative
Garrett's discussion there in
terms of the impact of this
types of type of observational
tool and how it is linked to our
structured literacy initiative
in the state which is critical
one of the most important
initiatives and that is an
observational tool like this
really allows for daily ongoing
progress monitoring around
different components so both the
economy and the table to you
which is kindergarten
observational tool outlined
specific things around but have
you Larry from a logical
wariness of phonics alphabet
knowledge comprehension writing
all of those really important
highlighted components of noted
in the science of reading and
how we should be teaching
reading and when we start to
move in that direction with a
much more comprehensive
assessment that's grounded in
instruction that's going to
support this initiative in
in a really robust profound way.
In addition I think when you
build out the same type of tool
for first and second grade same
thing can happen much more
Found level in not just
literally but math.
You know what thank you Mr
chairman and and sponsor
Representative Garrett and and
the others yep I leave it there
I just want to make sure that we
have it is many tools necessary
or available to the teachers so
that they can you know get
customized the solution for each
one of the the different
children that they have in their
classrooms I think that's all I
have for the moment thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative members of the
committee
thank you for bringing this
forward Representative
So nationally that I think this
is you know that when we talk
about data driven in some sense
Nationally I think we do have to
have some assessments but we
have a comparison and will this
hinder any of that.
Mr chairman and senator no it
will not and and remember that
Any any program that is
purchased there are dozens and
dozens of programs used by
different states used by
different districts
so one specific computer ice
test doesn't necessarily match
what other states you.
Thank you thank you
Representative Mr chair of thank
you Representative for saying
that because that is at issue
especially in the state where we
have a.
Schools that are right there on
the state line and especially
now I think we're going to see a
lot of mobility with our
students.
In that you know if they come in
you know giving them a whole
different assessment but you
know that their folder should
follow that.
In that sense where you still
have that comparison especially
if we see
children change schools schools
in the middle of the year which
I've consistently seen because I
have a nother Kate eight school
right at the hill and you know
it was kind of interesting.
Thing that played out because
whoever started school first got
the most students and then you
get through legislation then
they leave and go down to the
other screen and misty
assessment and then we have an
issue because when they do come
back in that mobility the
comparison are really fighting
with trial set becomes an issue
because here in the fall through
those gaps.
And one of the things with the
B. I. E. school to was what we
chose an assessment that.
It might no longer exist as you
go down the road and that's what
we've really tried to have that
in state assessment not where
it's created back on the east
coast and brought out here that
it really does engage and does
consider our children that are
here that not what's happening
over there but I think there has
to be a comparison to so we know
where we set thank you
Representative and that's all I
have thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator
I see Senator Kernan hand back
up is this a second time or yes
this means.
Well may I just Representative
Wheatley I have a couple
questions just real quickly so
so maybe this is for the PED yes
I.
If you if you could respond with
regard to help me understand
what our
school districts in our
kindergarten through second
grade teachers will use for a
summative assessment at the end
of the year so so what tool is
is being used to make a
determination where our children
are in in of course I'm almost
afraid to test image here
because they've lost your of of
learning but tell me what tool
is currently being used to make
a determination on what progress
has been made at the end of the
year.
Mr Chairman.
Yes thank you.
And Mister chairman Senator
Kernan a great to see you so
that
Currently our accountability
assessment for
The younger students K. two is
our eyes I is I station that is
are some of.
So and and so Mr chair and do
you feel that the observational
tool that we're talking about
today
Would replace I station so there
would be a districts would no
longer use I. station it would
be at each tier at the end of
the year doing an individual I
guess and I'm trying to
visualize what that looks like
how are they going to determine
where that try this is here yes
it's given at the end of the
year what yes will be given I
mean we can observe all year
long and certainly report that
on your iPad so so teachers
going to sit there with an iPad
and they're going to
Input.
I assume things that are in this
new program if that they
observe.
Individually on a daily basis a
weekly basis are they gonna ask
them questions or they can
listen to the three.
How do you do that individually
as a teacher for twenty kiddos
or twenty five twenty two I
think it's a limit.
On on what basis is that done
with this new program it's going
to be able to at the end of the
year I'm gonna say well that
child's reading at a one point
nine grade level in reading how
to set up special tools that.
Mr chairman and senator a great
question so I'm gonna give you
an answer within their started
to copy us to it so the first is
it's a very comprehensive tool
and happens observationally one
on one throughout the day with
students it's important to note
that it's really individualized
this relates a little bit to
question wrong so that Senator
Pinto is asking us it's really
important to note that it this
observation tool can be also
implemented in and multiple
languages right so students in a
actually that's important these
but what what happens as you
take the porting back over time
there's three.
Areas is what's called recourse
assessment or in terms session
happens at the beginning of the
year or B. O. Y. middle of the
year and and why it Madam and
then an end of year assessment
and your why what's important
about that is it's not just a
one shot assessment at the end
of the year it measures growth
throughout the year which is a
really critical piece in all of
this what I station for this I
station is also designed to the
exact same way right so we're
measuring growth in addition to
that end of the year assessments
on assessment so in order to
fund both types of assessments
if you're looking at that as a
legislative body do what you
would want to consider those two
things the second hobby out
around to this is that the if
you use observation tool as your
end of year summative assessment
that could be done in fact are
wonderful a very legislative
finance council published a
really nice twenty twenty
program evaluation of pre K. and
used this tool to demonstrate
the success of the program so.
Can be used that way.
So thank you very much and and
tell me Mr chair with regard to
professional development
because.
It appears many kindergarten
through second grade teachers
are there in the state of New
Mexico including charter schools
and and all public traditional
schools I mean how many teachers
would have to be trained in this
new tool.
And that's question for PED.
Mister chairman Senator I'm not
sure
Mr Senator you have an idea we
have to take a we have to go
back and bring that to you I
don't know off the top of my
head.
Mr chairman and senator I do
want to add that kindergarten
teachers are already trained to
use the cable TV they've been
using it I believe for the last
five years okay so then Mr chair
and representative of how many
first and second grade teachers
would still need to be trained
in this pool
For for for the coming years I
mean I'm just curious how long
is the training what's the cost
of the training what's the
additional cost to the school
district to implement another
new program just curious what
that cost would be.
Mr chair Senator Kernan I can I
can give you a probably just a
very rough estimate there about
between twenty and twenty two
thousand teachers in New Mexico
I would say there's probably
anywhere between three thousand
and thirty five hundred.
Our first and second grade
teachers who need to be
potentially need to be trained
okay and so thank you for that
in and so Mister chair and
representative is there an
appropriation that would cover
the cost of that professional
development going forward is it
in the bill how would that be a
store would be part of the SCG
who pays for that.
Mr chairman I will have PED
answer but but do you recall
that this wouldn't be expanded
to first grade for two more
years so there is not an
appropriation for this year
because that wasn't necessary.
Okay well thank you that's good
enough I don't are we get to
know exactly how much we didn't
programs all the time and we
always circle back around you
have to train teachers but
I don't know it just means it
probably gonna need some funding
down the road for sure and and
hopefully we'll have it well Mr
chair that's all I have I think
I'll yield and we'll just keep
listening thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan I love
on my committee when by the time
he gets to me most of the
questions I had concerns over.
Your second time round senator
in U. S. some of the almost the
exact questions that I had a
couple of things is there
anywhere in this bill that says
that districts are not allowed
by station or any kind of a
standardized but but yes they've
been using.
Mr Chairman that is a great
question because already
individual schools and districts
use their discretionary money
for all sorts of things we have
Fundacion switches the ultimate
structured literacy program of
for kindergarten to third grade
we have schools where because I
station was only mandated for
the lower grades they decided to
purchase it on their own for
higher grades so the school and
I'm most of you know familiar
with the schools I work at APS
they use their money their
instructional councils which
guide the school all our
purchases do all sorts of extra
programs according to what they
determined is best for their
population.
So.
Representative this really is an
addition to not a taking away
from something that schools are
already doing is that correct.
I would say that that's correct
with the call yes that we're
doing this over a four year
period starting next year.
Sure no and I understand that
and yeah we got all kinds of
expertise on the those who today
that have extensive experience
in elementary principal for five
years
thought developmental psychology
yeah I know and understand kids
and how they grow and develop as
well as you know I am a.
You might train psychometrics
and no I'm not qualified to to
get like to test and other kinds
of assessments for you from
little kids all the way up to
adults one of the things it's
very clear and I think some of
the concerns brought up in this
particular legislation is
standardized tests get less and
less valid and reliable the
under the kids are the variances
all over the place some because
it's a sunny day outside that
the smartest kid in the class
stores very well and then the
next day they score all of what
much higher and are who we are
and how our brains function
begins to narrow into a more
solidified the older that we are
and so I think we need this adds
another tool of the observation
over just the the straight
assessment that gives a number
because that number is
notoriously both invalid and
unreliable or has mobility and
reliability scores to it the
younger the children are and so
I think this just expands some
of what the data that we already
have to include the the very
professional observation levels
of the teachers I do have a
concern anything so whether
Senator Kernan is there a an
awful lot of professional
development because to do
observations well a consistent
and you get reliable results
requires very highly skilled
training on what the protocols
of the initial observations were
to get consistent results and
I'm hoping and I think that
somewhere over the four years
but just getting both the time
for that professional
development and the money and
training to do that are are some
of the and technical issues.
Moving on any comments or to to
any of that if not we'll go to a
the committee.
Mr chairman thank you for saying
that and I I think that remember
that our teachers go through
their four years of training as
they get their degrees and so
increasingly those programs
involved in classroom hours so
we're not just talking about
existing teachers we're talking
about improving and expanding
how we train our teachers beef
for the ever take over
responsibility for a classroom
and and my final statement would
just be to say we have a diverse
group of young learners we have
native American children we have
special education children we
have English language learners
and when we.
ourselves to a computerized
situation as you said the sunny
day up you know the animals that
they left in the morning have a
lot of influence so we need to
work we need to return to the
whole child that embraces their
culture their circumstances.
All these things thank you for
your comments Mr chairman and
and everybody thank you for your
questions that discussion.
Thank you and now pleasure the
committee Mr Chairman before you
do that I did that one just last
I'm sorry yes please Senator be
super quick Mr Chairman just
making sure that what I heard
you say it's one of her friends
that there's no taking away
there's just in addition to bye
bye but but this measure is that
right Representative.
Mr Chairman I would say that is
correct again we're looking at a
four year process.
Mr chairman I heard you say that
a couple times after I you you
said that nothing's being taken
away from the the the teacher of
the early what what why the for
your.
Mr chairman and senator the four
here is because
you know each grade as you
recall from pre K. to cater
first to second you're going to
change the elements of the two
as the level of the development
of the training we're you know
how you put it on the dashboard
what computerized tests do you
date will you consultation why
there is a process Mr Chairman
representative but in the forty
years you're not taking anything
away you're simply over four
years expanding the availability
of the tools.
Yes.
I can vote for this man thank
you very much thank you I just
want to make sure all the tools
are available and the teacher
has a choice and to to make you
can make the best decision thank
you.
So the Mr chair may I ask one
last question.
Yes and I'm trying to get to a
vote because they're calling me
for another committee I've got
to get off to so
I just need to clarify because I
don't think that's what the bill
says I think the bill replaces
our station and I want to hear
from this Bonser the legislation
that that I station in four
years will still be something
that is acceptable both to the
PD and within the district
because I don't think that's
with build us.
Mr chairman and senator PED can
you explain your purchasing
those issues.
Mister chairman Senator that
very quickly we have a contract
with I station for next year we
will step in with legislation
next year and then after that we
will continue you know we we
need to go through the RFP
process once again.
So so that is K. so this is a
replacement by station and I
believe that that is that
concerns me thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan
pleasure the committee please.
I would get no Representative to
finance.
We have a motion for a no REC.
Is there a second legislative
stop or you.
I will second.
And we have the second was that
the up.
Yes Mr chairman okay you'll call
the roll please.
Brandt no ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
As.
Senator Hickey.
Pass.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Well.
You call Mason although I get
Center Novell yes yes thank.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes.
The pope.
Yes.
I am back to center Hickey yes.
Senator also yes.
We.
Senator Kernan explainable but
you having gone to I believe
goes to finance next is so I
would like to see Mr chair and
representative before gets to
finance some sort of
clarification on allowing
districts to use the tools that
they want and it's concerning to
me that the PED will not allow
that to happen within this four
year period and that concerns.
Mr chairman and senator there is
a process as a doctor Warniment
said that they had a five year
contract it continues to next
year.
But so what is up Mr Chairman
I've never had it no rectified
as can you just explain to me
what that means.
Our illustrious Representative
Garrett and all it Senator
Padilla jump in as well if I
don't do this but we're
basically giving you a no
recommendation it's not a do
pass is not a do not pass but
you still get to move forward to
the next committee.
Okay.
I wanted to run Mr chairman the
pope I know that the chairman so
I believe that's what I would
have said thank you.
Thank you our.
Mr vice chair and committee.
With.
All right well are the chairman
had to step out so I will be
chairing the meeting going
forward next that we have house
bill one sixty three school
financial management classes
with our Representative Madrid
and Representative Maestas.
Leave us Representative by Estes
actually Representative Madrid
as well you may proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman let up
Jumba only in into the zoom for
a quick presentation we know
that time is short I'll turn
over to Representative Madrid in
the myself maybe a minute or two
each thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
This is a long financial
management house bill one sixty
three to count as an elective is
a six through eighth grade and
commending graduation
requirements requiring one half
you know financial management
prior to graduation in short
this is a bill of the soul
already knows to be able to
start teaching kids earlier
opposed to your critical story
about my daughter and her
grandfather where to store one
day and she wanted a box of a.
We'll talk Raman and right
dad says going digital boxes you
got a box truck just got a box
wide about debts is not come
with interest we have and that's
with the beginning of early
learning of maths and
understanding the financial
aspects and outside like to
conclude at the end there after
all our speak to speak but I
think that's a starting point
and I think my other colleagues
here will at two thank you I
yield to my co sponsor.
Thank you Mr chairman members
and thanks for having us this
morning a fundamentalist C. is
is referred to as financial
management and it's.
in this in this bill and it
requires financial management to
graduate in every high school in
New Mexico as you recall in two
thousand seven the legislature
and then go to Richardson signed
into law financial management as
a required class in every high
school in the state.
So every single high school has
financial management in their
schools today
certified and ratified by the
superintendents and the the
education department also in
these fourteen years of
financial management courses in
every single high school in the
state of the vast majority if
not all of them currently
qualify as a math credit I think
it was three four years ago of
house member of the queen passed
legislation was signed into law
that financial management does
qualify as a math credit if
approved those have all since
been approved as far as I know
so this doesn't change the
formula and I know this is a big
ask a members of this committee
but currently you need for
credits math to graduate.
You need seven and a half
credits.
Of electives this doesn't change
that you would still need for
credits a Matthew would still
need seven have credits of
electives but a half credit will
qualify as a math credit and
must be taken so then that begs
the question will are you where
are you going to four and a half
credits matched what why don't
you do this why don't you do
that what's it I think it it
just plays out in the real world
those students will take four
credits a math and financial
literacy and other students will
take you know for credits a math
and just one half credit last of
electives they may not fit in
because there may not be a half
credit amount out there and
therefore those concerns are
alleviated where they're gonna
take for have credits what kind
of qualifies as a math class and
so I know there's gonna be a a
rewrite group great great
education mine's gonna come
together this summer and and and
redo the education requirements
in high schools but I don't
believe any idea I've heard out
there with regard to that re
rate does not include financial
management we are the poorest
state in the country we have the
highest rate of installment
loans in the country of markets
markets that came from Europe
New York wherever we're the last
outpost of of of financial
markets and and market forces in
general in the in the country to
to our beauty and to our
detriment lastly Mr chairman I I
recall up smoking my brother
well back in the day about
refinancing his house and his
son was there and I got
uncomfortable.
It was uncomfortable
conversation for me because
because this son was there and I
snapped no no we have to have
those conversations with our
children but many many many of
our children don't have those
conversations with their parents
because of their parents don't
have the basic knowledge of
financial literacy except
through the school of hard
knocks into their forties and
fifties with that briefly this
bill was brought to us by th I
think New Mexico and so are are
a expert has a few comments Mr
me welcome thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative he may
proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is O. T.
on the on the on the field
director for think Mexico for
someone I think chairman my
assistant Representative Madrid
as well the other co sponsors to
sponsoring this really important
legislation last year we had a
produced report about predatory
lending specifically in our
state infection in schools as
caring Senate bill six sixty cap
high interest rates on small
loans but the reason I mention
that is because during our
reserves of predatory lending we
saw how important it is for
everyone to really have a
fundamental and you're standing
of financial matters in order to
give them the tools and insights
they need to make smart
financial decisions and possibly
prevent them from entering
cycles of debt financial
education is the one thing that
impart affects almost everyone
in our lives
like Mr chairman my sis said yet
many people have the knowledge
that they should and while some
people have access to this type
of information home it's not
always readily accessible a two
thousand seventeens study by T.
Rowe price suggested that sixty
nine of parents are reluctant to
discuss financial matters with
the children and personally I
wish I had waited to law school
to take my first formal
financial literacy course I
definitely could significantly
benefit from the knowledge in
high school just before I was
bombarded with all kinds of.
Edit card offers and student
loans so learning the importance
of budgeting and saving and
investing and the power com
hounding would definitely been
invaluable invaluable to me at
that time some of the important
things that I'd like to point
are are that only eleven percent
of students opted to take the
elective last year so this bill
would would would significantly
increase those numbers we've
seen this work in other states
seventeen of the of those states
that have made it a requirement
the last decade include Arizona
Texas and Utah three of our
neighboring states and a two
thousand nineteen study by
wallet hub New Mexico was ranked
forty seventh of the fifty
states and financial literacy.
Also studies that show the of
the students to take financial
management courses are more
likely to have checking accounts
retirement savings less likely
to take out predatory loans they
ship from higher costs low to
lower cost credit
and it's even more immediately
important for the thirty one
percent of students nationally
that grew graduate high school
and entered the workforce
directly it's also a great way
to address poverty by bridging
the gap between lower income
students and their wealthier
peers and quite often what
grades of happening is that some
of those students actually take
home with the learn about
personal finances School and
then take home and share with
their families
we all know that financial
literacy doesn't happen
overnight but that instead it
takes a lifetime of learning and
application in the least we can
do is give our young people the
foundation to expand their
financial knowledge base and
hopefully set them up for a
lifetime of success thank you
very much thank you Mr chairman
we stand for questions.
Just for everyone that's online
we're on house bill one sixty
three we will now go to public
comment if we get if we have
anyone that has signed up in
opposition.
Our house bill one sixty three
we do not have any members of
the public register in advance
to speak in opposition if there
are any members of the public
here with us today who wish to
speak in opposition to house
bill one sixty three please
raise your hand now.
And rounds.
Mr chair members the committee
good morning Stan rounds on
behalf of the New Mexico school
superintendents don't want me
best understood that we do not
support financial planning quite
frankly as I mentioned in the
earlier bill this is all about
staging timing and funding this
bill does not have an
appropriation and at its stage
is as soft as we understand the
bill for next year and the
funding is not there to consider
the staff implications in the US
so we would ask the committee at
this point of the session to
move this bill perhaps the
implementation date down one
here to give us a chance to get
our arms around this and to
stage properly and districts to
do the right to do this for kids
to do something is very
important it requires that kind
of standard to be applied thank
you.
Thank you very much now we will
move on to those who registered
to speak in favor beginning with
JD Bullington.
Thank you my muted.
Yes.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which supports this
legislation because like the
rest of us the chamber
understands that we have many
students who do not master the
important life skill of
financial management at home and
that detrimental lack of
instruction and guidance can
follow them the rest of their
lives with negative compounding
consequences as a business
organization this is
particularly important to the
chamber of commerce in terms of
workforce development and
maximizing the potential of our
skilled workforce so we are very
grateful and appreciative the
sponsors of this legislation and
to think New Mexico we're taking
the lead on this initiative.
Thank you very much next up we
have Douglas linum.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Hi my name is Doug line item and
I was the mathematics department
chair at Santa Fe prep for over
ten years and can currently a
high school classroom teacher
for twenty years where I taught
economics and personal finance
I'm now partner at Longview
asset management here in Santa
Fe and I'm also a nationally
recognized author and speaker on
financial issues have appeared
in numerous media outlets such
as The New York Times CNBC and
coupling or I'm here to testify
that financial literacy is an
excellent way to teach basic
math skills and that financial
literacy is one of the most
important gifts that we give
young adults help them avoid the
serious financial mistakes and
that they wanted to in life and
also helps lift lift our
communities out of generational
poverty the money is the
essential tool we all used to
take action and function in the
world but finance is a foreign
language without the ability to
read and understand the language
of finance individual economic
prosperity is almost impossible
to achieve and the curries of
course that we need this bill as
as as others have mentioned is
that parents can't teach what
they don't know and most adults
are unfortunately financially
illiterate so if most parents
can't teach the kids about
finance and schools don't teach
it we're sending young adults
out into the world you'll
quipped to thrive in a modern
and complex global economy and
that's why this bill is one of
many vital steps needed to help
reduce poverty in New Mexico and
build a more vibrant local
economy thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you next up we have Paul
stole.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm all strong I am
the president chief executive
officer of the credit union
association of New Mexico my
collection on that nine hundred
and fifty thousand.
Our years credit unions for
financial services are we deal
with problems with the lack of
knowledge of financial literacy
every single day one of our
goals are at credit unions is to
drive financial independence
financial independence hi is our
way to allow people to hi the
state that find ways to manage
their lives financial on that
increase their knowledge of
financial literacy we do have a
number of programs that we do
offer we are trying financial
counselors in all of our credit
unions we also have programs
that we use in the community and
whether the schools are
realities bears are allow of
game part
of the stepping through life's
financial difficulties and
allowing our young people to
participate to try and find ways
to get out of.
We also offer business which is
already a program that helps
young entrepreneurs learn about
financial literacy and how they
can start businesses and make
their financial grantees from
drew all we do urgent to passed
house bill one sixty three it's
very important in New Mexico.
Thank you next up we have Linda
Wilson.
Good morning my name is Linda
Wilson and I'm a high school
teacher in Albuquerque public
schools and I have been teaching
personal finance the past six
years I am a career technical
education business teacher so my
course is an elective not a map
credit some of the topics I
cover having an emergency fund
budgeting how to balance your
checking account how to write
checks what's debt and how to
stay out of it how to avoid
student loan debt investing for
retirement and the power of
compound interest for example
one lesson that my students
students labs looking at an
investment calculator and seeing
how their money can grow with
compound interest and that
interest rates matter I strongly
believe that this course is one
of the most important courses
that I've ever talked students
are not learning this
information at home so it is
necessary to make financial
management a high school
graduation requirement twenty
one other states now require a
financial management course.
In order to graduate many of my
students throughout the years
and told me how relevant the
course was to them or is and
that they are advising their own
parents on financial matters
sharing what they're learning in
class I believe that this course
is the key that will provide our
young people with the tools they
need to be self sufficient and
productive citizens in our
society this will help support
New Mexico in the future and
make it a better place to live
high school students are already
required to take an economics
course in order to graduate and
this bill does not teach in that
for the financial manage our
this course is not teaching
after the financial management
skills that students need if
this bill is passed which I hope
it is a standalone corners to
count for pent financial
management then I think we can
change the Mexico and take us
from the bottom of many less
that we are on today so please
make this financial management
and mandatory graduation.
Thank you next up we have
Rhiannon Samuel.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee for a I need to
speak my name is Rhiannon Samuel
and I'm the executive director
of the on to New Mexico County
New Mexico is a non partisan
grassroots nonprofit looks for
common ground solutions to New
Mexico's education crime
economic opportunity challenges
we support house bill one sixty
three because we feel that it
will help New Mexicans in tools
and information to pull
themselves out of difficult
situations and be able to manage
their money and of course remove
New Mexico from the wrong end of
many nationalists with regards
on how we manage our money thank
you.
Thank you next up we have a I
mean K. then why.
I thank you Mr chair and
committee members my name is
Eileen van we and I am the co
chair of the Education Committee
for the league of women voters
of New Mexico thank you to
Representative Madrid in my
Estes for introducing house bill
one sixty three the league of
women voters of New Mexico
believes that every New Mexico
students should have access to a
high quality equitable education
which includes learning
financial management money
touches everything from grocery
shopping career decisions
renting an apartment making
loans traveling retirement too
much much more a lack of
financial knowledge requiring
mathematical skills takes people
into debt lack of credit and
savings resulting in serious
problems such as poor health
depression and bankruptcy so we
urge you to pass house bill one
sixty three thank you.
Thank you finally we have so we
have thank.
Thank you vice chair poop
committee members Shelby thank
representing eight hundred
eighty W. New Mexico members we
support the financial management
component for graduation in H.
B. one sixty three I work in
schools for students start
quitting and sixteen working at
McDonald's was a great financial
decision everyone especially
young women of color frequently
in lower wage jobs needs to be
Sappey about budgeting
negotiating loans mortgages and
preparing for the inevitable
rainy day or retirement.
The consumer financial
protection bureau study supports
education for economic well
being connecting financial
management as a necessary
requirement will be a lifelong
benefit to go students and to
our state.
You W. New Mexico request your
endorsement for this requirement
thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of house
bill one sixty three please
raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you I would just like to
give our the sponsor an
opportunity there were there was
the one in opposition just
wanted you to give you an
opportunity to comment before we
moved on to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess
barber while point to this is
the second part of my story then
is my daughter the little girl
that we talked about in the
beginning is not on our last
semester of college in doing
their student teaching at
centennial high New Mexico the
other day Shusterman is what I'm
doing I've got the kids in my.
Some consumer requires doing a
small business with of the food
truck and and I guess that's the
the court Mexico businesses that
comes up fourfold the winners
people having early installment
and there's so many in our state
our young people are not it's
essential start this earlier new
year's would follow through and
I think we have great academic.
Principles I just don't think we
got to get scientific because we
look at what we need to do to be
ready financially it's not in
the book it's an everyday
reactions to the actions of our
decisions that we make so we
need to be more applicables to
be able to do stuff online the
way the processes are set up so
I really just want to conclude
with that to the point is made
that we need to make it into the
curriculum but I don't know if
we need to make sure we're needs
its own booking it needs all of
these things this fact of this
people spoke today again.
Testimony on how they've
modified and adapt that is the
true essence of financial
management thank you that thank
you Mr chairman members in my
mind schools have for years to.
You know to do this ninth
graders entering this year but
Mr rounds is the expert it's a
friendly amendment to bump a
year of up but I hope we all
agree that this needs to happen
as quickly as humanly possible
thank you Mr.
Questions.
Thank you will now move on to a
committee questions first that
we have Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and while
I have to give gigantic kudos to
Representative my S. this I know
that he has been working on this
for quite some time Mr chairman
and and the Representative did
you already passed a bill
similar to this.
I don't want to the age you.
What did you do this about was
was that your billing Senator
different was what was that
something you did about ten
years ago I don't remember thank
you Mr chairman etcetera but
that yes House Bill eleven no I
believe or not we introduce that
many crazy bills back in oh
seven but yeah though I was the
prime sponsor that bill to
mandate high schools to offer
financial literacy up back in oh
seven yes fourteen years ago so
now every single high school in
the state by law as a financial
literacy course unfortunately
only eleven percent of the
students are taking it thank you
Mr chairman understood and again
I even if it's only eleven
percent Mr chairman
Representative Maestas now
he was he was twelve when he
came to the legislature so but I
just just just ten or fourteen
years later the economic impacts
positive you've had Mr chairman
and the chairman Maestas is been
I'm sure if we were to be able
to measure it it's been huge for
the for the folks that have
participated so I just want to
give you those kudos because I
know this is been a passion of
yours for a very long time so
thank you for doing this for our
state and I love the move of of
where we're going now but so
just you know again.
Mr chairman and chairman I just
disagreed and I'm with Mr rounds
on this one I want to make sure
that this gets done gets funded
gets done the right way so with
your permission chairman my
system Representative Madrid
thank you Representative Madrid
for for sharing the the torch on
this one as well can we just go
to page nine line seventeen I
defined as Representative minus
this also for treatments is so
we just a on line seventeen I
would move Mr chairman that we
I'm in the bill.
On the fly to us straight two
thousand twenty one to two
thousand twenty two and change
that to two thousand twenty two
to two thousand twenty three.
Yes I just want to confirm
Marianna's as something that we
can do right now that short
amendment.
Yes we could do that if it's if
it's a maybe friendly by the
representatives.
Dr drive by just in the
committee.
Thank you so I I believe all
need a second amount.
It.
Or do I need a second that
Merion.
Yes your.
So we did get a are a vote on
the Maria on the Mr chairman
sorry what was the motion again
I'm.
And people interrupting the
start of your Mr chairman I was
instant Senator Brandt I was
with the trying to adopt the the
amendment to the Mr brown spoke
up in the chairman Maestas and
Representative Madrid agreed to
which was to give us an
additional year to ensure that
the funding is appropriately in
place so I pushed back on page
nine page seventeen I didn't
find it anywhere else so I think
I don't think we need to do it
anywhere else but that changes
of the work of the numbers two
thousand twenty one to two
thousand twenty two to two
thousand twenty two two thousand
twenty three.
Chairman and actually certainty
around my mind so right good
good with that well I wish I
could do Mr Chairman.
The thrifty Senator from Santa
Fe County but that was really Mr
rounds and and Mr indenture
master's degree and
Representative.
So is there any further
discussion on this amendment.
None Marianna can you to vote on
this amendment yes Senator
Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope.
Yes.
Souls.
We have an amended bill.
All right thank you Mr now we
are back on the bill in the
floors back to you Senator.
Thank you chairman so I sure I
understand this tool in.
This is fully supportive one
hundred ten percent.
Our our get some financial
literacy and management on a
hundred ten percent but I'm.
So now with this measure what
what amount of time will will be
required
Specifically for the high school
the students graduate high
school in financial literacy.
But.
For me thank you Representative
Madrid thank you Mr chairman
center for that so I so now
under the bill every eighth
grader in future eighth grader
we'll have to take financial
literacy in high school as
mentioned hi of financial
literacy is already in every
single high school in the state
of all so at a minimum there is
one teacher and one class of you
know twenty two or twenty five
students so depending on the
size of the school that have to
offer maybe three classes maybe
in the you know trys Mexico and
west mesa maybe for classes and
then they could adjusted to
tenth eleventh twelfth grade
ninth grade it's up to the high
school but this gives them the
flexibility and the
In on with the knowledge of each
particular high school of the
leadership in those schools will
make it happen.
Mr Chairman and Mr chairman
that's why I'm and
Representative are trying to
make sure I I understand so
we're not requiring one point
five years of financial literacy
per student training we're we're
or semesters what what what we
exactly what will the
requirement be to graduate I I
just because I know you have the
other measure fourteen years ago
which we talked about and then
that we have this measure and
you know what I want all of our
students to graduate is
financial geniuses I just don't
know if that's going to be the
exact case thank you Mr chairman
center for the out one half unit
so one.
All right well this is just a
really wonderful excellent very
timely piece of legislation I'm
very happy with that thank you
Representative my is this
representative of the and I
think I see it as something
that's going to help in many
other courses that the students
have to take graduate also so I
think this is a really really
good movie I'll stop there now
Mr chairman of the southwest
thank.
Thank you senator do an extra
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward Representative.
Is this bill addressing any of
the barriers currently.
Chairman representative and so I
think it is the beginning of
addressing issues that are
particularly subject to our
north and south areas in which
we have these predatory lenders
that are you know targeting our
parents and our our young
people's parents.
This.
Holden Representative I guess
any clarify my question a little
sorry I mean barriers within the
school system to offer this.
Particularly class start.
You know honestly I don't think
we have a a real Big barriers I
think this is a most to seeing
in the regard of it moving back
here which is given more time
to allow the schools to set up
for this.
And the reason I say that is the
the school I taught at you know
the the students were given an
option but what's that class was
full that was it you were you
could take the the class
although there was other math
teachers there that we're
endorsed that could have allowed
it so I think there's some
restrictive areas are barriers
that are created in which we we
don't allow that flexibility and
especially
This three schools I have
elementary middle school high
school they're like in walking
distance of each other but we
don't allow flexibility of
students that are at the mid
school to go up to the high
school where they could probably
even flexibility for the
teachers to come down and teach
at the mid school level
when they're fully endorsed in
that sense and and that's what a
I think that's something that
needs to be addressed
because it does for a rural
schools in our smaller schools
to really have complete access
to financial literacy we need to
allow that flexibility
with our teachers.
I think
chairman and representative
director Senator Pinto totally
agree with you there there is
like that that a lot that's
Robert hope we adapt and modify
because according and then
demand is a need to reckon on I
think in in our rural areas
never more there's a to help us
in our in our urban areas
there's a lot of great programs
as you see in the credit unions
that go into the schools and
help set up I think that's I do
think that's beautiful but I
think the role deserves the same
so I support your thoughts on
that and I I do feel like will
need to look at that more
extensive and and I'll be your
advocate for that.
Thank you great question.
Mister chairman Senator do if I
may this bill would remove that
barrier.
So those students that couldn't
get into that class now will
have that class and they'll be
mandated to take it so every
single high school expand and
every single student in the
state of Mexico will take this
course with this bill.
At that the mid school level one
of the things too Inc which with
the rural areas especially with
my high school that was that is.
Having the amendment allowed to
practice it.
So you're not just you know
looking at a book and reading it
but.
There are really restricted in
fund raising
a lot.
Something that
And it it was kind of
interesting how it came about
because we decided or someone
decided are you know that.
When we talk about childhood
hunger.
Children that are going hungry
so we're like okay we're going
offer free lunch the practice to
our students but in that sense
to they told there was this
restriction that they could not
sell food within the schools.
That had to be nutritious you
had to get all your food from
the cafeteria consume it in the
cafeteria during cafeteria hours
even at the
thunder at the games and stuff
you were restricted in what you
could sell that you weren't
competing with other entities
input to our offering.
So some of these
Things we intended to be in good
in some sense also created a
practice in which we are unable
to allow our students to
learn about this in the real
world.
And you know when we get down to
she really teaching this in the
classroom having that community
come in our that bank come in
offering those incentives for
them to create an account I have
children the in Gallup that when
they are not at school they're
outselling.
in the restaurants lane into.
During the COVID they were
actually going into the pond
shop selling their
you know who their their crafts
and they're the ones in there
with that and you've been at the
flea markets they're the ones
working there and so it's early
on they do get that.
You know exposure but it's
enhancing at and it's and had to
get to that specific community
in that area a lot of this is
very general very new to them
we talk about that teaching from
the book but in order for it to
be very very
ingrained in them they have to
be able to practice it within
the school thank you
Representative and that's all I
have Mister chair.
Thank you senator panto our in
house bill one sixty three let's
keep in mind we we're on our
second bill we do have to get to
the floor eleven o'clock next we
have Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the reminder all of all of
try to be quick have a couple of
questions Representative my
assistant first thought that was
I was really concerned about the
taking away of electives on this
bill and so can you explain to
me we don't have a lot of
electors left for students does
this take electives away from
our students.
Mister chairman Senator right no
would.
You're you're muted Senator.
Yeah apparently of the host
decided to mute me
So how do you hi Harry
accomplishing that the bill.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
back because we're we're not
changing any of the units
required so the student still
has to take for units of math
and seven and one half units of
an elective.
So they can they can.
This is really take four and a
half credits a mask which they
would do now if they took the
course of.
Or if they only took four
credits a math then that would
still free them up to do seven
half credits of electives.
Thank you and that's what I was
kind of seeing myself and and so
that's why I'm probably gonna go
and support your bill because I
think it's just give some other
options for students and it
requires that this be done which
I think is really important
however I also think so I think
two of the three through my
three children actually took
financial literacy at the school
and I'll tell you we need to
really tighten up the curriculum
it I talked a lot more home what
is put that way then they were
taught the class so we really
need to tighten up on that
curriculum and make sure it's
it's really doing a good job
because some of it's not that
great
the the other question I have is
on page seven.
Yes.
Number four.
I'm not understanding why we
have something in here from two
thousand five two thousand six
that's new language.
Thank you Mr Senator Brandt I I
spoke with the bill drafter and
and threw up my hands it's
actually not new language it's
actually on page eight.
On the top of page eight and it
just kind of transfers it into
into paragraph four but you're
correct it says entering the
ninth grade beginning in the
twenty two thousand five two
thousand six you here I I in my
opinion it did need to be there
but there may be that one
student floating out there that.
That entered the ninth grade and
for that doesn't need to take
this as a requirement so I I
well let's not get into that
discussion Representative.
Well at all that's current law
that that that language is
current lies just moved into it
a new paragraph to read better I
think Senator Padilla had
someone that you'll tell yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and representative I
think I'm schedule can can shed
some more light on that.
Mr Chairman actually just called
PD and I think probably the
representatives argue that with
the hat bill drafters one we
would have had as well that.
It your kids would have
graduated in two thousand ten
and so it's highly unlikely that
that you would have any of those
students still left the entered
in two thousand five two
thousand six and I think you
probably should fix it and clean
it up if you are making changes
I emailed Senator proposed what
an amendment would look like it
effectively
But strike the COVID after or at
a comma after government strike
the end before economics and
then
strike.
For students entering the ninth
grade beginning in two thousand
five six school year all the way
through
through the COVID and so if you
want me to that Senator Brandt
to you as well I'm happy to do
that but I think it would clean
it up and it wouldn't cause any
issues.
Mr chairman
I I agree that this should be
fixed there's no reason leave
language from.
Students graduate eleven years
ago in their this is a
requirement that needs to be
left in law obviously for the
one half unit in New Mexico
history but we don't need to
talk about students starting in
I six that some of the the
language we just need to clean
up as we're doing these bills
the bills for after obviously
I don't know who it was so I'm
not gonna make any slide remarks
well keep that to myself today
but that's that's really doesn't
need to be in there anymore so
we just need to lose that one
half unit New Mexico history.
Mr chairman as Brandt Senator
records for German Center brand
has the floor I did forward the
language from a schedule to him
since he has the floor if you
want to try to but but again we
need we need to talk to the the
Sanchez and make sure that
they're comfortable with that Mr
Chairman representative where
you at on that issue.
You can be center of Mr chairman
that is correct way to draft the
bill.
The Cisco Business go before
from here or.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
correct so what would you prefer
or would you prefer us fix this
year would you prefer that I
have let's council drafted and
just take care of it on the
floor what is your preference
Representative thank you Mr
Chairman said about whatever the
culture of this committee is
some committees are comfortable
on the fly somewhere not but
Everest quickest thank you Mr
chairman
Here Representative thank you
for that if if we're securing
this on the floor good as
friendly it would probably be
best to let's get the language
right and do it on the floor if
you want to work with me to get
that amendment together just
give it to me I can present on
the floor just out we're here
for sponsor is accepted as
friendly it won't be a problem
for marvelous Mr chairman center
band and and if this were to
proceed to the floor up Center
souls would would presented on
the staff.
So I appreciate that like so
that was the only thing I caught
in their own look reading
through the normal two thousand
five six so that's really all I
have Mister chairman if that's
okay with the committee will
districts that on the formation
languages correct it doesn't
really affect anything you'll
structurally to the bill are
critical to the bill so Mr
Chairman that'll you for thank
you.
Thank you Senator Brandt now
move on to Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative biases for
bringing this wonderful
commonsense bill at was part of
my campaign platform is bringing
common sense a.
Issues to the legislature and
being sure that are we with
common sense solve a number of
issues in New Mexico which I
think this will I do have a just
a couple of questions I mean you
say there are four units of math
that are required in a high
school curriculum can you tell
me what those courses are.
Representative.
Or Rachel Representative Madrid.
I'd like to yield to Rachel for
that to give us a better overall
with the state does.
I'm so Mister.
Mister chairman Senator.
Requirement to take algebra two
or higher in math and so there's
outside of that I think that's
your upper requirement maybe Mr
CENIC can answer better I want
to a traditional pathways I
would assume you got out for one
mostly some kids are taking up
for a one in hi in
mid school but there's a lot of
flexibility within that just so
long as kids get into
that algebra two class and
complete it.
Okay director Center.
Thank thank you Mr chair Senator
so that currently use most
students all students are
required to take algebra two in
usually the course of studies
algebra one geometry algebra two
and so as my schedule said some
students do take algebra one
those who are sort of an advance
track in eighth grade.
The majority of students in high
school and of taking algebra one
geometry and algebra two and so
the the four credits the fourth
credit can be a number of
courses I did want to point out
though that earlier we they
asked about some one of you
asked about electives and
whether or not this would
eliminate and electives it
doesn't eliminate electors per
se.
For students who might be on one
of those advanced courses our
advanced tracks maybe a a
science or mathematics track
they might take algebra geometry
algebra two and then want to
take something like statistics
or pre calculus or calculus in
order to to also meet the
financial literacy requirement
that this bill would would
include they would they would
then have to take an additional
maths course which could eat
into the other courses that they
might normally take so it
doesn't per se eliminating the
left of but for those who are on
those advanced courses if they
also have to take financial
literacy it might eliminate the
option of taking something else.
On that point if a student
failed algebra two in order to
meet that requirement are
depending on their credit count
sometimes they're taking
multiple math classes just to
make sure they graduate
the end so it's it's a very
in that sense when you get to
your senior junior.
I'm.
Is algebra
Mr center of Mr vice chair is
algebra two trigonometry.
Well Mr Mr chair Senator Hickey
nope no it isn't that that can
that's sometimes talk as a
standalone course.
Thank you and
where where I'm going is that
very often.
Some some students are not
necessarily map or any of that
what have you I don't know the
what's different between natural
wanting to out we have algebra
and then I had trigonometry and
then I had calculus and that was
years ago I have never use
trigonometry anytime in my life
or calculus
statistics now is a much more
important.
Mr chair you what we were going
to use that trigonometry.
So the and and statistics and
and but I also just from a
common sense point of view this
course is so critical the light
and I I myself never knew the
difference between accounting
and finance so I got my master's
degree in medical administration
and was surprised to learn how
they were different courses so
I'm not sure what all is
included in this certainly
accounting does is important but
also I the the concept of
finances how do you plan for the
future hi and how do you collect
resources borrowing generating
what have you and the time value
of money and and so forth I
think those are very very
valuable things to learn and I'm
hoping that as as forces put
together that it does it
create the incentive and
excitement to potentially become
a business starter and
entrepreneur and because the
state does need to generate
entrepreneurial more business so
that's just my comment on it but
I was trying to say is not.
I don't know the difference but
you know I was like do you
really need algebra two how much
of that is is in in in common
daily life so just some
observations as we move forward
thank you for bringing that up.
An ideal if I may um interject
that Mr chair R. and I Cherry
them are they are no Senator pin
on your website I recognize your
okay it is the screen on what
Mr he was saying about the
credits.
I believe that was a movie back
I don't know how many years ago
in which like college algebra
got split into two classes
before you could take it one
semester and you're done with it
but they had a lot of kids that
were failing so they split that
curriculum and half and some
schools in the school I was
teaching at which trick in pre
cal was one class together it
was not separate but that was
because we was just a couple of
us math teachers what a lot of
the kids elected to take
financial literacy because they
viewed it as an easier class to
get through instead of taking
trade get pre calc with me so.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Pinto no other
let's act as other callers from
the committee what is the
pleasure of the committee.
Do pass.
To have a second.
Senator Pinto is a second if we
could do a roll call vote.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes thank you Senator Pinto yes
senator Paul.
Yes Senator soul.
We have a due pass amended.
Thank you Mr chairman so you
both have a you have a good
the chairman my instance and
Representative Madrid.
With on page sixty three minute
have a great day.
Thank you.
We are now moving on the house
bill one thirty one amended and
I believe we have Senator Lopez
here keep in mind we are going
to house for at eleven AM and
you know at least we want it we
still have a lot of the agenda
but let's keep our questions are
concise and would just keep
moving on you may receive Senate
office.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning to everybody I'm I am
here to present house bill one
thirty one and this of course is
titled the Assistant Secretary
of Hispanic Education and Mr
chairman members of the
committee what this bill is
proposing is to fund positions
for assistance secretaries of
Hispanic at at the New Mexico
public education department and
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative
Christine Trujillo did share
with me that there is money
already that was funded through
the junior so that is already
within our our budget process
what this bill is also proposing
Mr chairman members of the
committee is to provide
sustainable frameworks and
systemic opportunities to
identify resources resource
materials and communication
tools for students family and
community engagement and
empowerment Mr chairman members
of the committee it establishes
collaborative decision making
processes through authentic
family and community engagement
and incorporate those decisions
and school district actions to
improve outcomes Mr chairman
members of the committee it also
provides a culturally sustaining
pedagogy and culturally relevant
materials through one or more
multi cultural education models
that are proven Mr chairman
members of the committee to be
affected with Hispanic students
and will also align curriculum
between community school
districts state prekindergarten
through post secondary education
systems
and what I will also just remind
us Mr chairman members of the
committee and in twenty ten and
I still remember the debate that
we had on the Senate floor in in
when governor bill Richardson
signed the first Hispanic
Education Act into law in the
intent of the eighty eight
Hispanic Education Act is aimed
at improving educational
achievements of our Hispano
students here we.
The state of New Mexico Mr
chairman members of the
committee I do have some expert
witnesses if I may we have
former state representative Rick
Miera who of course served as we
know is the chairman of edges
set house education also is the
house majority floor leader we
also have drive standard road
Regus and Dr Adam of the so if
we could Mr Chairman led them to
say a few words thank you.
Senator Lopez a yes they receive
their recognized.
Chairman if if it'll please a
committee I'll go ahead and go
first and speak on to this
position like I testified in the
house this.
Students families and
communities mentioned over
twenty five times
in regard to this position and
what it does to transform
education in the state of New
Mexico and when you look at the
majority of the students in the
state of New Mexico they're all
Hispanic and as we continue to
lag behind in education this
position offers support and
accountability to speak to that
measure and moving forward I'm
sure that all of us are are.
In in in symphony and in sync
when we want to state that we're
all here for the best of all the
students in New Mexico and since
the majority of all men most
districts happen to be Hispanic
this supposition speaks to that
tune and the we're asking for
your support moving forward
without all of during my time
over to doctor Rodriguez.
Thank you.
Committee and Mr chair in two
thousand nineteen uniforms were
organized throughout the state
of New Mexico to solicit ideas
and suggestions on how to
improve Hispanic Education in
New Mexico during those forms
four main areas emerged to the
data collection the first one
family community business
collaborative partnerships must
fix it if we are to improve
Hispanic Education to pre K. to
grade three which is PED and
postsecondary which is HEP must
have organized formal structures
in place if we are to improve
Hispanic Education thirty area
culturally relevant environments
resources training instructional
materials and curriculum must
exist if we're going to improve
education for Hispanic students
and the port area that emerged
is the establishment of a
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council that represents and
works on behalf of the families
communities and businesses must
exist if we are to improve
Hispanic Education and.
Consultation between PED and
they need to do with the
Advisory Council must exist if
we're going to improve education
for Hispanics to.
We are now in two thousand
twenty one.
And our house bill one thirty
one is looking at those same
issues again.
Are those same areas that were
identified over ten years ago R.
can be found in house bill one
thirty one but they have only
been further delineated make
sure that there is our.
Eight more.
Clear focus on what needs to be
done if we're going to make an.
With this I turn it over to a
representative.
Representative more if you get a
hold on one second my apologies
I'm going to have to jump off if
Senator Pinto if you could take
over as chair.
Share.
Okay Representative.
We are.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity I will be brief
looking at the time I think it
was noted there this is the ten
year anniversary of the first
Hispanic Education Act in New
Mexico I will not to belabor the
the points that were there but
eloquent to do for me but I
think it's it's noted that there
was a change this year and
that's the amendments that are
proposed and it static Education
Act at this particular point
time and that big change more
than anything is ten years ago
we're working with and
collectively collaborative the
with the within the education
department but we at that time
did not in the vault this the
higher education department at
in in the matter what it is in
this new house bill one thirty
one I think that's important if
we do not put that in it's going
to be left out of the higher
education part always be on the
sidelines Hispanic Education Act
of one thirty one.
Involves the static of the
higher education department with
the public education department
some major change in this
particular piece of legislation
I was honored to carry the first
bill and at that point in time
this bill has become an integral
part of of what's been going on
with the patient and Spanish
children in New Mexico and I
think the amendment so we
brought forth in here really
bring this bill up to date ten
years ago and we're going to be
not now in twenty twenty one but
for the next ten fifteen years
and of that so thank you Mr
chairman I stand ready for
questions.
Thank you and do we have any
public comment to.
We do.
And now we will go to public
comment house bill one thirty
one as amended we did not have
any members of the public
register to speak in opposition
if there are any members of the
public with us here today who
wish to speak in opposition to
this bill please raise your hand
now.
We will now go to those who
registered to speak in favor
beginning with both apple over.
Next up we have Patricia
humana's leave them.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is a
three seven minutes late them
I'm the project manager for
transform education New Mexico
and the culture of the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council
usually I'd like to think
Representative Trujillo and
Roybal Caballero for sponsoring
house bill thirty one along with
Senator Lopez I've been a member
of the Hispanic Education
Advisory Council for eight years
during this time our council has
been able to bring some of our
advisement to the secretary of
education and your permission
such as the by literacy still
upon high school graduation
trading position in New Mexico
had for family engagement
coordinator and here today
support in amending the Hispanic
Education Advisory active twenty
ten but the truly bold
advertisements that affect the
academic an opportunity gaps
faced by Hispanic students have
failed to be addressed house
bill one thirty one legislative
amendments to the AGA it'll
address these academic and
opportunity gaps I will ensure
leadership positions that both
had and had allowing states at
the decision making table to
address these needs of over
sixty one percent of our student
population this pandemic
community has spoken in the
revisions of the HCA
transformation cation New Mexico
and it's twenty three member
affiliates stand in firm support
the H. B. one thirty one we
kindly ask this committee
support thank you for your hard
work in the opportunity to
share.
Thank you next up we have Meryl
Leiberman.
Unless the deal.
Good morning I'm Madam
chairwoman and members of the
committee my name is Ali city
hall and I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center online
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the Yazzie point
us in the us Martinez lawsuit
again we also think the sponsor
for bringing this legislation we
stand in full support of it
we believe that the judge I am
calling for the full
implementation of a Hispanic
Education Act and the housing
brewing that this can be made
stronger by creating this
Assistant Secretary of Hispanic
Education to be charged with
ensuring full implementation of
the ETA I am without this
crucial leadership role
compliance with AGA will
continue to miss the mark for
these reasons we support this
legislation thank you so much.
Thank you next up we have the
ballot paper.
Hello everyone
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Isabella Baker and I'm a co
founder and organizer of the
forces in action and an
organizer with forward together
action I'm here today to
encourage you to vote yes on H.
B. one thirty one as a person
who works with young people and
schools and colleges on a daily
basis we know that in equities
where things would students of
color particularly Hispanic
students in our state are
astounding
I support this much needed
change in addition to that
Hispanic Education Act and the
higher education department as
well because of my own
experiences and higher education
with past few years we need more
support opportunities for us to
be able to sixty eight Hispanic
students like nation have to
fight for hard to navigate that
system the vegetation on our
state and I think proper
staffing on the state level it's
imperative to creating that
sense the change that will
trickle down to students who
most need it and that's I'm
asking about yesterday thank
you.
Thank you next up we have doctor
Karen Sanchez Griego.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak today
Karen Sanchez Griego I am a
native New Mexicans a product of
the New Mexico public schools
I'm an educator a grandmother I
was the executive director of
engaging Latino communities
which we did a lot of work
across the state in advancing
education for education for
Latinos for seven years both in
education policy I as well stand
in support of the community
member as an educator I am also
the superintendent Yuba
Independent School District we
stand in support of this this
bill as it will support also
join in New Mexico a lot of our
children are not only is that if
they are by racial and have lots
of importance that is needed
within this bill and to have
this secretary so again as a
community and educator I suppose
I stand in support of this bill
and I encourage and thank you
for all your work I think I'm
sorry I encourage you to a pass
thank you.
Thank you there are any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of house
bill one thirty one as amended
please raise your hand now.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you.
We had a part in we just at the
last moment we had Adrian Santa
is that alright with you madam
chair yes good okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee forgive me and for
that this will trigger and I
guess
once again a prince on the one I
am the director for the center
for the education study of
diverse populations I'm having
assistance sectors of Hispanic
Education Act and our public
education higher education
department ensures a decision
making and advocacy voice that
speaks to what the assets and
opportunity gaps of Hispanic
students across the pre K.
twenty system.
For this and many other reasons
we stand firmly in favor of HB
one thirty one thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you and the questions from
the committee.
Hi I yeah I have a couple of
questions so I'm looking at the
higher education department.
Mexico higher education
department and see the
division's and I see Indian
Education Division.
So we're creating a.
Availability we're creating.
Secretary of.
With this bill we're creating
something in higher ed.
What.
Could you clarify.
And the reason I'm asking that
is because.
As far as constituents did see
across the board where we're not
raising when like Hispanic and
Indian that ed and I would like
to see them all leveled out
across the board in higher ed in
PED
but I see the Indian Education
Division listed here
And so we're going to add
something to this rate in higher
ed.
Chairman if I could
Representative chairman if I may
madam chair members of the
committee great question of the
Indian Education Act I was in
the house at the time that the
chairman of the committee when
we passed indication acted in a
few years ago I supported
Representative Lente is they put
in.
And Assistant Secretary of
education which you which
indentation Act has now in this
part of of the are there
particular previous legislation
we're doing the same thing going
along with what you were talking
about we're putting in as of and
Assistant Secretary of education
summer to the Indian Education
Act so we're making a level and
putting it also impact as well
as an in the higher education
department because as as I noted
before we need to bring higher
education department to the into
the conversation that we have
with PED and that they're not
separate but the in one and this
is a very important for the
Indian Education Act as well as
Hispanic Education Act.
it's not going to be kind of
correlating with Indian
Education Division that's within
eight GB this is going to be.
Different than that.
That is correct one have their
of their missions and the for
them but there would we're
putting and combination is that
they're both going to have a
Sorry for the note here with
their both going to have an
Assistant Secretary position
that is the purpose of a house
bill one thirty one.
We clicked on this
So this system secretary.
So we're not going to call it
spending Education Division.
Better madam chair members of
the committee we're not changing
the the division part we're
adding as an Assistant Secretary
to the higher education
department Assistant Secretary
the Public Education Department
of similar to the system
secretary that they have for
Indian Education.
But there's none with in eight
thank you just they just have
the division.
For the is back
renewal for the individual in
the in the.
In higher ed.
Yeah hi read there is none
there's there's no of
relationship at the present time
with PED with regards to this
manic Education Act.
That.
Do we do you know if there's any
legislation trying to bring all
this what the Indian Education
and Hispanic Education because
when we talk about Yazzie
Martinez and addressing these
issues you know doing that
separately doesn't seem but it
should we should have
consistency across the board and
we try to be fair.
Within the on both sides are not
really.
The one above the other is one
of the things I want you to I'm
trying to clarify with myself I
know I'm not an expert with all
of our departments
With the building in eighteen D.
trying to keep that straight
there
there's some clarity on that but
I'll check into that Senator
Brandt.
Thank you madam chairman I'll
I'll try to be quick because I
know we're just about out of
time but is Mr sentenced along
with eight with the had.
Madam chair of Senator Browne
I'm here.
Thank you Mr sent us so
I I don't see anything on had on
this
You guys have a position now
that focuses on.
Hispanic Education do not.
Madam chair Senator
Representative so we do have a
Hispanic Education Hispanic lays
on his education ways on the
bill would would strike that
position and create the
Assistant Secretary position in
the of.
So Mr Chairman I'm sorry madam
chairman I'm not sure sharing
right now officer group over
senator and Senator pope was
back on so sure person where it
is
Mr center appreciate that is
there is there been an issue are
we not is Pat not being able to
take care of the needs of the
Hispanic community with an
education that you need
disposition or where what is the
PED's position on this position.
Madam chair and senator brat
so I I think I think we would
agree that we want to we want to
continue to prioritize the.
Affirmative and and just the
overall state of Hispanic
Education in New Mexico so are
Hispanic Education lays on has
been performing that function up
to this point
we want to we want to continue
to emphasize and prioritize that
I don't know that I could speak
to whether or not we've done
As.
I would say we continue to work
at we continue to work at it I
don't this is a this is a
position that would elevate that
that status of the of the
Hispanic Education Division and
in.
The language and culture
division in in the department
We we didn't we we don't have a
particular position position.
Mr Chairman Mr so that it is
this is almost.
The the bills almost implying
that that is not doing a good
job in this area.
and then I and the other concern
I have is the finances for this
position or or only in the
junior bill so they're not
recurring dollars at this point
in your dress both of those
because I I I actually think
that the changes you guys have
been doing in this area have
been very good so it concerns me
that that this bill is coming in
and basically saying you're not
doing your job in this area and
we need to create this other
position Senators Madam chair
Senator Representative I would I
would argue that.
I don't know that the bill
implies that I do think that
there is a desire to elevate the
Hispanic liaison position to the
position of his Assistant
Secretary you are to Senator
inTaos point in terms of of
equity we have we currently have
an Assistant Secretary of Indian
education and it sounds to me
like this this bill would merely
creates inequity across those
divisions as far as the as far
as the the finances go well we
did have some concerns when the
probation was struck potentially
there's a fiscal impact to our
department and to H. U. D. as
well in terms of of paying for
that position a year over year
basis for us it's probably a
little bit more minimal partly
because a liaison position could
potentially updated and would
include additional salary
additional salary and AGD for
the position does not exist they
would need yes recurring funds
to to pay for that his position
here to here.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr etcetera I I see the
equipment behind you are you a
musician.
I I I do a little bit of a music
plan I would call myself a
musician.
You play the guitar.
Yes I do okay thank you and I
used to and telling when miss my
left hand but sorry I know
that's completely off the bill
Mr Chairman sorry about that Mr
Chairman is or someone with
higher add on because I am
concerned about the financial
implications to higher ed they
have a very very small staff it
is one of the issues that I have
dealt with with some of the
bills I've sent over there is
there anyone that can address
that or maybe Rachel can address
that she's not hire an expert
which is.
Your concerns me on the
financial implications to them
you know if anyone's on the
progress that.
Senator Brandt I I'm just trying
to build yes right now so I
apologies so I would still like
to have the the the chairmanship
over to Senator Pinto my vote
thank you
madam chair maybe the sponsor
the bill knows of someone from
that is around that can answer
that question or have they
talked to Pat about the
implications the financial
implications to their apartment
on this bill.
Here I am looking through to see
also if there is someone from
higher ed I don't.
I don't recognize anybody at
this point but if I could madam
chair Representative mana.
Would you be able to shed some
light on this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator Lopez
Senator Brandt I think what I
like to be able to share is the
fact that as you well know over
the years we've been working
with Ted and working with
education of K. and twelve and
then pre K. through twelve and
then there's this big gap
between that and higher
education and I think it's
important that higher education
be involved because they're
training the teachers other
setting them down we're having
relationships that you've been
talking about here for years and
years and that is on the other
side what distract Education Act
does with the secretaries is
providing that link that is not
existing right now will not
exist without this conversation
that it can happen at the a
similar levels with both
secretaries being of equal
positions to be able to have
that conversation and so that is
the importance of the secretary
and that's the importance of
head getting involved with Pat
we hear that so much this is an
opportunity for that to happen
thank you for that to happen on
those regular sustained level so
that those individuals being in
the same positions are able to
talk about what's going on at
one level with the children and
the other level with the
teachers and that's just a small
example of what needs to happen
between Pat and had and this can
accomplish that.
Thank you Mr chairman of the.
It's really good to see you
Representative we are.
Get.
Some of the things you've done
for me in my earlier years up
your when you were still
chairman of.
Of health education thank you
Sir you've created the position
at the higher education
department how are we paying for
that that's that's my concerns
that they actually have a very
very small staff AGD how are we
paying for that position Mister
chairman Senator in my opening
remarks I did mention that there
was money in the junior bill.
Was to go there to until the
bill signed of course but that
will go to HSD to fund this
position there is money that has
already been placed within our
our budgetary system to pay for
this.
Thank you Mr madam chair sorry
in this Sir Lopez I'm just R.
that covers it for one year
the rule that is being recurring
on the recurring side because I
know we were going recurring and
non recurring on.
Junior running.
I'm.
Miss madam chair Senator I I do
believe that it was its
intention is to be recurring but
you know as well as I do that
that still a dance that we play
through DFA so our hope and
intent is that it stays
recurring which is as as you
know Mr Madam chair Senator
that's part of the amendment
process that we went through yes
yes Madam chair Senator how much
was the
Appropriation to pay for the
session madam chair Senator a
hundred and ten thousand.
Thank you madam chair thank you
center percent it appreciate the
answers to the questions I'm
concerned about the the funding
source to pay for this position
and it does concern me that if
that isn't addressing the state
already and that is the role so
thank you for that thank you.
Thank you for that thank you
Senator Brandt and so
clarification from what I was
talking about earlier because
I'm looking at the ATP website
and they have the.
Indian Education Division but
there's only a tribe one tribal
liaison with in it so this bill
does not create a Hispanic what
is the title of the
Education Division in ATV.
That is not the intent madam
chair members of the committee
okay and that that's what I
meant about having because
consistency are clear
I don't think it's a fairness
across the board is that if
we're going to do something like
this that we.
Should probably have a static
Education Division within ATD in
which they would have a liaison
just the same as the tribal are
are the Indian Education
Division
it's it's something I verses
trying to do an assistant.
Because I want it as an aid may
I would wanted assisted to if
there was a higher level but I
think it's the same
It to be that
of and that's all and I got the
lose I know Senator Brandt had
his hand up I think with Senator
Hickey I don't know if you had
anything to.
Add ins does Senator soldiers
back
Senator Brandt answered my
questions madam chair okay
Senator so did you want to
resume the chair.
Thank thank you yeah I just got
back so I'm trying to catch up
with where we are what's going
on and very and was was just
seeing
And and I guess at this point
because we are at we're are
normal stop is that I went
checked with the ranking member
and the other members of the
committee if you want to
continue on to the end of this
bill or whether we want to pick
this up on Monday when we come
back.
Mr chairman I think we're about
near the I don't see more hands
up if you want to go ahead and
finish this out I doubt they'll
call us to the floor immediately
anyway.
Okay that would be great I just
wanna make sure that I'm always
checking and I just got back on
so I wasn't sure exactly where
we work so.
If we continue a let me check
are there any other people that
want to speak on this particular
bill.
Madam chair if I may this is
doctor on the board
I do want to clarify some things
one of the one of the things
that that in this initiation
that we talked about Sir what is
the yeah we don't yeah we're
already to where we're going to
a vote stop so no typically were
only members at this point
unless they ask specifically for
for clarification thank you.
So pleasure of the committee.
My motion for duty today at I
think just motion for a.
I can't see everybody.
The motion for the past.
To hear me but I'm moving to do
pass on house bill one thirty
one is amended thank you and I
think that it was gonna be
Senator Pinto did you will the
second.
Yes Mr chair okay thank you your
call the roll please Senator
Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Neville no.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls.
Yes you have a do pass.
Thank you.
Representative you have a.
we are now up against the the
clock thanks
I apologize to others who are
waiting on house bill one eighty
eight House Bill to nineteen
house bill two sixty six health
bill two eighty seven oh we will
roll those over to Monday
are there a couple of others
Committee do plan on getting
Monday Wednesday and I suspect
we'll have some last minute ones
on Friday at this point we'll
keep it at the regular time all
of that always changes depending
on what's going on with four
sessions that they change our
times with that there's a chance
always that the floor session
will get pushed back to give us
time to get through all of that
I don't know what that will just
kind of way along with that we
are not planning on having a
meeting on Saturday.
Anything else to the committee.
And again I apologize to anybody
who was waiting in the queue
there is still plenty of time so
don't anybody panic we got
several committee meetings and
the what the things get get rid
of the poor and stuff so I don't
see that is yes to critical at
this point with that we will
adjourn Senate education for
today thank you.
