so we're gonna start with Senate
bill three eighty four
that we'll see of Senator Lopez
is here and then look at four
fifty four sixty five if you
need is not and prompted her in
when she is able to get here
so Senator my S. this.
Three eighty four of the school
athletic changes.
It says you to connect.
Right for us yes Sir thank you
so much Mr chairman honorable
members this is how Senate bill
three hundred eighty four let
them play that deals with the
eligibility to play varsity
sports in New Mexico high
schools I'm joined with Mister
Jerry Archuleta who is a lawyer
who has done a couple of these
cases and facilitated students
playing varsity sports and not
missing out on an entire year
and also mark one tell us whose
niece here in Santa Fe was
almost deprived of of playing a
varsity sports the sport she
loves of girls volleyball Mr
chairman honorable members I
think we all agree on the
benefits of participating in
high school sports in my opinion
team sports but improves
teenagers of mental health.
Help some overcome stress less
anxiety help some about
sue nothing's have less
depression and less suicidal
ideation it also helps with teen
substance abuse and other
reckless behaviors it leads to
stronger civic engagement and
social responsibility an adult
lives and of course less social
media during their teenage years
the
there's two concerns that that
the person I want to thank
everybody who spoke to me
including you Mr Chairman on on
the issues there's two.
Reasons why people kind of have
a immediate reaction against
this bill but those reactions
aren't usurped by this bill.
The number one issue folks have
with this bill is the the
creation of super teams coaches
recruiting boosters recruiting
students going around and and
hard you know harness the three
or four best basketball players
from left from a town and and
winning a state championship
that is simply not allowed in
this bill
It's not allowed because the New
Mexico athletic association
which which regulates athletics
at the high school level has
pages and pages and pages in its
eligibility bylaws as to why
that is not allowed for the
first time those provisions will
be codified in state statute
with this bill and I I knowledge
for that if you can up.
If we could not discuss the.
The committee so because it's
it's just written a lot better
Mr chairman so we could do that
as soon as our presentation is
over but Canadian so.
The committee so that was given
to the committee Saturday and
then a new version was given to
the committee on Sunday.
Not just we were in committee we
have no committee so I
understand I understand that's
news to me but anyway it's just
simply written better it's the
same bill but it's simply
written better
So as I was saying there's two
one is that is not allowed and
is not allowed in this bill.
First of provision of this bill
that we want to codified state
statute.
Actually is consistent with that
concern that coaches or coaches
circuits and in the committee
sub any person cannot
participate in recruiting a
student to go from one screen to
another for athletic activities
so this actually bolsters in
state statute that concern
And secondly there's a concern
that athletic should not trump
academics this bill does nothing
to change the dynamics with
regard to that firmly held
belief that that the
regulations articulated in the
NMAA bylaws deal with a grade
point averages and participation
in school attendance behavior
all of those things are not
usurped by this bill all this
bill does Mr chairman is allow
students to play ball when
circumstances out of their
control under current law rules
doesn't allow them to play ball
for example if a family moves
from one town to another to take
a job.
If if parents get divorced in
the right and and they and that
students to move outside of the
district to live with the other
parent when economic means don't
allow them to put to continue in
a private school and they but
what this bill merely does is
avoids hundreds and hundreds of
petitions whether they're
granted or not these petitions
should not be necessary.
If someone's dad move from
Farmington our teachers senior
year what is yes us permission
up to play sports if if
someone's parents get divorced
and eight thirty and he leaves a
private school walks I boxed was
public school and rules why
should ask permission to play
sports so all of the wonderful
and.
Beneficial attributes of playing
sports in high school.
Trump.
Any personal emotional
opinions that folks have with
regards to why they don't want
folks.
Being recruited or or or having
athletics Trump academics that
that those concerns exist now
and they will not change as a
result of this bill Senator over
to up to Mister Michael lets us
with a personal testimony of his
niece and then Mr director at
that time about the nuances of
of how the courts have currently
it usurped current rules.
good morning Mr.
This we don't permit continues
morning Mr chairman members the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzales and I know many of you
know that I'm a registered
lobbyist for a lot of different
interests I'm not register today
for anybody and I'm not in
anyway getting paid on this
matter the reason why I'm
involved in this issue is
because of my goddaughter who
was impacted by this rule
negatively and.
The bottom line and and and and
I think you don't need to listen
to me I think you know Jared is
going to talk about what the
judges have said when they see
these cases and they say that
these kids are being denied due
process for many reasons but in
in in my nieces particular case
you know she was transferring
from Santa Fe Indian school to a
public school and you know she's
a fantastic student and was in
just an incredible you know
doing well in school and
everything like that she's
continued to well but what you
want to transfer to Santa Fe
high after the NMED had allowed
Santa Fe Indian school students
to during the COVID transfer to
any school in their district to
play sports it when she after
COVID ended decided to transfer
from the Santo change in school
too the public school Tuesday
night and you're gonna hear many
stories about all of the other
public school students who have
had problems like Senator my
Estes had mentioned with regard
to private school transfers to
public school transfers the lack
of people being able to afford
the private school and and then
transferred to public school and
and not being able to play but
you know the one thing that I
started thinking about because
my god daughter is you know
native American from south
Philly but Pueblo is the a a
regardless of whatever the rule
does the issue is also I mean
are we actually looking at the
sovereignty issues in these
cases
Carefully enough because of if
if any transfer within the enemy
is allowed for one student for
whatever purpose.
How can we be the nine native
American students to be able to
transfer from the jurisdiction
of the native American schools
into our state jurisdiction
schools
without affording them the same
opportunity that other students
maybe getting who have been
approved in one regard another
in other words because of the
sovereign to sovereign nation
are we should we not say to the
native American students we're
gonna treat you regardless of
what your concern is the same
way that we treat other students
in our schools and if and if any
are about to transfer on a
hardship basis then why
shouldn't they be allowed to
also transfer I think it's an
issue that deserves
consideration I understand from
the lawyers that a lot of this
information is not public you
can get to any of the reasons
why things are approved or
denied because of the nature of
the young person being involved
in the privacy of their records
but I think more powerful than
anything is mostly district
judges which Jerry can get into
when they see these things they
say they're not being afforded
due process and and this is it
the right way to go I would ask
you please to just consider
hearing this bill and and and
you know I think it deserves of
a greater hearing that just what
we're talking about today and
moving it forward I mean this
issue to be is very important I
love my god daughter very much
and in top of all the other
issues that you're going to hear
about from families today I
think that's an additional
concern so Mister chairman I
won't go on any longer I think
it's a niche additional issue
aside from all the others are to
be raised here today and I thank
you for your time.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
director let the.
Mr Chairman it is the committee
thank you I'm give you a little
bit background about myself all
law firm handles a lot of these
cases when we're trying to get
petitions or injunctions I did
handle the one with Markle's
goddaughter.
in which we get calls on this on
a consistent basis a little bit
more is I'm finishing my
dissertation for my PhD in
psychology and I'm a local high
school coach here so I have a
vested interest and how these
rules impact these athletes in
these children going forward
because I I see it first hand.
what one of the greatest things
that we teach as a coach as a
parent is we're not going to
deal with we're not going to
stand for bullying and we're not
going to stand for racial
discrimination.
We're seeing that on a
consistent basis with the NMAA
is not granting eligibility when
we have clear cut cases we had
in our a case in Albuquerque
with judge Lopez with the child
was being physically assaulted
and battered every single day
and when the principal told the
parents we can't protect your
son he needs to transfer to a
different school the NMAA denied
his eligibility on a hardship
case.
judge Lopez who in his verbal
ruling till the NMAA that that's
not a hardship he doesn't know
what is in that they're not
reading the rules are not
following the rules that they're
not reading the facts behind the
cases are just rubber stamping
to Niles.
Then we had the case with
Markle's goddaughter being
racially discriminated.
Emotionally and psychologically
affecting or every single day
where her ability to play
volleyball at the high level
that she earned was a way to
help her mental well being but
the NM es said that that wasn't
a hardship and they denied her
eligibility also judge budget
hold during our trial with them
said.
That it's a fundamental due
process rights being violated
that the N. M. A. A. is not
following their own rules and is
asking to create declaratory
judgment to change the way the
procedures being handled by the
NMAA.
Our law firm has been handling
these types of cases for about
seven or eight years.
The thing that concerns me is
that despite our desire and our
ability to handle as many of
these cases as we can pro bono
because the majority of these.
A families cannot afford legal
services there are a lot of
cases that we can't handle
either because it's to the
procedurally where there's no
longer remedy by law but we're
getting calls on a consistent
basis that these are not
isolated events.
In my concern as a father as a
psychologist is what effect is
it having on the children that
we are trying to protect if
we're telling these children
that that we we as adults we as
the ones responsible we the ones
that are creating laws to
protect them if we're telling
these children we're going to
protect you from bowling we're
going to protect you from racial
discrimination and then we can't
and then we're victimizing these
athletes twice and Mr Moses is
right it it's their student
athletes that so we we we for
time all the time thirty student
first and then an athlete second
but their ability to play the
sports I've seen if coached at
the high school local high
school here for ten years now.
The state claim they stay off
drugs it helps with their mental
well being it helps them focus
on the great that helps them
focus for their next stage in
their life and I've read the
bill I think the bills great
I'd love the committee to let it
go for lotus provides more
reserves our law firm can
provide transcripts from some of
the cases with these judges are
completely appalled and
dumbfounded by the decisions of
the NMAA thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
provokes
notification the past year
there's been six hundred
petitions four of them had
reached District Court.
how many of those positions
petitions are like no brainers
but also how many students have
transferred and not filed
petitions how many students have
been told by the coach sorry
complete till next year and the
parents or whomever to now the
where with all the fire
petitions and how many families
chose not to take that job chose
not to move
uh chose to keep the child in up
unhealthy home environment that
didn't that didn't even try so
anyway without we appreciate the
dialogue and we look forward to
the conversation and we hope
that this committee lets them
play.
up to the audience first with
the quick show of hands how many
in support.
Those in opposition.
Okay and we've got a couple
online so will take about six
from each side so those in
support.
Yes indeed come up and use the
the.
That's.
Mr chairman members got all the
button down.
Is
this all the time.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is James Rivera the tribal
member councilman from the
Pueblo of Pojoaque in.
I support this bill because of
the nature of the real really is
the mental capacity of a student
who is transferring from one
school to another based on
hardships and of one of the
things that was cited today was
native American students who are
having issues coming from a
native AmerisourceBergen now I
mean quite frankly if you take a
look at this in a hard line it
it's racial discrimination we
we've got to get away from that
bottom line we've got to give
every single student the ladies
and the sensibility to schools
to move on with their high
school careers as athletes and
we as adults need to be the
example of of of how we can set.
The the next parameter for them
to move from school to school
without having to have
difficulties and have to go
through courts and the and and
having that child go through
that phase of the M. I've worthy
of of being an athlete at
another school we've got to
change this we've got to give
that student the all the
positive notes that we can as
adults and Mr chairman and
members the committee I really
appreciate your time today on
this thank you.
Hi my name is the terrorists
Justice is a similar session we
stand for.
In the supporters of brick.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello my name's Angelina
Geisinger and Marco's niece that
he was speaking about.
I'm here for you to share my
story a story that was shared
multiple times to a variety of
anime audiences including the
board of directors I'm a former
Santa Fe Indian school students
who experience bullying I tended
Santa Fe Indian school for my
seventh grade year twenty
eighteen until the fall semester
of my sophomore year twenty
twenty two.
As a student Santa Fe Indian
school other students commented
on my skin my blue eyes and my
curly hair and how I do not look
native it'll.
I learned to ignore those
comments throughout the years in
my eighth grade year I made the
varsity volleyball team which
help me fit in a little bit more
added another layer to the
bowling as other girls to not
think I deserve to play at the
level.
There were many incidents
Senator went unreported because
I knew it would only make my
situation worse it got to a
point where my mental health was
so low and I told my parents
that I needed to transfer after
and during three years of going
I finally put my mental health
first I made the transfer to
Santa Fe high in January of
twenty twenty two I knew it was
going to be a fight to play the
sport that I loved in the sport
that can be seen through my
experiences with blowing.
I follow the NMAA hardship
procedures and share my story
several times like a broken
record each time someone from
NMAA summarize my PO getting
details wrong the meetings are
not recorded as far as I
understand and there was no
formal record.
After each yield they sent my
family a blanket letter stating
my appeal was not approved
animation not have the right to
arbitrarily decide who and who
can and cannot participate in
sports as a varsity volleyball
player since eighth grade I was
forcibly down because I transfer
to protect my mental health.
We bowling is not considered a
hardship to NMAA asset of high
school I realize that I was not
alone in transmission please for
mental health reasons several
goals on my volleyball team were
also sanctioned down and only
allowed to play JV sports my
family chose to fight an enemy
court and we want we recognize
that our only hope was to pay
course to help us fight enemies
on fair process thank you for
your time thank you.
Anyone else.
Support.
Online.
We have Nelson Smith that right.
Mr Smith.
Yes can you hear me yes.
Okay.
So my name is Nelson Smith the
whole reason why I'm one of the
reasons why this law is in
effect now I transferred to a
quite a high school in nineteen
ninety two
for educational purposes and
sports purposes now at that time
other kids are transferring in
to waiver as an example to play
sports there but my mom was a
single parent of three I was the
youngest
Really wanted me to get a better
education hours a month on a
high school and when I went to
the grave of the education was a
lot harder and more challenging
which I appreciate to this day
because it made me who I am.
That time.
I played varsity football
basketball baseball as a
sophomore
and I was forced to sit out when
I transferred.
is during the basketball season
so
I set up my time we.
I had to go live with my
godfathers of the bill where was
district and we follow the rules
and everything that else like
that so and the bad thing about
that will hold situation was is
that the NMAA was parked outside
of my godfather's house three
nights of the week to make sure
that I was spending more four
nights of the week away from my
mother and my godfather's house
staying there and and doing what
the NMAA requested us to do.
I don't think that are created
this bill I support this bill
because I think that under my
circumstances of the reason why
we need a second please.
That it needed to be this bill
is going to affect because kids
like me needed to have the
opportunity to go to school I
went ended up going to
university of Miami played
college football and I graduated
with a three point I thank you
Mr Nelson Mr Smith.
Yes Sir thank you.
Of those in opposition.
Please come.
Chairman members of the
committee my number button
continues.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Sally
markets on the executive
director of the New Mexico
activities association The New
Mexico activities association is
a member led organization a
hundred and sixty high schools
two hundred middle schools there
is not one by law that is passed
that does not go through the
membership there is a process
where it starts with the by laws
committee then it goes to the
commission to our board of
directors then it goes back to
the membership for a vote and
then the Public Education
Department of firms it hi Sally
markets do not make up the by
laws and when you say the NMAA
it is the membership led
organization this bill would
create an unlevel playing field.
Even though he'd said it isn't
it would it would create super
teams people be able transfer
whether coaches recruit or not
kids will transfer to whatever
school they want whenever they
want.
I urge you that you keep this in
the hands of the practitioners
we're coming up on the state
basketball tournament
everybody's excited because it
is a level playing field this
will not make the it a level
playing field it will displace
kids and when we go to play
basketball or any sport they're
not only going to play against
the team that but they're now
going to play against Senate
bill three eighty four thank
you.
Thank you.
Senate rash good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I I'm Dennis Roch some
superintendent of Logan schools
and I'm I'm this is my fifth
year to serve on the appeals
committee for the NMAA and so I
want to talk a little bit about
the due process that exists in
the current rules if somebody
petitions because the transfer
for for what for whatever reason
the petition for eligibility and
and this the petition itself is
paperwork and often filled out
by the school that they are now
attending so the petition
The petition for eligibility at
if it's initially denied because
of the way the by laws are
written it can have an
opportunity go to our their
hardship Committee if there's an
act of a financial hardship
eventually the definition a
rules or to the appeals
committee because of extenuating
circumstances and so let me just
give you a quick two quick
examples as a member of the
appeals committee we hear about
three appeals a month and have
so for about the last two years
one example I remember reading
the the the file that was sent
to me ahead of the committee
hearing I thought for for sure
this person's going to get
approved of this which is going
to be eligible they moved from
from dad's house to mom's house
in a neighboring district and
that I think that's going to be
great I mean it's a legitimate
move come to find out that that
mom actually wasn't living in
the house that the data sort of
rented an apartment to give the
facade of a residence to install
that came out during the
discussion the appeal we had to
make the decision against in
other cases I thought oh gosh
this is land on the rules say
they can't they can't play but
we come to find out that a
student truly was being bullied
or harassed and it's documented
that the school that they had
been attending didn't lift a
finger to help that student and
the appeals committee has
granted eligibility in cases
like that I've been part of
those committee deliberations I
want to tell you the rules exist
by the member schools thank you
the rules of this by the member
schools and the appeals
committee is providing the due
process without this legislation
in place thank you thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
stand around for the school
superintendents and the
coalition for educational
leaders you for some compelling
descriptions of what goes on I
will reflect on a couple things
first of all a yes only by the
the the sponsor this bill six
hundred appeals this year.
The numbers have gone to court
for that's less than one percent
deviation and what is heard
versus what is happened secondly
we strongly oppose this bill we
believe this is statutory
overreach we believe you're
infringing on the the ability of
the membership of the school
districts in the New Mexico
activities association to have
the democratic voice in how
should we do business this is an
easy I've sat on the NMAA I was
a September twenty seven years
of sat on the NMAA for fifteen
of those years.
Lots of hard choices lots of
factual derivatives that come
out of that and in most cases
very good decisions Mr chairman
again we just the committee to
vote against this bill.
Thank you.
Committee chair and you have to
hold the button down.
Good morning committee chairman
and committee members I'm doctor
Kimberly my cell the
superintendent Bloomfield school
district I also am in in in may
a board member I oppose this
legislation to the fact that.
There's two sides of the story
and when you have children just
student athletes transferring in
and out of districts they are
displacing community student
athletes for the slots in
positions that are available in
sports you only have so many
slots for basketball so many for
wrestling so many for all the
athletics point the displacement
of those community members
causes tremendous problems for
superintendent because the
community starts recognizing
that we are accepting the
students into our schools and
not allowing their children to
play so that is one concern that
I have about this legislation
and I oppose it thank you.
Thank you so.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jogi N. executive
director of the New Mexico
school boards association I
think the case has been made in
opposition to this page we also
take that position hi so I had
the.
The honor of serving on the
board of directors for
approximately six years we heard
many many appeals and I think
all of the decisions that we
made were were consistent with
our rules and regulations never
did we violate those rules and
regulations I still have
neighbors and other board
members that don't talk to me
because we enforce those so this
is a local decision making
authority we ask that you keep
it at that level and again we
oppose this bill.
Thank you is there anyone in
opposition online.
Anyone else in opposition in the
room.
right now is one is that you're
walking up or not Senator for we
go to questions and comments.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you everyone who's who's here I
have nothing but tremendous
respect for NMAA in the
leadership particularly by
director Marcus I I want to give
a shout out to hosting the two
thousand twenty boys girls
basketball tournament.
Right at the precipice of COVID
and having those students have
the experience of winning and
and playing in the pit without
sacrificing of the health and
safety of the committee was
tremendous leadership on on its
part secondly with regards to
legislative over reach when you
read the bylaws it makes
reference to very statutes it
makes reference to statutes that
we have done that influence the
bylaws we are the
legislative branch of.
Presumably the schools I suppose
are the executive branch and
it's completely appropriate
For us to.
Right laws that would that would
force NMAA to modify its by laws
if in fact those bylaws become
overly rigid or rigid rigid or
overly bureaucratic
But this we do a couple of
provisions
A transfer student who did not
participate in a particular
sport.
May petition the executive
director for immediate
eligibility at the varsity level
why is that necessary if they
don't play a sport at the
previous school transfer
students who will not
participate at the sub varsity
level only could not need to
petition and then that's the
contradiction if you played JV.
It's all good.
Because we know whether you're
the star of the team with you
play forty minutes are you come
off the bench on senior night
it's the experience of that
team.
There's no displacing a team
member when you when you're on
the same team and so there are
no rules with regards to
freshman and JV because we know
that we it is in the interest of
the child in the team and the
committee for that student to
play but this notion of of than
about the gentleman mentioned
that the that lack of up.
The the lack of experience in
the early nineties that still
with us today we.
People resented like well but
the time they want to Google
state championships that doesn't
exist these bylaws don't allow
it in this state statute this
bill rather it becoming statute
will bolster.
That does provisions.
Questions from the committee.
Have questions.
Yes so when word these bylaws
put in because you're trying to
say back in nineteen ninety two
but I believe up Mr chair and
the Senator my Estes that it was
already in place prior to that.
Mr Chairman separate of these
bylaws I would imagine have
always existed but I would
imagine that that that change
from time to time what's
unfortunate is as a result of
the recent court cases they have
not changed.
If you if the court if a judge.
You know.
They should change from time to
time given the court cases but
but apparently they don't but I
but if that director wants to
respond I.
That would be great as well in
terms of the history the
biological.
Director stay close you may ask
more questions coming at.
As I stated before the
practitioners the
superintendents the athletic
directors every single year we
look at the by laws to see what
needs to be changed it is in
their hands so what happened in
nineteen ninety three is not
what is happening in two
thousand twenty two as the
practitioners look at the by
laws through the by laws
committee through the commission
to the board of directors I am
not going to get in about about
the court cases but we did not
mention a court case that was
overturned twice and was
dismissed in this situation but
every single year the
practitioners look at the by
laws through our process we
would not be able to do that if
it is in state statute just like
our scholastic eligibility is a
two point oh in state law we
would not be able to
practitioners to change that
unless we came to you to change
that and that does put a
handcuff on our practitioners.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator mass this
actually I was one of those
students native American went
from one school to another had
to sit out there are just
placements the student goes to
another school but if there's
bullying happening there's a
fine line between believing and
competition especially when you
talk about athletics.
But my question to you to ponder
on is.
Where these students are going
to school.
Do you have the right coaches in
place because my understanding
is the boards are the ones that
boat on they're the ones that
have the control to say well we
don't want to coach their the
parents are the ones who can
petition to get that coach out
and if there's bullying taking
place in those sports facilities
in those locker rooms.
Then something there's there's
something more to school needs
to do.
I've seen it I've coached
basketball for quite a few years
from little kids all the way to
high school.
And even other athletes that I
talked to
About this bill particularly.
They were like no it should it
should stay in place the way it
is because we're very well aware
all the athletes throughout the
state are very well aware of
this criteria that they have to
me.
I know there are situations but.
You know we we can't do all
those
In in the sense of.
If there's six hundred petitions
that's just a bit ridiculous in
that sense so maybe those people
need to be re educated about
this policy
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator masters thank you
Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chair and first off
I know we got a committee sub
doing need to make a motion on
there are we going to stick to
the regular bill I don't know
Senator the last two to talk
more about the committee so yes
Mr chairman it's it's written
cleaner and as it it caught up
yes I'd like to explain okay
would you like to make that.
Chair Mister chair I move it do
not pass on Senate bill three
eighty four and a due pass on
sanitation Committee substitute
for Senate bill three eighty
four for discussion purposes.
Okay and center you want to
indicate where there the
differences of the changes thank
you.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and create the the bills after
working.
On this the first provision
paragraph a the original bill
was coaches or their surrogates
could not recruit we learned
that you know could be recorded
from a poll to folks so we say a
person.
The person shall not recruit or
induce a student to participate
in a athletic activity at
another school so could be a
boost or it could be the parent
of an I could be anybody not and
the coach may be annoying but if
that student is recruited
then there they are ineligible
and then also in the first draft
it was theoretically possible
for students to play football in
the fall.
Transfer and then play baseball
in the spring so we eliminated
that that that you're only
allowed to play.
A one sport at a school in as in
a season so if you but right but
if you do transfer over
Christmas you could practice
with the football team but you
can play till the fall you could
practice but.
You only complete the following
school year you could only
eligible in the fall.
if you transferred to the
preceding year.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay.
Committee questions about the
the substitute.
It's not center your.
It just because these are just
questions on the bill and thank
everyone for being here and and
getting their stories and and
what's happened I guess for me
what I'm kind of struggling with
I understand that we're the
legislature and and where the
lawmakers and we make decisions
here
but with M. M. and M. A. A.
having their policies I I'm just
wondering Mr chair Senator my
Estes was there any way to I
guess make adjustments through
NMAA to to kind of work this
process thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator poll I believe
so and that's what I'm hoping
that's what I'm hoping
That the bylaws are adjusted
from time to time as a result of
these of these if these issues
are concerns I think there's
three it just in the section
that I that I have which is the
eligibility LA bill eligibility
section of this really late the
did reference a state statute
like three or four times what
one is when we the latest one
that I recall this when we
allowed charter school students
to play athletics at the local
high school at that charter
school didn't have that
particular activity so if we
were to make a law in this area
than that David M. A. would
going to four going to affect
and they would adjust their by
laws according to state law in
fact admit it references in the
first.
First couple paragraphs how
these bylaws derive and that
they're that they're they cannot
drop federal or state law
What's unfortunate is that these
but as many times don't don't
adjust at after reaching a
record K..
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator and I'm looking at the
analysis we talked about the six
hundred or so transferable I see
that there is this appeals
process what I'm wondering
through this process do students
have to retain
Attorney in this process which
is something that they could
feel on their own.
Mister chairman Senator
apparently they could fill it on
their own their parents are we
learned that the screen fills it
out but if they want to go to
court and they would have to
hire a lawyer and pay for that
lawyer.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator
Yeah I mean.
I'm looking at the numbers of
the looking at the process and.
You know I'm understanding some
of the hardships and we're we're
we heard a few of the stories
that it's happened to I didn't
go to school here New Mexico
went to school in Colorado
played sports
transfer schools
Situation where the environment
was a good for me I I didn't
play at the new school so I'm
really.
Kind of struggling with this
understanding what students to
deal with and that decision that
they make.
But also understanding why there
is this process here and that we
don't want to have kind of the
imbalance of folks
leaving to one school or another
but recognizing the reason why
students need to make that
decision for their well being
and their safety.
All continue listening a little
more but I'm just a little
reluctant to kind that change
this process I understand
there's a small amount
but folks.
That have went through the
process and it's been denied on
the basis and not to say their
stories and you know heartfelt
an important but I'll listen a
little more and and and see
what.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman
I certainly understand
Senator and experts a number of
the extenuating circumstances
that have been brought up here
today
And I don't know a lot about
high school sports here
But.
It may be Assistant impression I
get the sense that let.
The Cueva wins a whole lot of
stuff and I'm just wondering and
and maybe this is totally wrong
on my part.
But is is it because they're
able to get a lot of transfers
in from other schools because
they've well Hey there is a the
scholastic part but then there's
the you know you're more likely
to be on the winning soccer team
and if you're on the winning
soccer team maybe you're more
likely to get a scholarship and
college in the and those kind of
factors that tend to
From what we want people to have
to transfer and and so I'm just
wondering in in my naivety and
so I'm here to learn if indeed
this somehow and balances the
fairness of the competition
between the high schools.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator he
it does not of what is it Mr
chairman of a teacher this as I
never lost it like we have a.
because up because I graduated
that year before it like whether
one online but when we look what
was created in nineteen eighty
seven the big schools were
Eldorado and Sandia which were
huge in my day and from nineteen
eighty seven to like nineteen
ninety fourth look up played
outstanding sports and dominated
and won a disproportionate
number state championships
because all by kids want to go
to a club it happened again
about ten fifteen years later
when Rio Rancho was was created
and then not now I think the the
big with you know it's I'm
biased but the big dogs but
cannabis to.
Which one boys and girls
basketball and went to the semi
finals in football last couple
years new schools are just
simply more attractive than old
schools we we sell
The success of atrisk heritage
with the state and the same
community is real good on the
and so knew what new schools go
online they have kind of a of a
five year window of of of being
not necessarily dominate but
doing well but that that
resonated Albuquerque N. as you
want to look level you don't
cheer for like whether you're
kind of like like with us so so
when I talk to folks about this
bill they mention like we have a
you know
and so but the by laws are tight
the by laws are strong there's
ten twelve pages of anti
recruiting anti incentive bylaws
that this that this bill does
not only doesn't touch but
bolsters.
And one quick comment thank you.
Mr Chairman and Senator Hickey
with regard to your point about
the competition and are the
bigger schools getting a
secretary you know I think it
does raise the issue of like
what what are the incentives
that are in the system that have
been created you're from then
maybe it's to protect big
schools I guess from profiting
more than small schools.
In learning about this process
and I'm by no means an expert
but you can just NMAA if it's
accurate I I heard or I
understand that
they allow a one time exception
for athletes in the eighth grade
so if you're in the eighth grade
and you want to go to school and
transfer you can go to the
school wherever you start out
and you're allowed to transfer
regardless of what the reason is
Montoya your at the end of your
ninth grade year so my point to
you is about this system that we
have that apparently is to try
and stop this big screen of
small school competition
whatever the NMAA which is
supposed to be protecting the
behavioral health needs of our
young people are actually
putting them in a position in
their parents in a position when
they're thirteen years old to
make a an adult decision when
they should about sports when
they should really be making it
about where they want to live
their life how they're going to
get along in their community and
where they're going to be best
served as a young adult I mean
sports should never factory to
it and then on the opposite side
when you're on the other side
they see well we have to protect
the other schools I just think
one of the things that I side
and and my god daughter's case
was the impact to her outlook in
life for the first time we're a
state it's not even just it's
it's it's not it's not beholden
to anybody in terms of it's a
that it's a it's a national
board right from a bunch of out
of state people who are making
these decisions about the
behavioral impacts behavior
health impacts to our children
and in a way I think that from
the from the very beginning if
you if they do that it's like
they're creating the wrong
incentives from the very
beginning so in that building I
think that's an important point
just to say that it's it's wrong
from the get go and then we have
these other problems that are
piled on top of it I don't think
it's an out of state board is
very much a within state of the
superintendents and others not
an out of state yes I just want
to say it's not it's it's it's a
it's a national they're
affiliated with the national.
They say the FY already do it
for schools all over so that's
what I mean.
Commands Senator so please
please if center would like yes
I would please I want to come to
correct a few things first off
in nineteen eighty six I was the
head look quite a girls
basketball coach and open the
school so I'm very familiar with
the opening of that school will
sensitive I can tell well.
But
The baby.
to answer your question when
state statute again this is
state statute when open
enrollment choice came above
with state statute that is when
the NMAA had to change their by
laws to make an open enrollment
choice and allow kids
eligibility it was not at the
eighth grade year it is that the
ninth grade it is the parent's
decision to make a choice as an
eighth grader whether they want
to make an open enrollment
choice that young.
Or do they wait to their ninth
grade year so I want to go ahead
and correct that as far as the
bill is concerned we do have
schools it's not just when
they're brand new.
We have schools all the time a
lot of it deals with the coach
and the program and that is
where you're going to get kids
whether they recruit or not they
will not recruit but there
program will sell itself so even
though we have recruiting bylaws
you're still going to have kids
transferring to that program if
they are winning program which
is then is going to make it even
more on level playing field.
Thank you.
Thank you very much I'm done.
You the questions.
Senator bill.
Just a thought Senator and and
maybe one of the.
Opponents might bring in.
Looking at your
New material on the second page
of this
Shown a recruiter in Doucette
make sense with that person is a
defined so I don't know that
that would have any waiter hold
up anywhere I'm not I'm not
going to serve on to is you try
to come up with all of the legal
thing but I don't I don't do
that is the kids buddy you know
comes to help I mean those kind
of things you just can't police
that but a transfer student
He can't be prohibited from any
participation.
If it transfers before the start
of school year that kind of
makes sense that interrupt the
whole program but I'm not sure
that's a violation isn't
provided for under the activity
associations that not the case
if the director.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
senator Neville no you have to
sit out a year you can't play if
your parents move out of town
not across town but to another
town you cannot please.
Yeah well that's that's what
you're and your bill says.
Mr Chairman up senator bill no
my bill would allow them to play
mind my bill lets them play a
different and if I could turn
over what Mr chair that they
could explain the rule is could
play if it's before the start of
the school year that's with
first for the census bureau
correct Mr in the school year
they can participate in
practice.
But they can't play that if it's
during the school year.
And then eighth grade taken
cells will compete.
But wouldn't it greater Rios
will to compete on the athletics
association rules.
And John I'm not sure this does
anything that isn't already
provided for under athletics
association and.
We're putting something in
statute that kind of regulation
a private organization I.
That's my concern I'm not sure
accomplishing anything this
already been accomplished maybe
not quite exactly the same
fairly close and there's every
kind of a.
Variation of what people
transfer of these kids come in
the mom and dad in the divorce
and all those things are true
the committee number reasons of
bullying I mean I I think that
we've got things coverage on the
other hand as was stated you've
got to community kids are
already there and if somebody if
this allows them to be bumped
it's I don't know I've got room
expertise will come again I'm
not sure this is much different
than what the I have over the by
laws but it doesn't seem like
it's a whole lot different than
what I'm being told.
Our exist.
The chairman senator Neville the
current by laws have a and I
believe it's a hundred eighty
day rule that when you transfer
schools you have to set up a
significant amount of time.
Which means that if somebody was
getting bullied at Santa Fe high
and left around Christmas time
to go to capital high school and
they were football player
they're gonna miss that whole
football here because they have
to wait I think it's happy here
and that's what we've been
coming across with the cases
that we have to take to court to
get injunctions is that there
are mechanisms with hardship
that you can by pass that the
time period to wait but we've
had to get involved with cases
were we had to get the court to
enforce the owned by laws that
are there the hardship by laws
because of these this waiting
period that in some instances
would keep a student out even
during their senior year and not
play at all and then what it's
doing is making the parents make
a decision if my child is going
to be in eligible to play the
sport that they love do the
indoor whatever they're going
through at the current school
because this waiting period do
we take a chance on a hardship
petition being denied these are
the decisions that the parents
having to make way and then they
come to us after they go through
all the initial steps without an
attorney we only get involved in
the at the judicial stage but
there's a wait period if you
transfer the if you don't be one
of the exceptions to being
granted eligibility you have to
sit out and I believe it's happy
here.
All of the director are you are
you the directors at your title
on the J. director.
I just want to clarify we keep
saying are not able to play all
kids are able to play where
there are concerns the
contention as at the varsity
level so if they are
transferring we do not hold kids
out they are able to play be a
part of the team they can
practice with the varsity they
just we're able to participate
at this of our state if indeed
the bylaws to answer your
question going back we still
have by laws going back to when
you were playing where you live
in a community you go to that
school the parents move they go
to that other school they're
eligible so we have many by laws
in there they give kids varsity
eligibility immediately in this
case and one of the cases that
they are discussing the parents
decided not to go through our
appeals process and go directly
to court what would have
happened if they went through
our three level peels process
appeals committee board of
directors and the public
education department there
outcome could have been
different but they chose that
that to not go that path.
Let me ask a question we're
still standing there if up.
My kid has to change it mid year
to Christmas period this says
they have to they go ahead and
play a practice other football
player then go ahead and
practice with the team they
can't play into the next school
year that's what it says right
how would the athletic
association interpret that
particular circumstance it
depends on the situation if it's
like for example at Christmas if
it's basketball and they started
playing at one schools rules and
in vogue right arts actually
going on going on at that time
that the sport is going on at
that time and they transfer they
are not able to play it to the
same sport at two different
schools however if it is a
football only transfer in
semester depending on their
situation if they made a bona
fide residents moved then yes
they would be able to play
football the next year it just
depends on the move a lot of the
cases that they are discussing
our where parents have not moved
in they're going just from one
school to the other have not
changed any residency we have
that all the time of the
superintendent Mozilla's here
we've got three schools within
fifteen miles of each other
three or four actually
and if you throw in Kirkland's
maybe five or six but so I that
happens all the time for various
reasons I would go different
schools but and and that is
correct and and we call that
area metro area just like
Albuquerque we have many Los
crucis we call metro areas
because they can hop from school
to school to school without
making a bona fide residence may
sometimes is because of our pay
play for the better team
understand that I'll be waiting
for a teacher to get past their
five year period so that the
quick winning Senator.
They keep beating up our
football guys but
I I don't know that we're yeah
other subtle differences I don't
doubt that that I'm not sure
thank you Mr.
Thank you
Second thank you and and I got a
little distracted I apologize
but just in general you know I
think thank one of the things
that concerns me a little bit is
just we don't.
We don't know I remember a
couple years ago there was a
young man trying to transfer
from hops to unison went through
the appeal process and and
contacted us and you know we
were helpless we couldn't do
anything to try to but I never
really understand I never
understood the reasoning for why
and I know that it's an
independent body they're able to
do whatever they want but I I
think it would be really helpful
of the interim to do a
presentation to Ellie as C.
because there are many of us
that we really don't understand
the process and I don't want
kids skipping around just so
they can be on a you know start
team and I think that's taking
care of in this but but I do
worry a lot about these kids
that have a have just four way
for
I mean if you've got six hundred
that's a lot and
I don't know I just wanna make
sure we're taking care of those
kids that really do need to have
that opportunity and I'm not
sure we're doing that in and not
prepared to put this in statute
that but I want to hear more
from this organization because
the one or two or three times
that you know I've had to.
Deal or figure out what's going
on.
Never worked out in you know I I
don't know it's still part of
the public system and not that I
want
Maybe to put this in statute
that I would like to hear from
the organization learn more
about it trying to figure out
what's really in place and are
we really helping those kids
that need it so I'm kind of torn
on this as well and I've spoken
with Mr rants about it that I'd
like to hear from them during
the interim thank you.
Yeah I'm I know we're getting
ready for a motion I have just a
question or two and more for
director Marcus or others who
have dealt with it.
Of the appeals well first does
recruiting approach.
Yes good just straight up.
In New Mexico and and where and
how.
It does occur but once again you
have to make sure that you have
if it does it goes to a court of
law against this the recruiting
that you have every ducks in the
row so you have to get a lot of
documentation about recruiting
recruiting does occur and we
talked about coaches and and in
the states that to their time
out coaches it's not really
coaches it is parents it is kids
it is a U. coaches and are in
and those are the ones where we
have to really we put in strong
by law so that does not occur
that we can make sure that we
stop that at this time.
On the side that says a person
shall not recruit.
Is it recruiting at the.
US of athletes friend says Hey
you know I'm over on the soccer
team more stock team really
great wanted to see about you
know transferred to our school.
Does that then maybe the other
student in eligible.
Or would it because they know
that is a person who is now
recruited and induce them to go
to that school.
Well but okay thank you thank
you Mr thank thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Senator souls I'll defer to the
directors to how they deal with
that now but yet they would be
recruited we don't want that we
don't want that we there is a
strong strong bylaws in an anime
that talk about that type of
activity that student in
eligible in the one that
recruited them ineligible.
Mr Chairman etcetera so it's not
the kid that recruited but the
kid that was recorded that would
make him ineligible how can.
I guess I have a real problem
then is you know can't you set
up a kid did by saying that and
then say Hey you know they were
recruited and now they're in
eligible.
it certainly happens and goes
on.
that you and I think that I have
absolute knowledge of such of
the six hundred appeals what
kinds of things I mean that many
of them were not.
Allow what kinds of things where
they not allowed for.
I mean why why did the committee
yeah again I'm asking you to
speculate for the committee but
what thank thank you Mr I think
it's our souls so I don't know
about the six hundred or the
hundreds that that were never
petitioned and and the decisions
that were made for for students
not moving to another town but
I'll just review some use some
the the bylaws and once again
tremendous respect for NMAG and
what they do for our young
people but the bylaws as
mentioned are the same as when
when some members of the
committee.
Eight ball but
It doesn't keep up with modern
times for example we live in a
modern society with modern
family guardianship I'm reading
from section six page eighteen
if a student with the if a legal
guardian and roll the student at
a new home district school of a
student gain immediate varsity
eligibility at the new home
district school no.
If if the military student if
the military student.
I'm sorry are they able to
appeal that decision they would
they could appeal but they would
loose this is actually specify
this is actually a simple they
that the bylaws to write the by
laws and then they give examples
of of scenarios and this it's an
actual scenario it's not in the
by laws but it's a scenario of
the bylaws.
Let me ask of people actually
sit on that committee of our
those automatic denials.
Representative rush.
Other those situations and it
will cause the committee of
granted those Mr Chairman yes
and and that's actually what my
examples were intended to
illustrate my opening comments
this morning which was that
sometimes on the face of an
appeal it looks like it might go
one way but then as the yield
discussion comes out of
information is revealed about
the students experience
sometimes the decision goes
totally the opposite way so yes
absolutely those kinds of things
that on the on the in the
initial bylaws the NMAA says
okay based on the by laws your
petition to play here is
initially denied and then it
goes to an appeals committee we
hear more of the story and say
oh you know there's extenuating
circumstances we're gonna grant
eligibility and we've done that
before in many many instances
and superintendent in situations
have you had appeals that come
before you where clearly.
The student was trying to
transfer for athletic
eligibility Mr chairman and yes
yes that happens and in fact
both of both the receiving
school the new school the
students attending and the
setting school are asked to fill
out a form during the petition
process and one of the questions
on the form is do you believe
that this move is motivated by
athletics and very often the
setting schools is no what we
know that the family was moving
or we know that there was a a
new job opportunity or their
sibling goes to this other
school where they were pursuing
a new academic program again I
be course or AP curriculum but
sometimes that setting school
says yeah we actually have
evidence that it was motivated
by athletics and then they then
the appeals committee looks at
those forms and says you know
the sending school raised flags
early on in the process that the
student maybe moving to go to a
new coach we'll go to a new team
or play with some of the P.
people that they play with on a
club sport or any a U. team
during the summer and so we take
all that into consideration and
make the right decision want to
benefit the student but also not
to create a precedent where
they're creates these this movie
just for athletic purposes.
And and I guess for a director
Marcus.
If this bill essentially the six
hundred appeals that have been
made would no longer be made
with that in your opinion cause
a problem for New Mexico
athletics and level playing
fields I do believe so because
there's no governing body that
is you know holding they're not
under the same rules there's no
governing by those looking at
that six hundred and ten
transfers can go to any school
they want five or six we're
talking about if we're talking
about valley we have four kids
this year that decided they were
going to move from different
schools in the Albuquerque area
to go to valley where they
recruited no but they've chosen
to go there because they played
together in the summer on a
state may you team those are the
types of cases that we are able
to look at and make sure that we
have a level playing field.
Some of the some of the data
that we have of the cases that
went to appeals committee in
mind you that parents are able
to yield even if the school
doesn't want to peel we do honor
a parent appeals many many times
thirty eight percent were
overturned at the appeals
committee level so that is
saying is not a blanket now
thirty eight percent of those
that decided to go on to the
board of directors forty percent
were overturned at the board of
directors and from there we had
for that went to the public
education department so as you
see it is not a blanket that
just because the initial
petition was a negative they do
look at the great I rural black
and white because that is my job
by the by laws the appeals
committee the board of directors
and the public education
department and their legal team
look at the gray.
Thank you
Thank you.
Is New Mexico's athlete transfer
rules is it consistent with the
states around us are they
similar Texas Arizona Colorado.
Mr chair I don't know I don't
know but I think of the director
may know.
As currently as a president of
the national federation at this
time I am engage with all the
state associations and every
single state has by laws that
are very similar to ours.
Thank you over the weekend I
looked at the ones and they're
very yeah Arizona Texas and
Colorado are very similar to
ours some some slight
differences of the one thing
that hasn't been talked about
this at all is paragraph do that
essentially an eighth grade
student is not shut up we get
five years of eligibility.
That's concerning and I think
that's in conflict as I looked
with the states around the US
and that do not allow that that
you're allowed four years of
eligibility and not five years
of eligibility but I think
that's what paragraph D. would
say is that it would allow five
years of eligibility thank you
Mr chairman Senator souls no
that's actually consistent with
it I made by us however in NMAA
bylaws it allows local districts
to opt out and so Albuquerque PS
had opted out for years and
years and last year the state
finally opted in to the eighth
grade participation because what
happened out occur key was you
can go to you go to academy for
prep and play five years but if
you go to Garfield in the eighth
grade you can't play a valley
you know so that was a
contradiction there that that
Albuquerque public schools
rectified this past year but the
eighth grader playing varsity is
is a an anomaly but if there is
that one athlete
NMAA allows them to participate.
Okay and I'm typically that's
more likely in a sport like golf
or something like that I think.
Any comments on that particular.
Director.
I would say R. as
superintendents and athletic
directors in New Mexico have
allowed eight great
participation and it is
something that they do want to
allow other states around us do
not allow eighth graders to play
up at the high school level but
as as some of the comments we
are looking at New Mexico New
Mexico kids and what's best for
them and that is why we have
allowed eighth graders to
participate so we do look at our
by laws on a yearly basis to
make sure that they are keeping
up with the times and what that
best for New Mexico again I
guess we already allow this why
does this need to be in the new
material thank you Mr chairman
Senator souls for those
districts that don't allow it I
think I think it's it's uniform
Center this would require them
to allow it if not make it a
local choice.
Mr this would this would be a
state a state law yes so
obviously the coach or the
school could disallow it but I
I've had this provision written
because of the Albuquerque
public school experience
actually didn't realize it was
the enemy it was already in the
NMAA bylaws.
Okay so my concern would be that
this takes out the local choices
to whether the local district
allows it puts it in state law
that requires all districts to
Mister chairman Senator souls
those local districts would have
to allow it if it's the same
school and that's the problem if
it's a private school in which
it's a six to twelve school then
it's allowed regardless of
whether this bill passes or not
this would simply allow those
kids who don't have the
opportunity to go to a private
school to benefit if in fact
there's this building eight
great golf but golf player I
guess my point is this takes
preempt local control over
whether to allowing creators to
play a varsity for five years.
Mr Chairman center sold for at
the district level but each
culture school can make that
choice that APS disallowed
eighth graders until this last
year and I'm not sure if any th
graders are playing varsity
sports or not but to to add
clarity on that because it is
interesting point.
It would take out local control
we have many school districts
that allow eighth graders in
certain sports because they do
not want to plummet there middle
schools so for example they have
them play basketball if middle
school has a basketball team
they do not let them play up at
the high school level so they
can make sure that they have
enough kids at the middle school
level in basketball there's some
school districts that only allow
those sports that they don't
have at the middle school like
golf and tennis to play up at
the high school level so this it
read the way it is written it
would take out local control as
to how they want to deal with
eighth graders also we do have
busing concerns from the middle
schools to the high schools had
to get in there for practice and
all of that again would be taken
out of local control so thank
you also up Mr chairman Senator
souls if someone were to go to
Sandia prep their eighth ninth
and tenth and then transfer to a
public school that eighth grade
year would take away from their
senior year that's that's what
this trying to rectify the the
directors and know that that's
not the case but.
That.
Regardless of.
The committee
that.
We do not pass.
But also to protect the that
move to table a it's not
debatable.
You'll take the role please on a
table motion.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator my Estes no
move to explain there can avail
yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes explain about
Senator souls yes bill was
tabled with
thank thank thank you Mr
chairman Senator souls I I voted
up against the tabling motion
because the thirty eight percent
that petitioned and were granted
why did they have to petition
and then the forty percent that
petitioned a second time and was
granted why did they have to
petition let's have clear lines
in the by laws for those
families that move that suffer
financial hardship or that
there's documented proof of
bullying to avoid six hundred
petitions so that student
athletes so that the NMAA lets
them play.
Okay thank you Mr chair I have
some of the same content I
talked about even the concerns
raised by Senator Kernan I hope
that we can have this discussion
and maybe talk about this and
LFC talk about this process and
maybe there's something that we
can do separate from what this
bill is to look out for kids and
work on these issues so I want
to continue working on that
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you all for a good discussion
all Senator Lopez.
Senate bill three forty to
provide public get ethnic
studies.
Good morning.
In order to hear.
Mr Chairman if I may also
mentioned aspect the pleasure of
the committee is there's another
measure in front of you this
morning that is also with
restraints and seclusion if we
could ask for that to be rolled
over my expert witness is home
sick with COVID yes so yes let
me announce Senate bill three
eighty seven then will not be
heard today do you want to
rolled over to Wednesday or
you'll let me know what you know
just to see how it's going to be
one of the ones that I need to
know pretty much today election
of or the end of the day okay
it's not a message that she had
I don't know how long she's been
diagnosed so let's see if not up
earlier the better all this I'll
find someone else that we can
help okay so trying to get the
the agenda out on tons of people
with the what's going to be on
the we will roll that went over
then also and also for the
public we are not hearing for
twenty two today the Sanchez
asked that they be held over as
well.
thank you very much Mr chairman.
And.
I'm gonna use this because of my
mask.
Good morning Mr chair Senate
bill three forty.
has been in front of committee a
few years in a row
the measure has passed a both
this chamber and the other
chamber but was detained on the
house floor several times due to
some debate other issues
what I'm also waiting for Mr
chair is my house of co sponsor
which is representative
Caballero she's coming over from
house education to say a few
words if she's able to get here
in time.
I also have with me here drive
me after hero who is also a say
a few words
of background information with
regards to Senate bill three
forty but essentially Mr chair
what Senate bill three forty is
asking is to amend existing law
to require students candor
through third grade to have
great appropriate instruction on
ethnic studies relating to New
Mexico history
it as ethnic studies to minimum
instructional requirements in
fourth through eighth grade and
requires high school students to
take one half unit of ethnic
studies as part of graduation
requirements the bill also
defines ethnic studies creates a
time limited ethnic studies
council and reduces required
elective units in high school to
accommodate the one half unit
requirement.
Mr chairman I know that we may
get into some more discussion
especially with I think it's
house bill one twenty six which
is working its way through the
house as we talk about the
changing graduation requirements
but I know we'll get to that
point and if I could Mr chair to
allow drive through here to say
s'mores.
I have to.
The.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee I'm grateful for
the opportunity to speak here
today as we said I Michael
Trujillo I'm the associate chair
of Chicana and Chicano studies
at the university of New Mexico
I'm also an associate professor
of American studies and Chicana
and Chicano studies.
So a growing body of growing and
significant body of research
demonstrates that ethnic studies
such as to got into Google
studies African American studies
native American studies have
improved the academic
achievement of high school and
college students while also
enhancing positive racial
attitudes of all ethnic groups
in the United States students
that are CCS college preparation
program classes for example read
in engagement tools related to
the Mexican and Latin and Latino
Latino immigrant experiences
indigenous traditions of Mexico
and they also read and engage
materials related to the
renewable may he Connell
experience and the scholarly
traditions that are continuous
here sense prior to eighteen
forty eight as well as our own
regional and indigenous
traditions and those of other
ethnic communities.
Ethnic studies courses courses
are increasingly necessary for a
majority minority states
that is well that has a large
data population is nearly fifty
percent of Hispanic origin and
increasingly diverse.
I now will focus on my own area
of ethnic studies as well as as
an example I do so in the
specific context of UNM's and
the crew key area high schools
Chicana and Chicano studies
college preparation program.
I for the purposes of analyzing
the it it the effect of the
effectiveness of our program I
drawn to recent studies by
university researchers in the
state of California and Arizona
to show that high school
students enrolled in ethnic
studies courses demonstrate high
attendance rates in comparison
to students not enrolled in
those classes.
In addition the students
experienced higher increases
high higher increases and
increases in GPA credit hours
earned and graduation rates
which ultimately may correlate
to decreases in high school drop
out rates and push out rates and
greater increases in college
matriculation.
Faculty from Stanford University
and the university of
California.
They have for.
Have trace the academic
achievement of over fourteen
hundred students completed
ethnic studies courses at five
schools in northern California.
They found that students who
took culturally relevant courses
experienced increases of student
attendance by twenty one
percentage points cumulative
ninth grade GPA of one increases
of one point four grade points
as well as increases in total
high school credits these
outcomes are also consistent
with the hypothesis that the
growers reduced dropout rates
that the course reduce dropout
rates and that the course is
reduced to drop out rates and
suggested culturally relevant
teaching when implemented in the
support of hi fidelity context
can come find effective support
for at risk students.
University of Arizona and
university of California the
lawsuit researchers found that
Mexican American studies
students were more likely to
pass their state reading tests
and there was a positive
relationship between Mexican
American studies participation
and passing the Arizona mandated
aims math test the majority of
students who took Mexican
American studies courses were
more likely to graduate from
high school the non Mexican
American studies students these
courses suggested these results
suggest that there is a
consistent significant positive
relationship between Mexican
American studies participation
and student academic
performance.
Based on existing research on
ethnic studies New Mexican
American studies we can
emphatically state the ethnic
studies in dual enrollment
programs work to improve
academic success.
Thank you.
Thank you doctor here and if I
could Mr chair just to allow my
house co sponsor to say a few
words.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you
Senator Lopez it's not by
coincidence that I just came
from how's Education Committee
where we entertained and
discussed house bill one forty
eight which is the early
childhood department tribal
agreements and what what is
important about this and why
it's not a coincidence Mr
chairman members of the
committee is because we spoke Mr
chair about.
Cradle to career.
Opportunities afforded to our
children that come to the
schools already culturally and
linguistically enriched not at
risk.
Culturally and linguistically in
rich.
We spoke about how important it
was to keep to acknowledge and
to respect tribal sovereignty
and tribal self determination in
making these agreements with the
early childhood department the
early childhood department we're
here presenting ethnic studies
from K. through twelve which is
the exact same arguments that we
present it in the house and that
is that ethnic studies from
cradle to career Mr chair has
been proven and shown to
increase the retention
persistence and graduation rates
across the board for all of our
children enrolled in these
classes so we had a of of very
good discussion and it was voted
out of committee that particular
bill unanimously and I just say
this Mr chair representative I
mean and of members of the of
the committee because there were
several and a total of
presentations made about how
some of the Representative
Ezzell for example mentioned how
she had grandchildren that were
coming from different parts of
the populations of color that
she has and was helping to raise
and she brought up an incident
about how important it was to
understand the language spoken
in the home and she gave a cute
little anecdote about but
sometimes it's not appropriate
to bring that language to the
school so the school children
picked up what that child was
bringing to from home to school
but in any event the importance
of this is that what doctor to
heal has already gone over is
the abundance of studies that
indicate that it once introduced
to ethnic studies at such an
early age all the way through
school it increases.
Our graduation rates and that's
what we aim to do with this bill
so thank you Mr chair Mr chair
and members of the committee and
senator.
Thank you Mr chair and one more
one more item of information is
there already is a council
statewide that exists that is
currently working on the
implementation of ethnic studies
classes in curricula across the
state there are school districts
that already offer
ethnic studies within their high
school systems and of I know
that.
Dr Vasquez was unable to be with
us today but she happens to
serve on that statewide
committee that already
Conscious state already has
things moving and the bill does
propose to have the council it
would be essentially that same
committee that would that work
with public education department
to as the implementation would
unroll and with that Mr chair
will stand for questions.
those in the room in support of
revenue requirement ethnic
studies.
Those in opposition.
Thank you if you would like to
to speak when I come up to the
microphone please.
Morning chair
going chair members of the
committee for a lot of the
school a graduate student at UNM
in the college of education I'm
a first generation college
student a.
one throughout the K. twelve
system starting with the Spanish
is my first language and this
was my second language I was or
average student throughout my K.
twelve I what I managed to go
higher education where I was
exposed what the studies
programs and classes at the end
of my college career so that was
the time where I really excelled
in I mean it a towards the end
and the dean's list because of
these courses that really
sparked my interest into
academia and seeking a higher
education in grad school so then
I wanted to a master's program
that also focused in the epic
series fields and also now I'm
studying in the college of
education and just seeing the
impact of ethnic studies on the
performance and experiences
students have navigating the
educational system as a positive
one just has a great opportunity
to have that exposure starting
in K. twelve so I really do
support this bill and I hope you
all can do that as well.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
When is the US five million my
name is Nancy Lopez I'm
professor of sociology at the
university of New Mexico for
twenty two years and I'm
actually part of a research
practice partnership with the
researchers who have been
looking at the transformational
impact of ethnic studies for
empowering our youth not only in
terms of improving their
attendance but also increasing
their college attendance and the
evidence is clear just as was
mentioned I strongly support
this bill the research shows
that this these courses are
healing for all of our students
and empowering and isn't that
what we want future oriented
youth that are engaged and
contributing system to society
in a positive way so I urge you
to support this bill and thank
you for the opportunity to
share.
Thank you anyone else in the
room.
Now we've got several in support
online Emily will that.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Emily will
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and we support this
bill and thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward we stand in
support of SB three forty as
part of the response to Yazzie
Martinez with a diverse
population of students it's
critical to engage them by
providing an education that
includes multiple perspectives
and points of view in addition
to the lessons are already being
taught.
We believe this will not only be
more valuable and engaging to
students but that also will
deepen critical thinking skills
and improve educational outcomes
we asked the committee to please
join us in support of SB three
forty thank you.
Thank you Monet.
Our tobacco.
Good morning.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Monique
archer back and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee we
stand in strong support of SB
three forty because not only is
it important for children to see
themselves in the curriculum but
studies have shown that students
who participate ethnic studies
are more academically engaged
develop a stronger self the self
efficacy and personal
empowerment perform better
academically and graduate at
higher rates our students
deserve a curriculum that makes
school relevant to the times
that we are in an environment
that engages them to develop
critical thinking skills today
you all have the ability to vote
for inclusivity in our
curriculum and diverse teaching
methods that will promote a just
society and improve education
outcomes for low income students
and students of color we urge
you to support I close with a
quote from Angela Davis we have
to talk about liberating minds
as well as liberating society
happy black history month and
thank you for your time.
Thank you I reinvest guess.
Senator souls members of the
committee good morning I stand
in support of Senate bill three
forty I am a the chair of
Chicana and Chicano studies at
you and then and we have had
little success recruiting and
retaining students at U. N. M.
through the two got into going
to cities college preparation
program I am also a member of
the TNA in date nation of
Southern New Mexico and I
followed the incredible
innovations that native American
studies and faculty in the
college of education at UNM had
made there is a council there is
a curriculum this is a
wonderfully important step in
the right direction thank you.
Thank you and last Eileen then
we.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee a lot
I'm my name is Eileen then we
and I'm representing the league
of women voters of New Mexico
this morning and we urge you to
pass this bill the the education
position of the league focuses
very much on multi cultural
multi lingual education and in
this case for the K. twelve
students and I was glad to hear
about this approach for lifelong
learning using these approaches
as well and it also obviously
supports the goals of the
Martinez Yazzie court findings
so we urge you to support this
bill three forty.
Thank you Eileen.
Center for we go to questions in
the committee any last comments.
Mr chair now will stand for
questions questions from the
committee.
Senator bill.
Thank you Mr I don't have any
objection to the concept to is
this going to add additional
hours to the curriculum that
kids already have to undertake.
Mr chair Senator as again as I
know that there's another bill
winding its way through this
body not our chamber but the
house that does reduce credits
down from twenty four to twenty
two
and what the the intent of the
bill of course is to make sure
that ethnic studies is one of
the the options available
so as the ways the bill is
written it is mandating for that
one half credit okay in the
social studies there's for our
credits one that's not named I I
called the freebie for lack of
better words at this point and
what this bill as it's drafted
right now would require half.
Twelve that one that sits
unnamed to be required for
ethnic studies.
And again I don't object to it
would it be part of state The
New Mexico history module they
teach that particular area would
you incorporate some of this
into that or how would you how
would we do this as far as
adding not adding excessive
amounts I think we've got a big
look at the list on page two and
three.
Will be up to fifteen fourteen
items I guess.
That we have to include in that.
That doesn't include
What kids might want to take
like welding or automotive and
X. or vocational agriculture in
those kind of things that kids
might want to do for their own
career for F..
The time issue concerns result I
have every time we had we have
these bills every year and they
want to add something
what financial literacy as of
one that's real common it's not
on the list and.
We need to we need to do that
but.
Where do we start how we fit
these in this all and all for
I'm Mr chair Senator this would
be ethnic studies is.
As is woven through the state
house bill one twenty six there
are different age appropriate
integrate appropriate
instruction that will continue.
But what we're trying to get to
do with this is with ethnic
studies it it would be a class
specifically unto itself and
again say for instance in the
Albuquerque public schools they
have one that's on black history
offer kind of studies others
I know there's a potential for
native American studies and
others Chicana Chicano studies
at it's offered at highland
university I mean how many of
you have in high school and I
know in Los crucis schools I
think there's also some ethnic
studies classes being offered I
know Taos has one I mean so
there's there are some existing
courses that are in existence
atrisk heritage academy also has
a class Rio Grande High School
has one Albuquerque high so I
mean there it there's already a
movie and where there's a
specific class on ethnic studies
being offered and that would be
the intent on this these are
grade school through eighth
grade levels of water and well
what this or through what from
what I understand Mr chair
Senator that's going through
house bill one twenty six
there's already a blending of
what even this bill is asking
K. through three this age
appropriate and then as you move
further in older grades again
talking about history of New
Mexico
but this one specifically is
just looking at high school.
this is strictly because of.
Inserted in the section that
says four through eighth grades
yes Mr chair Senator again with
what we have coming through
house bill one twenty six a lot
of this bill is already being
incorporated into that
particular legislation and if we
adopt that legislation them part
of this is already being
addressed the main point that
we're trying to do Mr chair
Senators making sure that high
school has as one of the choices
options a requirement for them
to take an ethnic studies
course.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Kernan thank you very
much and have just thank you of
course about the house bill
coming over that is that pretty
significant revamp of high
school graduation I think it's
really important for us to to
hear that bill and kind of see
where everything falls into
place you know it conflicts a
little bit with that bill
because it does take away
opportunity that have a credit
is now mandate for this and
I think I heard you say Mr chair
and senator that there are some
districts that are already doing
this is that correct Mr chair
Senator yes so so I think it's
the little bit for me about
local control and letting those
districts make a determination I
know if the new graduation
requirements going to place it
reduces the number of credits
down to twenty two which takes
well little bit of flexibility
there districts can choose to to
state twenty four I think in my
district it's twenty six now
required credits so if they
wanted to add that they could I
have a bill that says also doing
what you're trying to do which
is on financial literacy and I
don't expect that to you know be
good conversation but again it's
taking way the choice of
districts to to do what they
want to do you could certainly
as a district you could require
that you don't need state
authority to do it and and I
like that I like for districts
to to do those things said that
make their communities needs and
and what's important to them so
at this point I think it's
really
kind of a conflict with what's
coming over from the house they
spend a lot of time on and I'll
have to decide I think that's
the best way to do it that but I
do think it'll be a good
conversation I I know that we
spent a couple years on social
studies
standards and all of those
changes beginning in
kindergarten all the way up and
and I know that anything certain
vetted.
In that that is and I've read
them and I've gone through those
and great great great and I know
that did that we did that we
increase critical thinking
skills that's also embedded in
that which is part of what I
think you're trying to do which
is a very good thing that I
think at this time it's just
premature we've got to see what
is coming over from the house
with that care for several other
bills that are in conflict like
and maybe the one I'm hearing so
I'm hesitant to pass anything on
at this point until we hear from
from the house and what their
what their bills are so again I
like local control I like them
if they want to mandated they
certainly can do it districts
are you doing what you're saying
if that's what that so that's
all I have thank you.
The comments.
M. S. thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Lopez
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Share some of the similar
sentiments of.
Senator Kernan that this is
But yes the dialogue to have
because I think ultimately this
is key this is key to.
To truly creating healthy and
educated and successful.
You know people you know and so
you look at page thirteen New
Mexico history has always been a
priority
and is it and and was a mandated
class and now it's kind of
frozen and you would think that
social studies New Mexico
history in U. S. history.
Would cover what we know is
important in terms of ethnic
studies or hard human experience
kind of Chicano studies the
And so I think it's a.
Definitely a priority and
hopefully each district will
adopted from time to time but
you're right there's this the
nurse are coming over from the
house and the Senate from the
house but as a result of that
Ellie a cease work
but when that does come over you
know you want to.
Change and shells to maize and
maize to shells
but I just want upside the point
this is and this is important
for our students and to deal
with the the plan is concerned
in the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senate.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill Senator
Lopez the
The.
We we had an incredibly long
health meeting on Friday
evening.
and
That going the details it really
had to do with
understanding sexual
orientation.
And
Not going to get into that per
se.
But one of the things that
struck me as we listen to that
bill was how old the committee
was.
And how new in different the
understanding and the experience
of sexual orientation is today
with younger people.
and it was a great dialogue and
the part of me came away from it
is that
And I know this is the fiber in
Florida I'd be defender straight
to doing this next statement
that you know having a
broadening of what sexual
orientation means experiences of
the younger age and so I I just
bring that up this is saying we
have so much work to do and I
believe this bill brings that
that ethnic understanding is so
critical and is what sets us
apart is what makes a Florida
Florida or and and so I'm very
supportive of of how you want to
bring this forward up awareness
and understanding and getting
others people choose is so
critical to us being able to
solve our problems in the world
and so
I I absolutely conceptually
stand with this I'm a little
concerned how we jam it down
with all the other things and I
haven't quite figured that that
out yet
so my question is this other
bills going through is is this
bill going to be heard in
another committee before it gets
a little fighters again the
somehow get a little more
integration of that the other
bill this.
I'm Mr chair Senator of the bill
is is if it was to get out of
this committee would be heading
over to your committee over its
back for hearing
but if I may also Mr chair
Senator you know there's
Have I guess we are all waiting
for house bill one twenty six as
it meanders and comes over to
this chamber I do have an
amendment that could maybe help
with the bill but again not
knowing what's coming over at
this point I know it is kind of
kind of in limbo at this point
to see what prefer great what it
what for seeds what happens what
will go so.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr
Chairman just one last commented
like to refer to my fellow
senator on my left not from
Florida
and it in that that looking at
the maze and shells might might
help some of this but it's
definitely in the right
direction and again I come away
from this point that I'm I'm
looking at the the age of most
of us up here and we are aware
of the sixties seventies maybe
if you get to claim eighties
but it's it's a very different
time and in the same way we we
need to we need to broaden our
thinking and understanding of
other individuals so I thank you
for bringing this.
No no comments okay.
I've got several comments on
page two.
Well.
Beginning with the twenty five
twenty six years to the great
shall have the right appropriate
instruction efforts that
history.
How are we going to trend all of
our teachers by that time.
This is a shell they have to do
it.
Mr Chairman.
The.
This is working in context also
with our colleges of education
right and how the training is
happening with our teachers it's
part of our discussion that we
have been having over the last
several years with our college
dean's making sure as to how
this is implemented and how are
teachers you know it all goes
back to training in the
education and I know there's
also movement within our
colleges of education as to how
they to are I think embracing
the the not the issue but the
embarrassment of ethnic studies
and how we approach in teaching
our students so it's not just
with regards to history but it's
regards to language development
is looking as to how you
approach for math and all the
other subjects that teachers are
entrusted to teach
what.
With that the council itself has
been going through Mr chair is
actually working with the what I
say is more like a mentorship
working with teachers I know
that with one teacher and one of
my high schools in Albuquerque
she's working with some of the
professors at UNM and there's a
dialogue it's on going on with
the history she's that New
Mexico history teacher but she's
been working
in in conjunction with others at
the UNM add kind of how the
state helping a little bit more
as to how the development of her
ethnic studies classes moving
forward.
Of there is curricula that is
has already been developed over
in the state of California I
mean that there's lists so it's
not going back to the new to the
drawing board and I think it's
an opportunity Mr chair for we
can use the system that's in
existence project echo for right
now is also offering
professional development in
other ways of working with
teachers across the state of New
Mexico so you don't have to
drive and go for personally they
offer classes and courses
working with mentors and we've
had some discussion and
presentations on that Mr chair
which I think as much value with
regards to training our
teachers.
Yeah and I understand working
with the new teachers coming out
of colleges of education but
most of the teachers are gonna
be required to do this two years
now are already in place you
know that's pretty healthy
professional development for all
in this area and it says schools
are failing to meet these
minimum requirement shall not be
accredited by the department.
That's pretty strong language
that if there is a school or a
teacher not doing this that's.
Apartments that they're required
to all be trained to do this.
By that deadline
along the same lines how much do
they have to do.
A day.
All year every day is not
defined within here as to what
how much do they have to do this
requirement.
Do not jeopardize the district
lately Committee will not be
twelve.
Mr chair this is an ethnic
studies class so it's not just a
hit and miss for teachers who
are coming and these are
teachers who are dedicated to
learning about the area of study
so if they're going to be
teaching New Mexico history
based on his you know Chicana
Chicano studies we're talking
about is critical or very.
for third grade Mr chair.
This is curriculum that is
required by.
yes Mr chair and I believe this
is somewhat in conjunction with
what is currently in house bill
one twenty six were you looking
at just teachers who are able to
teach age appropriate New Mexico
history
and for instance if you are
you know in a particular
community let's say what this is
my vision on on this is talking
about black them then there'd be
persons who have to learn a
little bit more about that
information which means teachers
will have to go and learn
educate themselves a little bit
more than what their
understanding currently is we
have some new books on that have
been adopted through public
education department recently I
think that can add value for
some of their conversations
for a and again it is age
appropriate Mr chair members of
the committee that we're looking
for and I know house bill one
twenty six and I to have read
through that already has it in
the mix so if I could say also
Mr chair some of this bill may
not be needed as that other bill
comes over to this chamber where
we could maybe
And then parts of this bill to
match what's over in house bill
one twenty six.
One twenty six I do feel that
high school graduation
requirements not with content
for kindergarten through third
grade which is part of us all
right now I'm yes Mr chair that
went as grad does that but as
you look through all of the
other standards and such that I
read through there is our it
that's already in the mix.
It is already in the mix with
what is being
required for teaching for
students K. through three as
well as four through eight.
This material online problem
page two.
Yes Mr chair.
That is already in the mix is.
Mr chair what I say I guess what
I am trying to speak to say is
that this bill is proposing for
us to have ethnic studies as
part of the curriculum K.
through twelve.
What we are trying to mandate
here then most importantly is to
making sure that high school
students.
will have a choice.
To be able to take ethnic
studies as one of the
requirements for graduation.
What the bill is proposing at
this point maybe not necessary
at this time also because it's
already what I have seen it
through the information has been
shared with me through at the
alley FC much of this
information that's listed on the
bill is already incorporated in
the standards that are being
proposed.
Is there a I fully understand
that four one twenty six which
is high school graduation
requirements this particular
case is specific to in regard to
the third grade and is.
That is evident in your.
Currently a requirement for in
the third grade.
Mr what was the the anything
with down the dollar yes and I
may have may not being explain
myself correctly Mr chair but
the highest one twenty six is
for high school but again what I
have seen through some other
paperwork to the LFC has shown
how there is already been
integrated many of these points
that are in this first half of
the bill that's in front of your
committee for discussion.
Okay but we have to do with
what's in front of us this
requires it I have.
And also then.
With that in the this is over
here I I found it interesting
that it also requires the grades
that language other than English
we thought I know that's not
happening in most of our many of
our elementary schools.
but but it's a requirement and
the idea of the act who
determines the school level how
much how long recovery this
committee tried to.
That in that
If we're really talking about
just high school graduation
requirements and I can shift
over to that area.
You just call that the study
should be a choice for students
yeah this bill makes it a
requirement for students not a
choice.
It would require ethnic studies
do we have enough teachers
prepared to teach that at every
single high school in the state.
Mr chair Senator the that the
comment that I made with regards
to
Offering it for high school
students as a choice is a
potential amendment at some
point that maybe could be
entertained by your committee as
we move forward in talking about
high school graduation
requirements which is where I
was saying it could be one of
the choices that school
districts could make those are
looking with regards to those
what I call that the cafeteria
choice that they could make so
that could be and that's why I
was suggesting that maybe an
amendment could be made at that
point in time with regards to
language Mr chair the the bill
itself as it is requiring us yes
that language be important
within our school districts
there are some schools who do
offer a dual language immersion
program such as a school
district that I'm part of there
are schools that are dedicated
to that as you know we went to
go visit him as Pueblo where
they are trying to maintain
their language so that is an
immersion program
I believe that Mr chair as part
of culture ethnic studies
taking care of who we are here
in New Mexico that of Spanish is
one of our language is here in
the state also we're not an
English only state and for us to
make sure that their Spanish
offered and required they could
be a magnet school it could be
is some venue that school
districts could so choose so
that students do have an
opportunity to learn one of the
home languages here in New
Mexico.
Senator please understand I
don't disagree with rules of all
of that but what matters is
what's actually.
I'm sorry I've been having this
whole conversation with without
that my voice probably carries
fine without it but
But you you within the same
sensor talking about options and
requirements.
Lots of this requires those are
not choices for high school
students to just operate as an
option this requires.
That to be one of them is that
we were talking about a required
elective that still requirement.
Of the many of the pieces in
this are in direct conflict with
one twenty six which is the L.
E. S. C. endorsed bill on high
school graduation requirements.
And Mister chair if I may say
this bill is no different than
what has passed both chambers at
least the Senate as well as
health education and onto the
floor of the house of this bill
is no different than what we
have discussed before so I don't
have anything you that part of
our conversation that has been
held the past several years but
I know Mr chair as we're moving
forward with the again that that
hello the graduation
requirements changes in house
bill one twenty six and the
changes that have been made with
regards to the I think social
studies adoption and other
changes within that Penn has
made public education department
recently I believe there are
some things that are met that
have been met but on the other
hand there are still some of
points on this bill that I think
are very important for our state
to move forward with.
The I guess I'm not seeing where
those those extra points are on
the the temporary provisions for
the ethnic studies council
creation is that new is that
still there or is this different
than what's already in place is
it is just a continuation of
their workers is setting up a
new the council Mr chair the
council is currently in
existence
and I know better a previous of
course not this particular
session we did have members from
the council who were present to
share their work from across the
state of New Mexico they are
standing ready and willing to
work with school districts and
others just because there's
already you don't have to go
back to the drawing board to
create anything with regards to
ethnic studies these are
professionals at New Mexico
state northern New Mexico
University University of New
Mexico and other places that so
what this would do is to allow
the council to exist up until I
think the end of twenty twenty
five again as a offering
assistance as this
implementation begins within the
public school system so Senator
on the council it says
legislator point by the speaker
by the minority floor leader
have those been appointed.
Mr chair this is not been
officially appointed at this
point so the council that I'm
mentioning to you is kind of
what I call in my terms Mr chair
an ad hoc committee a task force
that is currently been meeting
for several years already so the
suggestion for these persons
various different but I think
many of the same persons could
be appointed to serve on it.
So we're talking about putting a
new council and that has and I
didn't total how many and some
of probably can build multiple
checkbox.
To be in there what is the
estimated cost for the meetings
of this where does that cost
come from there's no
appropriation on this bill and
there certainly is a cost with
having twenty twenty five people
that it appears this might have
meeting multiple times is a year
of paying per diem.
The estimate on what that cost
is on and that's that funded
through junior money from either
of you or how is that supposed
to be funded.
I'm Mr chair at this point there
there is no cost associated
causes you can see here it does
not
The there's there's nothing
specifically with regards to you
for the public education
department to you know for for
per diem and such again this is
just a temporary council and
again many of the members of how
should I say with the as as some
of us to participate of the
goodness of our hearts and
commitment and is our it does
mention to Mr chair
on page seventeen a line for it
does say that the council's
created but of course we would
ask the L. E. S. C. E. head and
higher at to back eyes our state
be there back up to helping them
as a your convene and again to
put forward some of the support
of information that's needed for
the curricula development.
The Senators we talk about
curriculum development the
social studies standards we're
just adopted.
How much of ethnic studies are
adopted into the the social
studies curriculum how much
overlap is there with what
your proposing compared to what
those current.
Stand newly the adopted
standards cover.
Mr chair again in just a quick
review that I have there seems
to be some overlap with reguards
K. through eight it's in the
high school area that this
council specifically will be
looking at when we talk about
ethnic studies classes.
But anyway.
Says for curricula for the
public schools done state high
school.
With secondary I don't think it
says that anywhere.
None the page nineteen do public
members of the ethnic studies
council shall be reimbursed for
per diem and mileage provided
the per diem mileage.
So that doesn't current cost.
Mr chair
Members of the committee yes and
that does happen in legislation
that we pass many times over so
for the department which budget
does that come out of Mr chair
this would most likely
Could come out of the Public
Education Department.
I'm sorry.
We are the higher education
department to.
To be determined I guess Mr
chair.
Yeah well I have a concern when
we're putting things on their
budget that they didn't yeah I
don't know the public at
greater.
You have the folks the FTEs in
the capacity to to convene this.
Both that person and and more
many what I know I put you on
the spot for it to make broad
generalizations if.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
It is difficult to say if the
public education department
would be able to
Manage the the the commission as
required by the by this bill.
That.
I guess you might make in
service are this as a whole lot
of shells and requires and
things like that without a whole
lot of who's responsible for
that what happens if they don't
and major conflicts with house
bill one twenty six which over
the last two years is been
discussed in L. E. S. C. and
adopted I think unanimous vote
by the L. E. S. C. as in
endorsed bill and there are
certainly direct conflicts with
one twenty six as it's moving
through so.
In my questions other questions
from anyone.
The committee.
Mr Chairman would pass.
Their second.
My second Senator Pinto thank
you bye Center Pinto if you'll
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt so Senator Hickey
****.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes.
Yes moved to explain.
Center Lovell no.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator souls nope.
So it's eight four four four.
Senator no alternative motion
anyone.
Yes of I'm sorry thank you Mr
chairman essentials but just
that I I just want the
Conversation to continue in
anticipation of house bill one
twenty six house bill one twenty
six is not law so to say this
deviates from house to one house
bill one twenty six okay it
disagrees with another bill but
it doesn't group it doesn't
contradict you know.
Generations of of law thank.
Okay we do have a tabling motion
if you'll call the roll on the
tabling motion Senator Brandt
says Senator Hickey.
No.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator my Estes.
The table yes.
Center Lovell yes Senator Pinto.
You.
Senator pope no.
Senator souls yes Kate this bill
has been tabled so it was tabled
on a five three Senator Kernan
to explain to anyone else and I
have a short thank you Mr
chairman I think this needs to
stay here until we get the house
bill because of the conflicts as
well as bills that may make it
over here that I'm sponsoring up
to move it on to another
committee outside of the
Education Committee this is
where these decisions to be made
and so we need to keep it here
get the other bill over see if
there's a way to amend in some
of this of I'm still concerned
about choice but let's keep it
here until we hear from the
other at the bill thank you in
and the many ways that's kind of
money to I'm not opposed at all
to ethnic studies and like to
see it embedded in things but
it's in direct conflict with
lots of the work the LFC is done
over the last two years on that
other bill so that comes over so
at this point the bill is
tabled.
Thank you Mr chairman elective
forward to for the dialogo thank
you
we have reached our staffing
point
If I committee if you choose we
will go on to do hurdles bill on
health C. P. R. A. and training.
In he has his the experts that
have been waiting all morning
that's okay with with people
here I'm going to go on some I
just want to make sure that
that's always a choice we make
strides Committee not me.
Try to push bills for one.
Their parole and we are on a
short time clock you're not one
to be very windy about things
but.
Thank you Mr job my top ten
today so that's that's the other
bill.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee will be
brief this is pretty
straightforward this puts into
the statute a requirement that
all licensed coaches or to have
current CPR certificate along
with the training to use the
EDD's the the Pavel devices that
but that are located they're
becoming more common let's put
that that way Mr chair members
of the committee it just puts
that requirement I think nine
out of ten people that have
cardiac arrest don't make it
outside of a hospital and those
that receive adequate CPR or
these devices increase their
chances of rival by three to
four times which I think would
be a good thing thank you Mr
chair okay and this is also an
appropriation bill and Mr it is
yes it is not an unfunded
mandate this does have funding
to go with it and and some of
that is the appropriation bills
we typically of.
Had very short discussion on and
then Senator with the No rectus
to finance so that it's not a
disparaging your bill that you
get in a wreck.
Director Abbey.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Erin
stem I'm president of the New
Mexico thirteeners Association
I'm athletic trainer in
Farmington just couple things I
want to add.
We are I think one of seventeen
states that don't already
require this more coaches.
also are bordering states Texas
Arizona Utah Colorado already
do.
Right now it's only required of
a level three coach I'm
fortunate to be a high school
where we have two athletic
trainers still.
Pods are first on the scene
would be a coach so that's still
the reason why this is important
that those in support just a
show of hands.
Anyone in opposition.
Since there's no one in
opposition is alright we don't
take public testimony I suspect.
Things are good with this.
An online requests from the
committee center Hickey to do
that Senator but I do have one
question if we could ask Miss
required of all coaches
volunteer coaches whatever level
of coaching or just those who
have a coaching license with the
state that are not necessarily a
volunteer helping.
yes it would be required of all
coaches that.
We have a motion for a do pass
no Representative.
Without quickly Mr chairman of
that record Pirtle do we want to
Do you want to strike section to
that way it doesn't need to go
to finance if you want to just
discuss that with the chairs and
maybe take out the committee
before in in Mr chairman and
senator I think it's fine to go
to finance I'm okay with that I
don't think this is gonna be so
this will be held up so I'm OK
with that.
That.
So vote on a no Representative
the finance without
recommendation to finance
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator Maestas yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes.
Members of the committee to pass
on the finance.
I mean without recommendation on
to finance
The we're gonna roll for sixty
five over to our Wednesday
agenda we do have a number of
bills that have started coming
over so we'll keep starting at
eight thirty that keep in place
so hi.
Thank you everyone who
participated today.
