Senator we are up in webcasting
now.
Very good good morning everyone
welcome the Senate educational
today Friday March.
I will call us up into into the
meeting we have three bills
today on the agenda Senate bill
four oh one is still not ready
and so I will check with Senator
Padilla you want to do to
rebuild that are just you always
get over but we will not be
doing Senate bill for a one for
technical education also house
bill one twenty eight the school
personnel background and
training and representative
Sarinana has requested that that
be held over till Monday so we
will hold that we do have house
bill one forty one it
infrastructure technology
definitions house bill one forty
two school pathways on sexual
misconduct and Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two public school
ventilation improvements at and
with that if any questions
announcements right from
committee members where we get
started.
If not representative Sarinana
welcomed the Senate education I
have here with us.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
representative Debbie Cerny on
and I'm here to present house
bill one forty one and I have an
expert witness Thibodeau million
state.
Thank you right thank you Mr
chairman the purpose of house
bill one forty one is to mend
the definition of education
technology infrastructure using
the public school capital alley
Act to me the physical hardware
and Services used interconnects
students teachers school
districts school buildings
necessary to support broadband
connectivity and remote learning
as determined by the council.
The proposed amendment broadens
the definition to include
services like wifi hotspots in
prepaid service subscriptions
the service plans in addition to
physical hardware it extends the
recipients of the education
technology infrastructure to
students and teachers in
addition to school districts and
school buildings when necessary
to support broadband
connectivity and remote learning
as determined by the public
school capital outlay council
and bond counsel so no issue
with the proposed amended
language then the amendment uses
part of the ten million dollars
from the public school capital
outlay fund deficiency
corrective program initiative to
temporarily cover the cost of
infrastructure and services for
remote learning.
The issue we ran into with the
pandemic was that this funding
could not be used for personal
connectivity's devices like wifi
hot spots or things of that
nature that can help students
during the pandemic because of
the statutory limitations around
the program.
This legislation would clear up
the statutory limitations and
make the the ten million dollars
eligible for personal
connectivity devices for for
teachers and students who do not
have access and the bill
addresses the difficulty
students experienced in remote
learning when they they lacked
the computer quality internet
access at home and like many of
you I'm a teacher so I've seen
some as kids who could didn't
have internet access or had such
horrible internet access the
that they couldn't come into the
classroom or if they did it was
garbled is slower or constantly
not are in able to actually feel
that on the fourth floor in my
office so I I feel their pain
and it's been estimated that
roughly twenty thousand New
Mexico students still live in a
household without a computer in
over sixty six thousand school
age students in New Mexico live
in a household without internet
subscription so the need for
connectivity all over New Mexico
is still here and this bill will
alleviate levy a problem and
we've learned that remote
learning is here to stay this
tool this capacity for students
interact with other students and
teachers to do research and
homework will remain with us
this is simply taking down a
barrier that has been in the way
of adequately funding our
connecting students and teachers
with that Mr chairman I stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative any
experts that you have are you
ready to go out the public
comment I'm I'm I have it though
but he's usually he just really
wants to be here for answering
questions okay thank you add to
cart you'll take us out for
public comment please on house
bill one forty one.
House bill one forty one we did
not have any members of the
public sign up in advance to
speak in opposition is there any
members of the public core here
with us now who wish to speak in
opposition to house bill one
forty one you mean raise your
hand.
Okay hands raised we will now go
to those who register to speak
in favor of the bill with Millie
Irvin Vitela.
Does not appear to be in the
meeting so we will move on to
Cameron Graham.
You are muted.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Cameron
Graham on the volunteer advocate
with a a RP New Mexico and it's
hundred forty eight thousand
members.
A. R. P. stands in support of
passed house bill one forty one.
A. R. P. yield views high speed
internet to be in a central
telecommunications service and
supporting nationwide efforts to
make reliable and affordable
high speed internet universally
available right wise A. R. P.
New Mexico is in support of a
number of bills currently
pending in the session to help
make the availability of high
speed internet available.
The importance of high speed
internet to our schools and
children has been demonstrated
during the COVID crisis.
Many A. R. P. members are
grandparents raising their
grandchildren and need a high
speed internet for themselves
and their grandchildren this
bill and hence is not
availability we thank the
sponsors for bringing forth this
legislation.
Thank you very much next up we
have lily may Ortiz.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee really more
decide Representative in New
Mexico school board association
as their provided by zoom Mr
chairman members of the
committee New Mexico school
board association's has
continually supported funding
for systems and broadband and
school safety programs
administered by the Public
School capital outlay Council
New Mexico school board
association's full membership
passed a resolution this last
December at our virtual
conference to expand on eligible
activities covered by the public
school capital outlay council to
include equipment to get schools
online the definition addition
of this bill to include physical
hardware and services for remote
learning is extremely critical
Mr chairman within the current
pandemic environment the
legislation opens up eligible
activities to provide more
comprehensive services to our
school districts and this will
allow but school capital outlay
council to make much needed
awards to school districts for
physical hardware and
educational resources New Mexico
scored Association supports this
addition of this bill we think
the sponsor for bringing it
forward and we think this
committee Mr chairman for
allowing us to voice our
position.
Thank you very much does anybody
else in the meeting wish to
speak in support of house bill
one forty one at this time you
may raise your hand.
Steve CNS.
Thank you can you hear me.
Okay good morning Mister chair
and members of the committee
Steve she argues and New Mexico
government relations director on
behalf of our members we support
H. B. one forty one and thank
the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward.
We all know the pandemic has
highlighted the inequity and
lack of quality internet access
especially for our students
groups named in the Yazzie
Martinez and also as per recent
survey our state found that
twenty two percent of the
state's public school students
lack internet access at home.
And up to sixty percent of the
students in the state's most
rural areas in addition thirty
two percent of the state
students did not have access to
their own devices such as a
computer or phone.
So this bill is a step in the
right direction and putting a
dent in that inequity and we ask
this committee voted in favor of
H. B. one forty one thank you
very much.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
wish to speak in support house
bill one forty one please raise
your hand.
I think.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee stand around for
the school superintendents and
educational leaders in New
Mexico we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward you've heard the
error rations as to why this is
a right policy moves we urge the
committee to vote in favor and
we thank you Mr chairman for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you and representative
madam I would like to go back to
the sponsor after public comment
if you have any other comments
will go to the question.
You're on you but I think I
heard you say know what you're
good we're ready to go to the
committee.
Yes what a liberating that of
let me pull up my list here
Senator Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you Representative for
bringing of the legislation is
fully supportive I think this is
exactly what needs to be done I
really wish we done this awhile
ago I think this is going to
help facilitate
You know we don't know what the
future's going to hold with
regard to other reasons that we
might have to have remote
learning and and all the other
things that are happening this
interconnects
funding and I think it's going
to lend itself to the
interconnection of funding to
maximize dollars that that you
know we are so fine I you know
in our state budget I'm glad to
see all the different at each of
your organization's excuse me
that are fully supported as well
because this is going to rest
with a lot of them as well so I
think that's very good
and then in terms of definitions
you know I'm constantly doing
work in the broadband area and I
come to find out that you know
back in two thousand seventeen
Mr chairman we have re written
our telecommunication license
before the internet came along
and that really put us woefully
behind with regard to our
tractive this on investment and
things of that nature so I think
this also is going to help with
you know being able to bring
matching dollars since the
states I think you know
Representative starting on your
right on tap right on on mark
with this one I just wanna let
my support thank you.
Great job.
Thank you senator I'm looking to
see if there are any other hands
many other committee members.
I'm not seeing any of those any
final comments Representative
when we go to a vote estimate is
pleasure
Mr chairman thank you for
letting me present the bill I
don't think I've been a fan of
your committee so this was a
little bit exciting thank you.
Glad to have you here what's
pleasure the committee please I
will move to do past Mr chairman
question for the past Senator
Padilla.
Second I think that was Center
pope I heard first on that
million if you call the roll
please.
Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes.
Kernan.
Senator Neville yes.
Yes.
Anto yes Senator pope.
Yes.
Seoul yes Representative you
but you passed out of Senate
education thank you Mr chairman
committee thank you thank you
for being here and what the
public we just have to do pass
on house bill one forty one
Senate bill for one is not going
to be heard today are Senate or
house bill one twenty eight is
that rolled over till Monday
next up is house bill one forty
two school task force on sexual
misconduct with representative
Thompson and then Committee sub
for House Bill to thirty two
public school ventilation with
Representative Stapleton our
Representative Thomson welcomed
to Senate education.
Mr chair how are you we're doing
fine thank you good.
We think there one forty two
what does it okay so one forty
two and has several several
areas it's relating to education
obviously it creates the task
force on sexual misconduct it
requires public schools and
public and private post
institutions to adopt policies
the procedures and and the big
part of this bill Mr chair is to
have affirmative consent be the
standard for sexual any type of
sexual contact and what what
affirmative consent means is
that only yes means yes not
saying no will doesn't mean yes
not being a week doesn't mean
yes not having had sexual
relations before doesn't mean
yes
it requires the the post
secondary educational institutes
to institution to conduct bi
annual sexual misconduct climate
service there are surveys and in
the man's the public school code
to include a requirement to set
affirmative consent as the
standard for sexual activity and
Mister chair I do have a couple
of experts if you wouldn't mind
giving them a couple of minutes.
Representative that would be
fine if they take just a couple
of moments please okay it's
Alexandria Taylor.
They were.
All.
Go ahead please all right good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee my needs Alexandria
Taylor and I'm the deputy
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs in and sees that leads
the state's efforts to reduce
sexual abuse and sexual violence
by providing training and
technical assistance to service
providers law enforcement
officers prosecutors medical
practitioners and mental health
professionals NMC sap also
collects and analyzes sexual
assault and domestic violence
data and produces annual reports
of the fighting according to our
New Mexico interpersonal
violence data report in twenty
nineteen there were three
thousand eight hundred and
seventy five sex crimes reported
by participating law enforcement
agencies and R. thirteen rape
crisis centers and mental health
centers serve two thousand one
hundred and for victims of
sexual violence house bill one
forty two creates a task force
on sexual misconduct requires
public schools and all
postsecondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and the
prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence harassment and stalking
and requires these institutions
to conduct a biennial sexual
misconduct climate survey it
amends the public school code to
include a requirement to set
affirmative consent as the
second standard for sexual
activity and I'll just say
according to the Houston
resiliency survey from high
school age young people grades
nine through twelve thirty eight
point six percent report having
had sexual intercourse and nine
point nine percent report having
been sexually assaulted in the
last twelve months all students
no matter what their gender
identity benefit from a clear
understanding affirmative
consent in sexual activity thank
you.
Thank you and Mister chair we
also have item to Echols.
Andrew if you would please.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Andrew
Ackles and the junior at New
Mexico State University New
Mexico state director of the New
Mexico every voice coalition a
student survivor led and
operated nonprofit as well as a
community organizer for a
quality New Mexico in LGBTQ
civil rights organization.
In the fall of two thousand and
eighteen I had an encounter and
a first year residence hall at
NMSU violated both my civil
rights and put me in an
incredibly unsafe situation and
the interest of time all of with
the details but I can say that
this is one of the worst days of
my life I was encouraged to seek
help and justice I had no idea
where to start I knew there had
to be someone in some office
somewhere that could help me a
community member suggested that
I speak with the director of
LGBT programs and in this you
she was horrified and
immediately referred me to the
office of institutional equity I
opened a case we met to review
evidence and talked about
finding witnesses next steps
this is in the fall of two
thousand and nineteen I have not
heard from them since.
The feeling of isolation after
my case have been dropped
without my knowledge was
devastating I know that without
a doubt I'm not the only person
faced three traumatize ation of
the case being mishandled
students survivors and most
importantly survivors with
intersecting identities need
more support from the
institutions they give
everything to we need accurate
comprehensive data about what is
happening on our campuses we
know that almost ninety percent
of survivors choose not to
report and this creates a
massive gap in numbers of
reports every year compared to
the actual number of assaults we
deserve to know what is
happening on our campus and for
many students are home.
We need access to medical legal
and mental health services after
insult most college students
struggle with money the cost of
tuition rent utilities insurance
gas school supplies and food
make services like these
something we can only dream
about.
We need amnesty for school
policy violations at the time of
the missile it's inappropriate
to ever going the survivor for
substance use or any other
school policy violation when
drugs and alcohol are so often
mechanisms of the perpetrator.
This all starts at teaching
consent we need to know exactly
how to give consent as a
conscious voluntary agreement
that is reversible at any time
how can we expect young people
to be able to properly give and
ask for consent if we never
learn how to.
The bottom line is that we
students survivors queer and
trans young people are counting
on H. B. one forty two we refuse
to let the generations of
students after us to ever feel
the same isolation that we felt
and we seek to address this at
the start by teaching young
people how to consent thank you
for allowing me to speak to.
Thank you Representative back to
you.
Thank you Mr chair so just just
a couple of things we have a
huge coalition working on this
with probably have eighteen
different groups
and and we did have this bill in
twenty nineteen and it did pass
out of this committee so with
that Mr chair we will stand for
questions.
Thank you we go out to public
comment Tokara if you'll take us
through that process please we
do limit people to a maximum of
two minutes per person please
try not to read exactly what
other states that the card if
you would please.
Absolutely so far house bill one
forty two we did not have any
members of the public register
in advance to speak in
opposition if there are any
members of the public here today
who wish to speak in opposition
to house bill one forty two you
may raise your hand now.
We will now move on to those who
register to speak in favor of
the bill beginning with Wendy
Pascoe.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Wendy Basco
the staff attorney for the
southwest women's Law Center
we at the southwest women's Law
Center stand in very strong
support of H. B. one forty two
it is a common sense measure for
the times that we live in and we
urge the committee to vote yes
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Janet Williams.
Next up we have a we rush forth.
Thank you in at least that I am
not a compare Amancio and the
staff attorney at the ACLU of
New Mexico and we stand in
support of H. B. one forty two
we support evidence based sex
education for young people in a
way that fosters good
communication and respect we
also support adopting the
minimum requirements in the bill
for how institutions of higher
education should handle reports
of sexual misconduct thank you.
You very much next step we have
Juliana Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
hearing us today yes means yes a
yes vote on this bill allows us
to move this test build along
and get a test on the floor and
the test from the governor thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much next up we
have all we are asking.
Ramirez.
Okay next up we have careened
Sanchez.
Both chair and members of the
committee Sierra will be asking
the I am doctor Corinne Sanchez
and it is with respect that I
represent telling United and our
voice as an organization that
works to end violence against
indigenous women and girls and
our earth mother one in three
native women will be raped in
her time this is what this
reality that tell me knighted is
grateful for your support of
house bill one forty two this
bill provides students with
invaluable skills for life as a
healthy adult by empowering
students to communicate.
Of and respect the decisions.
Someone makes about consent this
is about us which is respected
our language and body
sovereignty.
We believe that all students no
matter their gender identity
benefit from a clear
understanding of the consent in
all relationships including
sexual activity affirmative
consent education for all
students is a small step that we
can make towards giving everyone
a common understanding of
consent couldn't that and thank
you for supporting house bill
one forty two and we appreciate
all that you do for our state.
Thank you very much next up we
have Serra mater.
Marshall Martinez.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Jim Marshall
Martinez and the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
As you heard from Andrew queer
and trans people are much more
likely to experience sexual
harassment and assault because
of our sexual orientation and
gender identities.
This bill will provide one more
opportunity for us to mitigate
these hazards by teaching us by
providing us with resources when
we are in schools including
colleges and by helping us to
live in a world where the larger
society around us understands
how to discuss and how to
navigate consent for that reason
quality New Mexico asks your
support for house bill one forty
two thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Kate Oster hopes.
Hi everyone chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
hearing today monies chaos rules
I am a student leader I with
every voice coalition New Mexico
a student led grassroots
organizing group and we are very
much in pro of H. B. one forty
two for variety reasons one
because all students of all ages
need to eight you know have
ownership over their own bodies
and know how to advocate for
themselves in addition to that
this bill provides a ton of
incredibly important resources
for college students
specifically the amnesty
policies as well as our
memorandums of understanding for
Austin.
Can have access to the resources
that they need to provide
supports health thank you very
much.
Thank you very much next up we
have Charlotte mind when you.
Next step we have bred Gerrity.
Good morning Terry Sullivan
Committee members I mean it's
pretty Gary I'm a student
internet do not approve us at
UNM and today I speak in support
of helpful one for you to on
behalf of ACLU a young college
student I understand the
importance of adulthood to this
because I've seen the negative
consequences of not having
training.
Consent social safety and sexual
abuse we have the statistics
about young people who have been
abused but with equal comparing
in the number of young people
who don't now they have
experienced sexual assault
harassment or abuse.
Many students who have not been
taught to look out for coercion
or manipulation know how to set
boundaries which we to self
blaming are twenty where that
situation is still not only can
educate young people on how and
when not to cross boundaries but
more importantly it is young
people the control they have
over their own bodies the power
they have to say no or say yes
and the self worth they have
which is the act.
Environment does not happen
overnight the steps that will
the young people favor and
programs such as these can
change someone's life overnight
with this bill we have the
opportunity to make a safe
campus environment where all are
given the right to safety and
resources and we have the
opportunity to give students a
personal authority and power to
make educated decisions thank
you for your time and your work
in this committee.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill one forty two please
raise your hand.
Cat Sanchez.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is Cat
Sanchez with gold futures as an
advocacy organization for women
and people of color in New
Mexico one aspect of our work is
access to resources for you to
be able to have the information
they need to grow and become
healthy and strong adults I'm
also a parent like many of you
H. B. one forty two is at the
intersection my personal life
and my advocacy my partner and I
have had incredibly productive
conversations with all of our
kids about life skills and
relationships including consent.
Based on feedback from our kids
who either previously attended
or currently attending public
schools in Los crucis a lens
with consent and consent
inclusive of LGBTQ relationships
is severely lacking as an
advocate and a mom this is
alarming our kids have friends
who live within the queer
spectrum and note their
identities are not valued or
validated sexual health and
education is disheartening we
urge your support on the bill we
have been working on in
coalition with other
organizations across New Mexico
to get past for several years
thank you for your time.
Thank you Emeli Wilkes.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak my
name is Emily Wilkes I'm a
recent UNM grad and I want to
express my full support for this
bill there are a lot of pressing
pieces of legislation to be
passed this session and this is
one of them we cannot wait to
educate and support the students
within our state and to not act
now would put our young adults
at risk I urge you to join me in
prioritizing the well being of
our next generation of leaders
and continuing a discussion on a
topic that is too often
forgotten about as a recent
graduate I want to reinforce
that there is an absolute need
for these changes and this
legislation can quite literally
change lives thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Meghan cautionary.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is ninety
Kastner I'm seventeen and
representing growth in the Santa
Fe when I was younger I didn't
appreciate the power of
affirmative consent because I
learned that too young eight
eight five I started attending
groping and learning about
consent your body level of trees
that symbolizes personal space
and asking for hunger high I.
As I aged my consent education
grew to include relationships
have the potential to make
contact.
This part of my upbringing was a
continuous process one that
began when I was young and grew
with me.
My peers at school did not have
the same experience starting in
fifth grade transliterated me
sharing stories of an
uncomfortable situation each
time I wish I could help them
before that something upsetting
happened been able to
communicate their boundaries
they simply didn't learn the
communication skills.
Because I did learn new skills I
think you meant like appears
that their voices mattered.
Teaching affirmative consent
education was so young people
they have a voice when it
mattered it is imperative to
provide this education is
seventh and eleventh grade
students that anymore and so
what this final statement you to
vote yes on house bill one week
you thank you.
Thank you very much.
The public comment at this time.
Thank you for getting us do that
always I always like to go back
to the sponsor after public
comment before we go to
questions from the committee
Representative Thomson Mr chair
we are ready for questions thank
you.
Thank you.
Questions from our committee and
first I Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you for bringing this
forward Representative on page
three
line eight through eleven when
it talks about addressing the
appropriate protections of
privacy of the individuals
involved on what if there is a
breach of this confidentiality
who will be held accountable how
will they be held accountable.
Mr chair Alexander get take that
one.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair Senator will
you restate the page that you
cited page three
like nine through eleven it says
that Policy Studies shall
include a provision addressing
how the institution will provide
appropriate protections for the
privacy of the individuals
involved including
confidentiality but is there any
query here about the
accountability will happen if
there's a breach.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so
this section is really about
issue stated ensuring that the
institutions of higher ed
create the policies and so I
think the expectation is that
the in state institutions will
be creating how issues of
breaking confidentiality will
also be handled.
But there's no
Yes in some sense what I'm
alluding to is the fallout from
this especially for the students
themselves
when you're.
Whether you are using are the
accused if there's a breach in
in this if this is not handle
with the most up most discrete
ness and working in the public
schools in the B. I. E. schools
this has been an issue ongoing
Inc which to students end up in
the fall out of it dealing with
in the school itself really when
it's the adult that is handling
the situation didn't handle it
confidence you'll be enough that
you know where gets outs on
social media very before that
this end of the school day are a
within the hour.
So when there's a fall out and
you know something is delegate
at this this it really I think
has to be detailed in the manner
of how are they going to handle
this for those students on both
ends if there's a breach in the
the confidentiality of us
something like this whether you
are
It's not child are in high
school are you going when you
get to college you know the that
reputation and those
Regardless of the outcome on
both and stay here say that is
put out there is is
The widespread and how are we
going to protect that.
Or does this bill not address
that.
Mr Mr chair I think I'm can we
go to L. the rest for.
Sure.
I am not only rest for.
I believe you might be trying to
go to me Representative Lane
ribbon out.
Right on the floor and at no
cost to get this morning I don't
even know my own name.
Yes I absolutely understand the
leader of your the one that was
supposed to be referred to in
can help with this if you would.
No problem Mr chair Senator
thank you for the question I I
appreciate I appreciate what
in your concern is you know
obviously there are
Concerns always regarding
confidentiality and ensuring
that this processors all those
who who participate in it I
again I I sort of have to
reiterate what distillers said
in that I think that this is
something that the schools
themselves would would determine
you know the best the best way
forward with with what the
outcome would be regarding a
breach in confidentiality.
Thank you and the reason is when
you're saying the task force I
think that is something they
really have to consider because
I don't think there has been a
voice for those that have been
disciplined and when they return
back to school and even if
they're just sent to the office
for whatever reason that that
here state that comes back can
be very harming and
you know you're dealing with it
every day as a student and yet
the adults are the ones that did
not handle it with the utmost
respect of you know protecting
the child's.
Whole self in the emotional
trauma that just being sent to
the office in itself can you
know be very alarming
to the child and to the
The other students so I don't
know if the contract can be
issued or some kind of in which
that they are served as some
sort of
That they know there is
protection beyond this if there
it sticks disclosed and that
those around them to really
understand the severity of the
matter of talking or having
other students
Being informed are leaking that
information thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Thank you Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Thompson for
bringing this bill forward I'm
gonna support the bill out you
know we we get this type of
education even in the military
I've seen this type of of
education done to a lot of the
mentorship programs and I'm
involved in but we need to make
sure that everyone is getting
this type of education in and
getting it early on to decrease
and eliminate any type of sexual
misconduct so no questions I
just want to thank you and and
let you know that I'm going to
support the bill.
Anyone else on the committee I'm
looking for raised hands.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative Thompson for
bringing this bill forward
I really want to speak for my
wife who is the medical director
of sex roles all the nurse
examiners and anything that we
can here in this area to
enlighten people in that
education are is tremendously
helpful so I really appreciate
that I'm sure she would say that
as well thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm not
sure if you're ready for but I
would like to make a do pass
motion.
Thank you senator I have just a
question or two if there are
others that have any questions.
I'm not the other hands go up I
guess my question this as it
creates a task force what is the
purpose of the task force and I
was trying to find the section
on it as to where the task force
is created who's on it but most
this bill doesn't deal with the
task force at all what is the
task forces job and duty why do
we need that many people it
sounds like the only job is to
create a to do a survey each
year and report the results why
do we need a bunch of people to
do that instead of no one agency
sent out the question up.
Excuse me Mr chair we go to a
land up please.
Hello.
Mr chair that's a great question
so the purpose of the task force
is to create a comprehensive and
confidential crime just climb it
survey on campus and that the
purpose essentially is to
understate better understand
sexual violence on campus what
we know is that
much of sexual salts that occurs
in campus communities is not
necessarily captured in the
clear a report each year into
our hope is that by making this
confidential survey we will have
the opportunity to get accurate
data to provide necessary
support and going back to
senator Pete does question I
think this sort of get that at
her concern as well that in
order to to adequately address
what is occurring on campus
ensure that confidentiality
singe is is happening in these
processes we need to understand
what's actually happening on the
ground when it's Rick when
matters are reported or when
they're not and so that is one
of the the real goals of the
task force is to ensure that we
understand what is happening on
campus and how we need to
address the issue going forward.
Thank you and Representative can
you direct me to where it sets
up who's on the task force I'm
trying to identify that and then
what it indicates their role is
as I was looking through I
didn't see that as very clear it
just says the task force more
talk about dissemination of of
what they provide.
Mr Mr.
Mr chair I'm I I don't have that
right now I'm if any of my
witnesses do you can you please
that jump in.
Absolutely Mr chair I see it
mentioned on page six line ten.
it's also discussed.
Well if I can interrupt I
apologize but that the tell me
what the task force is what he
did to provide but this creates
a task force where is the
creation and who's on it.
it is Mr chair it is on page
twenty nine I'm starting at the
top the task force consists of
nine members including the
secretary of higher education or
a designate
would you like me to read
through who's on the task force
thank you I did I did I was
getting through
They're gonna develop a sexual
misconduct climate survey I'm on
page thirty one nineteen for
distribution that seems like a
lot of people and people hi I
need to develop.
A survey.
No is there not one the already
available other places that need
the needs and requirements and
and please understand I I by all
means agree with all of this
when I was teaching AP
psychology we spent several days
don't show the video on TV and
only yes means yes we talked
about all of those and how
alcohol is used as a weapon for
use of about perpetrators of
sexual assault and yet we very
spoke very candidly about it.
But we create task force all the
time up here that take a lot of
people's time to do something
that I suspect is probably
already available somewhere
instead of bringing people
together for several meetings to
kind of nod their head and say
yes that's what we want to do
the survey to be.
Mr chair.
I'm sorry I'm we go to and
through.
Thank you Mr chair I'm very
happy to answer this question
the task force is so important
in order to fill in the gaps of
what is happening on our campus
in two thousand and seventeen
eighty nine percent of colleges
in the United States reported
zero cases of sexual assault we
know that's not true and that
the intention with this task
force is to make sure that
students can not only make an
informed decision about where
they want to go to school but
that that way they know where
they're safe on their campus and
where they are not I hope that I
hope that answers your question.
Thank you but no I don't think
it did.
L. as I read through the the
what the task force is supposed
to do is yeah with it indicates
that it's supposed to develop
the point survey it doesn't talk
about that yeah they're supposed
to review particular cases or
things of that sort.
or or find a place for students
to go or things of that sort is
that a task force and I I
understand but to create the
survey and make sure the survey
gets disseminated.
I began my my concern is why are
we setting up a task force when
it seems like that water this is
already there ready to go yeah
we just need to get the survey
out of the school so we can find
out what the the scope of
problems that particular
institutions it would be the
Alexander you might I know
you've been in this area for
quite some time you excellent
presentation that many of the
interim committees and such but
why do we need to reinvent what
already out there.
You Mr chair I just want to say
first that I appreciate as
someone who gets invited to a
lot of task force and councils I
appreciate your questioning
because we certainly don't want
to create any more task force
without intention the reason why
there is the creation of this
task force for house bill one
forty two is because we really
want to focus and etcetera New
Mexico culture and our students
and families and in our primary
prevention work the CDC has a
list of culturally specific
primary prevention curriculums
and when we evaluated our
programs to did the CDC approved
evidence based curriculum so
verses the programs to
administered primary prevention
programs that were designed with
New Mexico's diverse cultures in
mind are kind of home grown
prevention program any
programming outperforms the
evidence based CDC recommended
curriculums and so we just
really know in New Mexico that
we value nothing for us without
the people that are going to be
most impacted this bill is not
about punishment and so we want
to make sure that we're
addressing sexual violence on
our campuses and that if we're
going to have colleges and
universities putting out a
biennial survey that it's
something that's gonna return
return information and data that
we can actually use to be better
and prevent the prevalence of
sexual violence and so that's
really why we have this creation
of the task force so that the
client survey is a reflection of
our communities here in New
Mexico.
The question that I somewhere in
her I read that if somebody
misses two of the meetings they
get off of the task force it
sounds like this is going to be
a perpetual long term task force
R. all of the people wanted
volunteers is that who oversees
the task force and and is there
funding for per diem and other
things I don't see any funding
with it is know how you know
kind of the details of how to to
get the group together no make
sure that they're they stay on
task and that this doesn't
become a forever passwords or
maybe it should which case how
the.
Let's start with Representative
but you may want to refer back
to yes I'm for whatever whoever
has that can jump in I'm I'm
sorry Mr chair there there do
you mean from taxing you're up
you're up and we need your vote
in health and and it's I'm I'm a
little scattered and I'm sorry.
We all play the game
Representative.
Yes thank you Mr chair for your
question I'm the secretary of
education the secretary of a
higher ed would be the chair of
this task force and then as is
filled out in the the bill there
will be other members who are
participating there is not the
per diem or other financial
impact attached to the task
force.
So yeah it's going to come out
of the the budget of higher
Edward there people released for
a day to participate in this no
and they're gonna in the
meetings all in Santa Fe they
going to be remote I mean
usually there's faster we put
together groups to come
together.
The question I apologize it was
that correct with.
I was gonna say Mr chair my boss
might get mad at me but this is
also what the coalition.
Convene people together and so I
think we are pretty savvy about
building coalition in our state
and so I I don't know that it'll
be perpetual perpetual cost but
we don't have the state initial
reflective survey for our state
that that's going to be I think
the biggest left for for the
work.
Okay thank you those are just my
concerns is that we create task
force all the time and we never
get rid of passports with you
like they are kind of in
perpetuity or just kind of go by
the wayside while they're still
on the books and so this is in
the law we're now on the books
what.
We had a new path motion is
there a second.
I will thank you that then.
Very
okay.
That was my motion Mr chairman
to do better for the a motion I
seconded.
Senator Brandt.
South Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
She's over the committee chair
senator Neville yes this Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto yes.
Senator pope yes Senator holes
yes.
Yes.
You can head up your committee
representative thank you for
that thank you Mr chair for for
your understanding thank you.
And our last bill today and for
the public we added you pass on
house bill one forty one we have
to pass on house bill one forty
two Senate bill for one was not
heard today at the Sanchez
request house bill one twenty
eight was moved to Monday at the
sponsor's request we are now on
Committee South for House Bill
to thirty two public school
violation improvement act
Representative Stapleton.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm.
Well you today house bill two
thirty two committee some
Cation Committee substitute for
House Bill to thirty two Mr
chairman and members of the
committee the purpose of the
bill is to address the need for
a safe and healthy school
environment for students and
school personnel June the COVID
nineteen pandemic Mr chairman
and members of the committee
how's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two cents for the
mechanism for schools to meet
the PED guidelines for
ventilation systems required for
re opening the committee
substitute Mr Chairman addresses
the key processes public school
districts when you as the
exam individuation systems and
make repairs upgrades
modifications and replacements.
Mr Chairman the committee
seventy provide qualifications
of the certified assessor needed
to make the initial assessment
of the system that the district
uses to submit the application
once the district received the
water is certified technician
who is certified in testing and
balancing works with the
contractor to accomplish the
work the committee set up by
these qualifications Mr chairman
and members committee.
Thirty two creates a fun and PED
retains twenty we we tend to
five percent of the funds
deposited into the new fund
public school ventilation
improvements to administer the
program.
Also be used by districts but
the cost of the initial
assessment if needed.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee contractor is hired by
the district with this train
construction workforce in which
at least forty percent of the
work is not graduates
registered apprenticeship
program in New Mexico the
committee specifies what was
sent as graduates registered
apprenticeship program to ensure
that the construction work is
performed by workers on job
sites working together with
apprenticeship trained
personnel.
Members the committee that.
Also clarifies that a state
funds are appropriated the
district will follow the
methodology set for the SFA
awards Mr chairman and members
of the committee.
Will collaborate with certified
technician to ensure that the
work meet standards and criteria
for safe and healthy ventilation
system and Mr chairman I do have
an amendment the house bill do
study to committee some
amendment.
And the number is one two two
zero four two four point one.
Mr chair.
The option.
Remember It is up on the screen
better for the.
would would move the amendment
for purposes of discussion only
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative you'll
take issue with that then that
that please.
Mr Chairman on page three line
six when.
Registered and insured in little
damn I registered in I'm
attended
I'm I'm Mr Chairman on page
three line six and seven strike
in New Mexico and insert the
little they have registered with
the workforce solutions
department all want to page that
the department has granted
reciprocal approval on page six
line eleven strike implies that
in certain they have uses on
page two line eight strike
implies and insert into their
abuses Mr Chairman the amendment
addresses the need to ensure
that that the appendices I'm not
only graduates registered
program but may actually be
obtained in a program.
Also Mr chairman the amendment
also insurance that
apprenticeship program is
registered with the department
of workforce solution since all
right as she program must be
registered this way also Mr
chairman the department of
workforce solutions can grant
we want to programs that are out
of state.
Mr chairman and enough what is
can many of our members talk
about the the the border states
the border cities in New Mexico
with what are states that enable
them to be able to utilize.
workers from neighboring states
the last part of the amendment
ensures that workers would
skills and training in our
actually on the work site and
that's simply listed as part of
the contract does work for us
and Mr chairman I stand for
questions on the amendment.
Okay are committee we are on the
amendment.
The questions on the amendment.
Mr chairman I do.
Padilla.
Have a question madam Majority
Leader to so good to see you.
I don't see as often as I'd like
anymore but good to see this
morning
The question I had was around
definitions and are.
So the amendment here it is your
your career cleaning up language
or you're actually redefining
something is what is the the
purpose of the amendment one
more time I'm sorry.
Language amendment the dresses
that need to ensure.
So that the premises I'm not
only graduates of accredited
program well I'm but some may
actually be attending a program
they don't you know all students
it says that it's cleanup
language to make sure that if if
you have a pregnancies that are
in a program they're not just
have already graduated from a
program but they can also be you
the prize.
At the apprenticeship program is
registered with the workforce
solution.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
madam Majority Leader I think my
question Mr Chairman might be
more on the bill so I'm gonna go
and stand down to the mall thank
you.
Thank you from the committee any
others questions on the
amendment.
If not I I have a question about
it when it says they acted being
now
Registered in or attending in.
Are the community college
programs are the set up by the
union what is your formal
registered for however the
register or at ten.
I believe that I have the
we have with the New Mexico
apprenticeship director I
believe that she's there maybe
she can answer the question
about how would set up Mr
chairman.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
Katrina the heat I am the state
apprenticeship director with the
New Mexico department of
workforce solutions I'm really
the the program sponsor itself
can be a variety of institutions
organizations it can be a you
company it can be like I said an
association a community college
in order to become a registered
apprenticeship program they do
go through a formal registration
process and bidding process with
our department they have to
comply with various regulations
established by both the state
and federal government in order
to be a registered program.
So it is really open currently
for heating and ventilation we
do have three or make that for
registered apprenticeship
programs
one is a private employer one is
a community college or excuse me
no we do not have a community
college currently that we have
an association and I were you
program as well to you programs.
Representative and just be here.
No I guess I'm many of our
community colleges have full
blown H. back system they would
not be able to participate in
that and this is that correct is
that what I'm understanding.
That is not correct they could
potentially participate if they
were willing to registered
apprenticeship program currently
we do have some registered
managed care programs through
asked one college and central
New Mexico community college
however not in that particular
occupation but they could
definitely register program they
so chose to.
Okay Representative yeah this is
talking about the number of
actual people that are working
for the company that gets the
contract as I understand who is
going to verify and check the
records that the it the employee
the actual worker is registered
or attending one of the.
I could also speak to that if
you would like Mr chair members
of the committee
our agency actually tracks all
of that we have it the data
application which the
apprentices are are registered
their progression through the
apprenticeship program is also
tracked with that therefore we
would be able to verify that
they are actively engaged a
participating in the
apprenticeship program.
Okay and and I guess is probably
also estimates the hill is the.
Does workforce solutions reach
out to the H. back programs that
the various community colleges
or do you rely on them coming to
you to be part of apprenticeship
programs.
It could be a combination
we to at this point we have not
directly reached out to them
To to trying to develop a
program for the most part
programs or potential programs
reach out to us we do have more
staff on board within the last
year that would enable us to do
additional outreach to it to be
able to do that but currently
it's up for the most part
programs reaching out or
potential programs reaching out
to us to try and register their
programs or to find out more
about apprenticeship.
Okay it just seems what we have
a bill of this is kind of the
nexus between the amendment in
the bill but we have a bill that
requires the people doing the
work part of an apprenticeship
program and yet we've got
community colleges that are
clearly training people in this
bill that we ought to workforce
solutions ought to be trying to
expand that by reaching out to
them and get them certified and
registered so that we expand the
number of people who are able to
participate in in making up
these contracting job so with
that I don't I'm done with my
questions about that section of
the amendment on the second on
part two of the amendment where
it talks about workforce
solutions being able to expand
to out of state ones how many
apprenticeships do we have that
are already of certified from
out of state to work in New
Mexico.
I'm.
We do not have out of state
programs per se registered in
the state so what happens if an
ATA state contractor comes into
the state to perform federal
Davis bacon work or public works
jobs then they would be if they
have a premises that are coming
in from out of state that's when
we would grant that reciprocal
Ruble.
So they would they would
basically be could be a
registered program in another
state and we would just verify
that registration with our
federal partners or with the
state agency.
So again this is kind of a cross
over between the amendment and
the the bill but if there's an
out of state.
Person or company that wants to
come in that somebody let them
know they need to register their
apprentice program or do they
just have to have gone through
you know our laws and provide
health bill two thirty two and
go over hi I need we need to
contact workforce solutions so
that we're able to to apply for
this the work.
I I don't know provide the
appropriate individual to answer
this question but I know for any
public works jobs through our
system our data system as well
there's a requirement for such
contractors out of state or in
state to pay an apprentice
contribution for every man our
work on a job hence you know
they are typically advised of
this so if they're an apprentice
or not they have to go through
that system and I believe our
public works folks find and I I
cannot come from all of this but
my understanding is that they
would provide this information
and they would be made aware of
that.
Okay I I just want to make sure
that you know they don't have to
just happen upon this law to
know that in order to
participate yeah that.
They they have to have come up
upon this long ago we can do
this because we need this
requirement or something of that
sort okay
out back on the amendment and
Committee was a pleasure the
committee on the amendment.
Move adoption of the amendment.
Have a motion to adopt the
amendment is the second.
Second.
Thank you bye Senator Hickey
million if you will call the
roll please.
And the branch.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Well yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope.
Yes and senator souls yes.
We have an amended bill.
Okay you're.
Representative your.
What what are of get your title
right I apologize
but you haven't amended bill out
back on the main bill other
other things about the bill or
issues on the bill.
The.
I'm.
I just want to share that.
In reference to your questions.
There are.
One companies in New Mexico
workforce that meets the
requirement of the skilled and
trained workforce and their one
thousand Jenny then in the state
that.
With certifications that allows
them to perform this work and Mr
chairman.
And then I I that this
requirement by started to work
as a graduate of all registered
and attended.
Program and because it's so.
State we have a more open system
for those border cities and Mr
chairman I now stand for
questions and I do have some
expert witness is still and
technical questions and
additional information I'm I
have that.
Superintendent of regulation and
licensure Linda Trujillo from a
representative from the house
and Steven Curtis with you know
some Valdez and Stephanie Lee
I'm Vince Alvarado and John
Hamilton.
Are they just for entering
technical things are here and
would you like to be treated for
that at this point.
I just put.
Technical responses to questions
Mr chairman.
Okay I'm I am not sure I think
that yeah.
Thank you we'll go out for
public comment Bill Cosby will
take us to public comment on
Committee subjects for House
Bill to thirty two as amended
now.
Many substitute for house bill
two thirty two as amended we
will begin with those who
registered to speak in
opposition beginning with Robert
Baker.
Next up we have.
Hello Mister chair and members
of the committee.
Hello Mister chair and members
of the committee my name is
Robert Baker I'm a licensed
bonded and insured mechanical
contractor here in the state of
New Mexico I was originally for
this bill and telling amendment
was introduced and passed
despite the already in place
state regulations on a skilled
trades that the definition of a
skilled trades in accord
wikipedia skilled trades men
refers to a skilled worker we
specialize in particular
occupation that requires work
experience on the job training
and often formal vacation all
education but not a bachelor's
degree here in the state of New
Mexico our construction industry
division allows the individuals
that have four thousand hours
which is equivalent to two years
hands on training by a licensed
contractor or a certified
certificate from a vocational
school and one year hands on in
the trade or a certificate from
a four year approved preparation
program they can apply to test
for the journeyman license in
their field of experience with
C. ID verifies the treatments
experience.
Loses application he then has to
take a written proctor yes and
for some during the life in the
hands on proctor yes if the
tests are passed you are now a
licensed by the state of New
Mexico as a skilled tradesmen in
your field this legislation is
incorrectly written and
disenfranchised as many skilled
workers that are received their
experience in other forms let me
ask you Mr chair and members of
the committee with this
legislation put into question
our state's current processes of
licensing skilled trades second
Mr chair.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee I ask you to vote no
on this bill we do not need to
create unnecessary red tape when
the public school the
procurement process already
budget all contractors to do
this work.
Thank you so much and please
vote no on this bill.
Thank you very much next up we
have John day.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is John day
Baker I am the executive
director of before that's
businesses educators and
families organizing to reform
education I represent many small
and minority owned businesses in
many different fields I also
have an indoor air quality
certification from the
environmental protection agency
for K. twelve schools.
And but believe I understand the
needs in our schools and the
needs to improve the air that we
breathe.
That our governor set out
priorities for Senate bill fifty
three which prioritizes of
minority veteran owned in New
Mexico owned businesses
unfortunately I believe that
there is language in this bill
that goes against at that
priority and actually is
excluding many of our veteran
and minority locally New Mexico
owned contractors I spoke with
thirteen contractors on an
approved list to do work in the
public schools twelve of them
told me that they can not meet
the requirements of the forty
percent in a registered
apprenticeship program one of
them was veteran owned and said
that he went through the
military to get his
certifications I also spoke to
somebody who is a member of the
four twelve and said that they
cannot meet that requirement
because journeymen are able to
buy in and not necessarily have
to go through their
apprenticeship program graduate.
The language in this bill of
skilled workforce is exclusive.
and and puts are minority owned
businesses out we have many
qualified people to do this work
I believe this is the all hands
on deck and in importance and I
ask you to vote no on H. B. two
thirty two thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
to committee sub house bill two
thirty two as amended your hand
is up right now I assume that
you were speaking in opposition
karla Kugler.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Carla Kugler I am with
associated builders and
contractors we respectfully
stand in opposition of this
legislation not because it isn't
necessary it is and we think the
sponsor for bringing it forward
but the mandate set in this bill
for schools to only use
contractors with a special
definition of a skilled and
trained workforce is a really
unnecessary mandate for an
emergency bill the contractor
may be qualified certified
industry recognized and just
simply disqualified by not
meeting this kind of unnecessary
threshold we understand the
intent of what the sponsoring
the supporters are trying to get
to and we thank them for
previously lowering the mandate
and now for the change of what
may be a registered
apprenticeship program graduate
language is still in there so
it's a little confusing and this
the first time we're seeing this
but this is still highly onerous
for our school systems to
provide these contractors as an
emergency bill the work needs to
get done quickly thoroughly by
certified technicians specialize
certifications we have no
problem with that but there are
other ways in which to reach
that C. N. M. other local
community colleges and graduates
become a New Mexico journeymen
holding license holders right
there already accepted by the
ICC ID PSMA yes yes.
We've spoken with advocates of
the legislation and it's become
apparent that there are vastly
different interpretations of
this requirement
so but the general consensus
remains this mandate puts an
extra strain on our rural
communities to use only a few
specific contractors eliminates
local workers and businesses and
it's kind of wrong to subject
the taxpayers of this great
state to a been limited pool of
contractors who fit this mandate
we ask again that the sponsor
please remove that specific
section of the legislation and
open these projects to fair and
open competition for all New
Mexicans trained certified and
qualified thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any elected members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition.
Okay moving on we will now go to
those who register to speak in
favor beginning with really may
Ortiz.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee lily more T.
signs the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico school board
association and the school board
association believes that we
need programs at the state level
that will assist our school
districts and filling the gaps
during this pandemic you we need
some relief and and response in
this situation one of our
association's top priorities
yield a student safety.
And we believe that this bill
works to secure that this
legislation provides directed to
school districts we support
legislation to provide direct
aid to school districts of the
flexibility necessary to meet
the upper deck table of ever
changing pandemic needs
including PPE technology HVAC
for our students we also support
the creation of a capital group
program program for public
school ventilation systems that
will address the school will
district needs of providing safe
and healthy school environments
we support the purpose and
intent of this bill Mr chairman
we thank the Majority Leader
Stapleton for submitting this
bill and we just the committee
to favourably consider and move
it forward thank you for
allowing us to voice our
disposition.
Thank you very much next up we
have I think you.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Is is
empty with the sheet metal
workers local forty nine first
thing I'd like to talk about his
safety we have all been touched
in some way by the COVID
nineteen it is very likely that
someone we know has been
impacted by this deadly virus
and public schools as we emerge
from this pandemic it is
critical read critical we return
to buildings that are as safe as
possible this is where a
ventilation assessment is key
the importance of ventilation in
the fight against COVID or any
other pathogens is paramount for
a safe return to normalcy
seconding is responsibility we
must make sure students and
educators have a safe
environment to learn and work
moving forward I have an eleven
year old son in Rio Rancho
public schools currently doing
the hybrid model and I take that
issue home with me every week in
order for this to happen a
skilled and trained workforce is
required to provide an
assessment and construction for
school site heating ventilation
and air conditioning systems.
Third is accountability we need
to make sure certified
technicians are giving accurate
assessments of the systems we
need to promote the use of
apprenticeships in our state I
was not always a union sheet
metal worker I started out in
the open shop.
With on the job training as my
only source of training.
It was not until later that I
sought out and punish a program
the pressure program gave me the
institutional knowledge to do my
job right the first time.
It was not until after I
graduated that I realized all
the bad habits I've picked up
prior to apprenticeship from an
on the job training only
curricula with that we thank the
sponsor for her work stand in
support of this bill and ask all
of you to do the same thank you.
Thank you very much next step we
have actually long.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
actually long with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico the COVID nineteen
pandemic has made many issues
come into focus for communities
one of which is the quality of
air within public school
ventilation systems we know that
having high quality systems and
therefore claim circulating air
is key for a safe and successful
learning environment for
students in a safe and
successful working environment
for educators.
To make sure this happens it is
critical that high highly
skilled trained and licensed
professionals inspect and find
assessment and improvements to
the systems.
Luckily there are plenty of
contractors to do this work all
of which travel to rural and
urban areas of our state takes
guidance mechanical for air
moving equipment for example
women owned construction company
contracting companies take metal
crafters are Jack's mechanical
as another example minority
owned construction contracting
companies both include a
workforce.
Of homegrown New Mexicans some
apprentices still in program and
others journey persons who have
completed their apprenticeship
program.
With that being said we think
the sponsor for being a champion
of this measure and keeping at
the forefront of our minds we
respectfully ask you all to
support students and educators
and by extension families and
communities by supporting house
bill two thirty two thank you.
Thank you very much next we have
rounded and Lopez.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee run the
Gillen Lopez the executive
director of the mechanical sheet
metal contractors association of
New Mexico we ask you to please
support this bill it provides
the guidelines to implement a
process for the most efficient
means possible to provide the
best results for school
districts and we appreciate that
you will consider supporting
this bill thank you.
Thank you very much we will now
move to propose raising their
hands John Lipchitz.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John the cheats
with The New Mexico federation
of labor representing thirty
nine various labor organizations
and entities in ten tens of
thousands of workers around the
state we do stand in strong
support of this bill and just
and from a logical standpoint
this state in this legislature
has highly endorsed qualified
apprenticeship programs we have
apprenticeship program
contributions necessary for
contractors that are working on
public works projects now we're
talking about have been are
upgrading H. fax systems in our
schools which will affect our
children and our educators and I
would hope we would hold the
same kind of standards for these
kind of projects as we would for
public works and self for those
reasons and all those stated
before we urge you all to
support this measure thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Steve's unions.
Thank you can you hear me yes.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee stage Yang is any aid
New Mexico government relations
director on behalf of our
members we stand in support of
this legislation we thank the
sponsor for bringing this
legislation report and agree
that mental Asian system should
be tracked and upgraded to
safeguard the health of students
and educators but while I
professions no less.
We firmly believe that we should
have highly qualified educators
teaching our students.
This bill makes common sense for
the health of our students
educators working families in
our communities we strongly
believe that we have the state
should move to make it a common
practice.
We respectfully ask for your
vote in favor and thank you.
Thank you very much any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support please raise
your hand.
Seeing no hands public comment
is over at this time thank you
very much
for taking assist midway through
all of that
Representative Stapleton if you
would please go any comments
you'd like to make what we go to
questions the committee.
Sorry I was muted I'm.
Mr Chairman I I just want to say
Based on hearing to some of the
information that was just listed
in terms of opposition.
I'm.
The average crew on a typical
sheet metal job ventilation job.
Most likely often needs it's
about two technicians.
And and forty percent of a trash
only saying that one of those
two people on that job receive
an education that in that graph
that supported him all high
enough to be able to do that job
we are in no way and hi Mr
chairman in no way trying to
eliminate any one global anyone
all denies stations all
businesses
in terms of.
Moving forward but this
ventilation to occur within
process to occur within our
school district.
I'm it's it's the purpose is to
address the need and the safety
of the school environment Mr
Chairman and with that Mr
Chairman I I stand for
questions.
Thank you majority floor leader
let's go to Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
majority floor leader
with what was where there was a
huge change in one of the
definitions over what C. ID
already has
outlined with regard to the the
training of the workforce to do
this work.
Mr.
I'm not sure is there but Linda
the.
C. I. D. is the one that gave us
the definition Mr chairman
Thank you Mr chairman Senator a
Linda Trujillo superintendent of
the regulation licensing
department what the work is C.
ID did in helping this bill had
to do with the substitute that
was created and in the original
bill the technician that does
the appraisal and the technician
who does the actual work were
combined into one definition we
work with the sponsor the
representative and the
interested parties and we got
those definitions separated out
and then at the end of the bill
we make sure that the work would
be done by a contractor who is
in compliance with the
construction industry division
while we support of
apprenticeship programs very
much and and as my work in the
legislature I supported
apprenticeship programs there
are alternative ways of getting
in compliance and being
certified and licensed through
C. ID.
I appreciate that and the
definition for skilled and
trained workforce was changed as
a result of this bill for House
C. ID will look at that that
that definition from from from
here on out.
Mister chairman Senator C. ID is
not involved in the trained and
skilled workforce requirements
were simply involved in ensuring
that the individuals who are
doing the certified technician
meets the ID requirements and
the contractors that are
responsible for the work are
appropriately licensed Mr
Chairman may I have.
Steven Curtis to respond to
Representative yeah thank.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Steven
Curtis I'm an attorney with you
to involved as
answered your question Mr
Senator Senator the excuse me
the definition has evolved over
time it was originally
requirement that'd be seventy
percent
that was reduced after the first
committee meeting to forty
percent two and it knowledge
meant of that the seventy
percent threshold.
Might be too high it might
exclude too many companies
ideally it would be one hundred
percent because apprentices
partnerships are the gold
standard this bill says that our
kids are worth it that we want
this work done and we want it
done right the subsequent the
other changes which are part of
the amendment that was adopted
by this committee.
made further changes to address
some concerns that were raised
during the house floor debate
regarding whether or not this
bill would discriminate against
out of state competitors I'm
sorry yes out of state companies
and so the department of
workforce solutions is the one
that would be governing the
apprenticeship programs and the
and verifying that the
appropriate people since these
are public works projects
anyways about forming this work
and.
The the the amendment that was
just adopted by this committee
broadens it again by allowing it
to not just be one that's
registered in New Mexico and out
of state companies can register
in New Mexico it is my
understanding that although
there are at least one out of
state company that is registered
and prevention program it's not
an H. back on but the more
common one is what we talked
about earlier about the
reciprocal acknowledgement which
is in the department of
workforce solutions regulations
which
Specify the conditions in which
a out of state company that has
used its on apprenticeship
program or hired employees from
the pension program can get
approval of that the program
even if it's not registered in
New Mexico the same way that in
New Mexico business would
probably register their program
and so when the entity it's on a
public works project they will
ask the department of workforce
solutions to grant reciprocal
approval of their partnership
program in order to allow them
to apply the initiative wage
rates to their workers otherwise
it would be painful gentleman
wages for that work I hope that
answers your question.
yes thoroughly to thank you
appreciate that the other
comment that I had just yeah and
I'm just trying to figure out
this is simply going to make
things safer and it it is at
least it appears to me it's
going to make things
How this work is done done by
more there are wild additionally
or or higher qualified folks is
that correct the Mr chairman and
madam floor leader.
Mr chairman and and senator yes.
Yeah so I'm I'm trying to figure
out you know I I I I have a lot
of friends on this call and and
on both sides of this issue and
and is yes governor Bruce king
said one time I'm gonna go with
my friends but but I'm always
going to air on on the side of
the you know safety and safety
for the worker safety for the
product that they you know
produce and and I'm I'm
supportive of this measure you
know and and I just thank
everybody for coming together
and trying to and I it sounds
like there was some compromise
from the seventy percent of the
forty percent so I really
appreciate that and and and
because we make this change this
year doesn't mean that we can.
That we can make this even
better next year and I want to
congratulate we haven't really
done this that superintendent R.
Trujillo very very good friend
of mine I miss her all the time
Mr chairman and she was my
partner in testing the early
childhood education and care
department of legislation
through the legislature couple
years ago and I I just want to
say congratulations to her
publicly thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator senator
Neville.
Thank you Mr chair of that
terrible band with this morning
I hope you can hear me okay.
I do I'm just confused why we
need to do this with the.
We have a.
No hole Division of the
licenses.
The license contractors and so
forth one of my ventures in life
was in the construction business
and development that kind of
thing.
And we always found that you
could hire qualified
refrigeration or.
air conditioning or whatever
specialist anytime you need to
there is never a problem with
finding and qualified people do
we need to make it more
difficult for new businesses or
whatever to get into this field
by adding some additional burden
I just want to clarify Mr
chairman.
Representative.
Mr Chairman Sierra avail I would
let Steven Curtis respond to
your question please.
Certainly and
Representative chairman souls
and and Representative Senator
Neville
again another one of the
amendments made
two by this committee is to
change the work employees to
using
these contractors will decide
what workforce they want to use
for which project as
Representative Stapleton has
acknowledged
these projects are typically to.
Possibly a few more
Workers which means that they
just need to make sure that they
have hired an employee who for
that project who has graduated
from the pension program the
pressure requirement in this
bill is consistent with provided
declarations of policy elsewhere
that recognize that
apprenticeship programs are the
best way to ensure that we have
a qualified workforce in New
Mexico
The whether or not someone has a
bare minimum requirements to
perform a job without violating
the law is different from saying
skilled and qualified workforce
which is the purpose of that
requirement in this bill.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chairman and
I'm just concerned that the I
don't have a problem with the
apprenticeship programs I think
that's a great plan that's of
one of the things that I've had
to deal with as well but
Mandating inner requiring
essentially setting up a new
whole new system of requests and
whatever seems like unnecessary
when we got qualified
organizations available to to do
the work in to do the.
Consider the and installations
whatever modifications I'm just
a little concerned that we're
talking about to redirecting
money to the wrong direction
sitting up but a whole new
system that just doesn't seem to
be necessary at all I'm I'm a
little concerned about again I
don't know if this is a union
backed arrangement or what it
what it is I'm not sure to I
just don't see the need for it
and will oppose it at this point
eight seconds here's a good
explanation of why it's
necessary because I think we've
got qualified people with
testimony from from people in
the the opponent's position that
said this issue what I'm saying
is that we've already got a
program pretty wells authorize
these people and it looks to me
like it's just another.
Another step that makes it more
difficult for businesses to
operate and function and
will necessarily yield any
better results on it to.
Would stand in a position of not
necessarily a.
Doing some things I wanted to
that's my concern that's all I
have of the representative you'd
like to respond what I'm
thinking and convince me
otherwise I'll certainly.
Open to listen.
And Senate in about.
All.
I do believe.
That the pop plus intent.
And the this bill.
Is not only.
To hire the best to have the
best workers be involved.
I'm it's not a matter of.
One over the other Mr chairman
and senator in about.
It's it's actually about.
The capability.
Right now to get the work done.
And.
And the performance of the work.
I'm just keep in mind Mr
chairman and senator in about.
That you also have the
collaboration with the P. FSA.
Process as well as the piece yes
C. O. C. along with PED to get
this work done.
So it's not a matter of.
To tease this collaboration
going on with all groups to make
sure that the company's in New
Mexico who have workforce meets
the requirement of skilled and
trained workforce basically
that's it Mr chairman and
senator and avail.
Mr chairman and Representative
even disagree with morning
qualified workforce but I think
we have a qualified workforce
without this bill and that's my
that's my issues and it's a it's
another issue of trying to
divert money to other programs
or systems or whatever and it's
not necessarily benefiting our
schools and getting the work
done better I think it actually
Campos you might hamper the
progress that's all I have
Mister chairman thank you.
Thank you senator and senator
hope.
Mr chair and madam Majority
Leader thanks for bringing the
bill Ford I just had the some of
the same calls and concerns from
some folks in my district so the
minority owned businesses and
veterans on businesses worried
about having the opportunity
to do some of this work I went
your office yesterday we did
talk in and I applaud you making
some of the amendments to the
bill I appreciate it so I I
guess the question I have is
first one is right now what is
the standard to do this type of
work it is there an apprentice
standard to do current work
today.
Mr Chairman I'm and senator pope
I can have John Hamilton respond
to you on that question.
Thank you senator Mr chairman so
one of the issues we've seen
nationally and what we see from
the engineering community that
that would be ashtray sorry for
using the acronyms is a lot of
failures on HVAC ventilation
systems through the use of non
qualified people especially in
schools the first thing when you
ask a school and you ask the
people who are on staff with the
school
is your ventilation system
working right of course everyone
said yes it is however through
national studies in two
different universities looking
into the issues surrounding
school violation nationally what
they found is it's the people
who go in and do this work on
ventilation systems that don't
have the skill of testing
adjusting and balancing using
you know approximately twenty
thousand dollars worth of
advanced instruments for taking
the readings right sickly if you
you're trying to take readings
about as hard as your breast is
blowing so it's very sensitive
instrumentation and it's a step
above just being a mechanical
contractor so what the next step
is a lot of people that are
sheet metal workers work on HVAC
systems they take a lot of
advanced training and
certification exams for doing
this in a probably ninety five
percent of jobs commercial jobs
throughout the state of New
Mexico it's specified by
engineering firms that all work
being performed shall be done by
a certified test and balance
technician because they
understand the importance of
doing this balancing work the
actual requirements the extra
instrumentation just for taking
the readings while they're doing
the balancing work so there is a
divide.
That we see
what a in Stalin and a person is
that goes in and does this work
and then the person that goes in
is the next step or some of that
basically yester PhD and
mechanical installation is what
we look at is that yes in
balance contractor in person
going to do these assessments
and make sure that they're
working right I hope that that
answers your question Senator
all.
So so Mister chair and Madam
Jordi leader so so I guess my
concern with that is we need to
do that.
And there's a concern with the
present work maybe we need to
look at making that change in
legislation on what the standard
is altogether but folks doing
this work and that would be my
that's my big concern and if
there are some of these
companies right now that don't
meet the standard they knew we
need to put them to that
standard
so that that's just what I'm
worried about it and I and I
agree you know this is this is
work in our schools this you
know it's dealing with our kids
and it's a priority and it
should be quality work but I
also know that this is important
work in we are we do need
everybody that can do this work
to be involved to get this done
this is gonna be a lot of work
and a lot of important work that
needs to be done right so my
concern with the standard is if
it is so important
it should be a standard across
the board and not with with
justice work so is there any
thought to making that a reality
are making that happen.
Mr Chairman
even Curtis could you answer
that question please.
Mister chairman Senator pope I
think you made some valid points
this is a limited bill this bill
is intended to ensure that our
schools have the proper
ventilation mechanical systems
both tested and installed by
qualified people
the what you're proposing would
be a significant
would be something other than an
amendment to these public
addition to the public school
code that we're talking about
here
but it it is sort of outside the
scope of this bill.
So Mister chair Madam Jordan
leader you're right and that's
what that would be
but also my concern is working a
little bit for the City of
Albuquerque I just know that
there's always seems to be a
shortage of even H. back
technicians right people with
the skills I know that pulled
away in different jobs decide
after and when you're when
you're a track goes out right
you know it's always part time
to get someone to come to this
work because we do need those
qualified person so
It's just just a concern of mine
and I just want to make sure
that we're not.
My concern is that we're not
leaving any folks out that can
do this work that our license
that are qualified to do it so
that's just a concern and and I
guess for some of the folks a
few of the folks that called in
who were against the bill do we
know that would be actually be
able to do some of this work.
Chairman souls Senator pope I
don't I'm not certain that was
directed at me there are my
understanding is that roughly at
least forty firms in New Mexico
currently with their current
work forces qualify again they
these construction firms tend to
person up for a specific job and
if this requires them to person
up in a different direction than
they already have and that's one
thing it should be noted that of
that forty more than half of
them and this is addressing
concern that senator Neville
raised about as being a you bill
more than half of the ones that
are currently with their current
workforce is qualified do so
through the as a station and
building contractors which is
non union office so it is not a
union versus non and you think
it is qualified to do this
highly technical skills work
that is vital for kids again I
think the public policy and
implicit in this bill is our
kids are worth it to not only do
this but we do it right and that
is the purpose of the skilled
and qualified workforce
requirement to say you know as I
think as you all are probably
very aware whenever federal
money flowed into a thank you
sometimes get slipshod work
being done and this is a strong
way of ensuring that does not
have.
So Mister chair.
Madam Majority Leader are you
mentioned forty companies do
these companies have the option
to maybe subcontractor work with
some of these other companies
that may not meet the threshold
of this bill.
Senator back chairman souls
Senator pope I suppose so it's
going to again the school
districts are gonna bid these
projects out and that reminds me
of a response to Senator souls.
Question about how the and now
it should be in the bit cracked
packets what rules they have to
follow in and how they're going
to bid on these public works
projects
But whether they they can
subcontract the work or not is
sort of up to the school
districts.
So Mister chair.
And madam Majority Leader one
more question you mentioned
those forty companies right now
is do you think those forty
companies here in the state.
Avid have the ability to do this
work you know this is emergency
work can accomplish that.
Chairman souls and Senator pope
the answer is yes.
Well thank you Mr chairman thank
you Majority Leader this this is
important work and thank thank
you for answering my questions I
appreciate.
Thank you senator next Senator
Kernan but we have about five
minutes until stop and I
certainly have I think it least
five minutes worth of questions
so I just want to make sure
Representative understand we got
a heart stopping about five
minutes or so so when we get to
that point we'll stop at that
point and you will be first on
the list but we come back on
Monday Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize I was doing a
presenting a bill in the house
and just got back over here and
on this presentation but operate
the bill in the analysis and I
just want to make a statement I
don't really have a lot of
questions I think center to
develop covered all of that that
but I guess just going back to
the history of why all this is
occurring and I know that A. F.
T. maybe that requirement with
reguards to re opening schools
it was part of the the plan that
PED has had put in place and I
guess before I can support this
bill I need to know what
research was done what other
states have done with regard to
ventilation.
We have an open schools until
just recently so I know we
couldn't do any kind of real
testing with regard to New
Mexico schools but you know I
certainly want our school
districts to be safe and we want
to have the best but I know that
was a lot of concern about
school districts that couldn't
even use these filters that are
being been required by the PED
the whole process is been very
costly my district spent well
over two hundred three hundred
thousand dollars at getting
everything up to speed and
fortunately it's a large
districts and district and I
know what at probably use staff
qualified people but I agree
with Senator pope I don't know
where these forty companies are
I don't know how they're going
to get down to challenge trauma
and I don't know how that's
gonna happen so I have some
concerns I'm gonna stop there
but
you know I entail I learn more
about that.
This process I can't support the
bill thank you.
I think it might be thank you
Senator Kernan of the state.
The other hands up of of other
committee members of.
A couple of questions that that
well I have quite a number of
questions so far we have only
talked about the construction
side of it whether it's you know
you who are in or not and I'll
start my questions there but
there's a whole second half of
this building of this bill that
deals with
how the funding goes out who
does that who oversees that what
are the priority on projects all
kinds of things that we haven't
even discussed in any game that
we talked about which is quite a
large portion of what this bill
deals that but let me state at
this point two more the the
construction side of it I think
one person indicated that
typically on the job that the
actual installation construction
is about to people is that actor
representative out for leader.
And I hear that correctly.
I was knocked off an.
And so I I my bandwidth is bad
and so I can't wait to Michael
but the at Representative but
the and get stuff going on that
broadband issues especially when
I'm living in Albuquerque by the
base so I'm I didn't hear your
question it says my internet is
on stable so Mister chairman
chairman my questions.
Mr chairman Michael Padilla
house representatives now to
that's great they'll be two of
us now.
What we get your bills Senator.
You know I love you madam during
the.
A question add to do with what
people actually go out to do the
work how many people typically
go out on a job to do the H.
back work at state in elementary
school.
Mr Chairman I'm you know the
average creating it is going to
be about two technicians.
Okay thank you for floor leader
of that's what I thought I heard
and I want to make sure that
that was accurate.
This particular bill says that
at least forty percent of the
people that are used which I
believe means on the job must be
in an apprentice program is that
true.
The funny percent trash only say
that one of those two people on
that job receive an education in
that graph that supported him
are enough to be able to do that
job correctly Mr Chairman yes
thank you and I thought that's
what I heard of no of course the
amendment that we just passed
indicated that they have to be
registered in or attending and
Would not allow that one of the
people.
Is not has not been through a
program and the other one just
registered yesterday because
they're not registered in an
approved programs of the two
people out there you could have
one that just started an
apprentice program and one that
is not in an apprentice program
is that accurate based on how
this bill was constructed.
Mr Chairman I'm student credits
to respond to your question
please.
Senator sells members of the
committee that is not correct
because under the bill requires
the complete compliance with the
construction industry licensing
act which require if an
apprentice is doing the work
that they have to be doing so
under the supervision of a
licensed journeymen so it would
not be the case that you might
have just an apprentice or just
to participants doing the work
it would be a someone at least
one of them would have got has a
during his license.
That.
Or later and certainly I and I
understand that but yet attorney
then prices did not require that
you go to an apprentice program
is that correct.
And senator chairman cells yes
that is correct and that is the
reason why we want
Hi there a journeyman who has
gone through the constructs an
apprenticeship program or one
who is an efficient program
operating under the supervision
of adjournment.
Apprenticeship program and so
under this bill though the a
company that maybe twenty out to
Germany then would not be
eligible but a company it turns
out one journeyman and somebody
who just started working under
the journeymen would be eligible
is that correct.
Chairman souls I suppose it is
possible.
So I I guess my concern is why
you would.
Why would we be excluding.
A company that that is about to
journey then for in favor of a
company's sent out one journey
then that one simply repairing
Office of that the counter
intuitive to me am I did not
understand your mission
something.
Chairman souls I think the
language the amendment that you
adopted
Expands as required by public
debate on this bill the firm's
that could send a workforce out
and it
It.
Does so in a way that
corresponds with the public
policy the state to acknowledge
the value of the prevention
programs and but allows for
greater number participation.
I don't I think as a practical
matter.
You your concern is the radical
more than actual on the ground
adult construction projects
performed by these workforce.
I'm not certain that answers
your question but I actors.
I'm I'm not certain that it does
neither of and that's why I
asked if we on a job with the
dated that if they sent out to
tax
and one could be a journeyman
and one to the end credits you
just started in the apprentice
programs and say they have to a
completed it says register in
worth pending one so they could
have signed up yesterday and
working under journeymen yet
would exclude a contractor that
for those two Texas setting out
to journey.
And it seems like you were
worried about the quality of
work that to journeymen is
better than attorney then and
then the drugs.
Am I missing something on how
programs work chairman so's I
think the policy is is opposite
of what you said in that
Recognizing the value of
apprenticeship programs and the
listening necessity that.
That the people performing the
work be participating in those
programs ensures a higher
quality of work and the simple
on the job training I think for
all the reasons that I think you
mentioned that on the job
training can teach you bad
habits words pressure program
includes a classroom component
that includes a higher quality
of workforce.
Yes but as I understand this
doesn't say that they must have
completed an apprenticeship
program where they got all of
that and it only indicates and
as the amendment says registered
in or attending at it doesn't
give any time limit they
completed it doesn't say
anything about a fact.
I I think that's a concern I've
got some other questions I know
when I want to honor the.
The minority members of my
committee that have I and I
believe it was at ten thirty is
that right Senator Kernan that
have a a caucus meeting and so
we're going to need to and at
this point we will pick up at
this point when we come back on
Monday but I've I've got some
concerns about who were
excluding and that I have quite
a number of questions also about
how the projects get picked how
they work and function within
that of state local match in the
PSC OC in the New Mexico school
finance authority for actually
the funding of all of this and
Representative up for later I
apologize but we did make a
commitment that we would add
that this time and so will pick
up on Monday with you first on
and we start pretty promptly
about eight eight thirty staff.
So I apologize floor leader.
Questions are things for the
Human we have several other
health bills also will be
scheduled for Monday we do not
have a Saturday I know several
other committees do with are
going to be tried to catch up
that that we do not have a
Saturday be out thank you to my
committee and for presenters and
all the other people who were
able to join us today we are
adjourned until eight thirty on
Monday.
