it is never appropriate to
directly call out a particular
legislator or even their
district or community during
public comment for what between
ourselves as we're discussing
things and I should have stepped
in at that point I apologize we
will do our best to not allow
that to happen I have also
instructed Marcello who runs our
our zoom that is clearly out of
why.
If I don't step in that she has
the power to you and double
there is somebody is purposely
trying to disrupt the beating of
that is not appropriate here so
Senator please my apologies I
should have handled it at the
moment and not out so and so
thank you for your time and that
of the committee.
Thank you.
Just briefly on what we've got
scheduled for today SB one
thirty five the Sanchez asked
roll that over Monday they have
not completed all of the
information that they needed
with New Mexico State University
so for those people watching SB
one thirty I will not be heard
today it will be on Monday's
agenda and then also be one
forty eight Senator Stewart she
needs to be over and rules
committee she has requested to
have her bill heard first so
Senate bill one forty eight will
be the first bill up and that I
believe will be running to the
other bills in order and so with
that and the introduction and
start let me turn it over to
Senator pope and I'll try to be
getting back in as I'm able to
of with the bill I got over to
this morning so Senator pope if
it's your committee.
Thank you Mr chair up before we
start I would just ask if we
could have a moment of silence
in the committee we lost one of
our state police officers out
last night officer Gary
insurance who leaves behind
three children and I believe we
had a fourth on the way you know
I've got to know somebody state
police officers and they're
really been for taking us at the
capitol so if we could just a
moment of silence.
Thank you.
So we will begin the day without
Senate pro tem Stewart on Senate
bill one forty eight you have
the floor.
You're on you're on mute Senator
Stewart Stewart.
Thank you so much Mr chair can
you hear me now yes all right.
Thank you
so this morning I bring to you a
commission on diversity equity
and excellence in education this
is a L. AST Bill.
This follows the two year study
that the L. AST did on the no
time to lose which is a report
that came from the national
conference of state legislatures
it's studied high performing
countries around the world and
try to determine what was common
to all of them and how we could
bring some of those issues back
to New Mexico one of the
The message that other states
have chosen and they're trying
to improve their education is to
set up a commission well we have
business people have higher ed
we have community organizations
and certainly in New Mexico we
now have the issues around
Yazzie Martinez we have
transformed New Mexico we have
the tribal remedy we have many
groups that are trying to put
together a plan this commission
would try to look at all that
and over the next four years
come up with both short term and
long term goals
so their responsibility would be
to report to us every year with
the short term goals and over a
period of four years really look
at where New Mexico is in our
educational system and where we
ought to go their job would be
certainly to start with our
Martinez Yazzie consolidated
lawsuit to fully understand that
and the ramifications we need as
a state to have a collective
ownership of a long term plan so
there are twenty eight.
People on the commission
including six legislative
members Executive public members
of for tribal or reservation
native American groups
School personnel of school
business person teachers up
principles
the folks that run our education
system and including two
business representatives and
several nonprofit representative
so the idea is to really study
where we're at now where we've
come from the last issues of the
last three or four years have
really shown us and the
educational community that we
have gaps and we have long term
plans that we must put in place
to get that kind of the first
teaching staff that we need our
students deserve teachers that
look like them so we we are
already many of us know or have
an idea of where we ought to go
but this would bring New
Mexicans together to try to
determine how to help our
education system.
so Mr chairman it would use two
hundred thousand dollars from
the education reform Fund the
legislative education study
committee would provide the
staff for it and
That's the generally how it
work and I am open for questions
thank you Sir.
Mr term before you go there I
will I forgot a main issue and
that is the commission with this
bill would form sub committees
the in their work they would
have funding for per diem and to
get experts and the the idea of
subcommittee works would bring
in the people that are not
specifically named as part of
the commission.
So I'm open to questions.
Thank you madam chair
If you have no other
expert witnesses we will move on
to public comment.
Our market would do we have any
of folks that have signed up in
opposition of this bill and
we're once again on Senate bill
one forty eight.
Yes we have a lease so Dolly who
signed up.
And mark Taylor your it seems
like your microphones as a
little lower.
We're having a little trouble
hearing of it.
I think that was to me I can
hear you very well so I just
want to make sure before I got
started Mr chairman.
Yes you can proceed thank you I.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Lisa
Dion attorney with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and member of the legal team for
the Yazzie Kleenex in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit the legal team
submitted written comments and
advances this hearing for the
record and we are closed this
bill for the many reasons listed
in that statement but I won't go
through at this time hello
however I would like to make two
additional burden points first
we agree that the state must
adopt a statewide conference a
plan to come into compliance
with the court's order in the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit we
repeatedly asked for one but
this bill would not result in a
comprehensive compliance plan
and is not a substitute second
this bill is not required by the
court's order to the extent the
LFC fiscal impact reports is
otherwise incorrect a commission
is not what the court said it
wants to see rather there are
already two blue prints of the
reforms needed created the
template from for education
reform in the tribal Remi
framework that are the result of
tremendous community led effort
and PED is in the initial
process of developing a draft
drafted as well these plans
needed media action and funding
and to date that has not
happened is this bill would
start the process from scratch
which is inefficient and
minimizes the work already done
by communities experts parents
tribal leaders and educators
these recommendations to be
acted upon as a priority and
it's sad instead of sending them
through another process and
especially with no guarantee
that these recommendations will
be implemented we hope to work
with the sponsoring these issues
has we believe it's critical for
the plaintiffs in the state to
work together to achieve
compliance with the Yazzie case
thank you.
Thank you and our next
but speaker.
In opposition market.
That was the last person who.
That was the last person who
emailed for public comment is
there anyone else from the
public who would like to speak
please raise your hand at this
time.
Mr Kirk Steinhaus go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members
that Education Committee it's an
honor to be with you this
morning Senator Stewart did an
excellent job of summarizing the
bill with your permission Sir
I'd like to add three additional
points the first point is just
this plain language this is a
rock solid bill that's been
fully researched as a school
superintendent for Los Alamos
I've been invited to participate
over the last two years and
presentations and discussions
about what's needed in New
Mexico and out of all that work
this idea is one of the ideas
that submerged and I think it's
important I'm second point if
you look at the timing of this
bill and where we are in New
Mexico I think this is the right
time for commission as a school
superintendent we work very very
hard and coordinate closely with
tribal governors from a northern
and the southern pueblos
we have worked really hard to
try to figure out how to use
culturally and linguistically
appropriate curriculum and it's
just not there we can't purchase
the curriculum we need we can
get the professional development
we need for that kind of
training and I think this
commission has the potential of
moving it forward I I've been
around the New Mexico
legislature for many years and
when Senator Stewart puts her
mind to something she gets it
done and I think that's another
odd timing point about this bill
and the last point I would
mention is that
I I don't see this commission as
starting over I see it taking
the work of transform New Mexico
the tribal framework
what we're doing with pre K. and
K. through six plus an all these
different initiatives and then
try.
To figure out how we're going to
make this work for kids who are
just in the middle of losing
almost the entire year and
that's another reason why we
need this bill Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity.
Thank you Sir.
I believe our Mr rounds would
like to speak as well market
would see as am going up.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee good morning stand
around just give history of the
summer on behalf of school
superintendents this is my
thirty seventh legislative go
around all second with Dr
Steinhaus just said about the
Senator Stewart we've watched
her work diligently to make
things work can work better New
Mexico we're gonna second
everything that Dr Steinhaus
said the superintendents we
believe this is a next necessary
step we have lots of things to
figure out you know we're New
Mexico strong as you put our as
we put our New Mexico work
together put our shoulder into
and push we can bring forward
right and correct solutions it's
time for this this is rock solid
as Kurtz said and we urge you
your approval thank you.
Thank you Mr rounds it looks
like Mr again would like to
speak as well.
Thank you chairman both.
Jokey and with the New Mexico
school boards association we
stand in favor of this bill we
strongly support to the
objectives of the bill we've
been involved in the no time to
lose effort with the Senator
Stewart over the last several
years this has been a one of the
major recommendations of of the
of the group the bill does
provide for comprehensive
membership including school
boards on there so we we we
thank the senator for that.
like the Mr Steinhaus we agree
that there's been much
accomplished over the last
several years that can be built
upon with this initiative.
particularly with the C.
Martinez lawsuits so we believe
this will help move that along.
And we think that the US senator
for bringing this forward we are
in strong support.
Thank you Mr yes.
I don't believe there anymore
public comments from anyone here
in the show room
If there is if you could please
raise your hand before we move
on.
All right seeing none I will now
ask members of the committee to
raise their hands if they have
any comments or questions to the
sponsor.
And first up is Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and
I support this bill completely
and I appreciate that approach
and Stewart bringing this at
this session is a member of
valley a city over the last few
years I think one of the things
that I like best about forming
this type of commission is that
hopefully we will finally have a
road map that will extend beyond
particular ministration it seems
like an education in New Mexico
you get one administration for
eight years and then we make
plans and we do things and then
once said it ministration
changes everything goes away and
we started a new process it is
my hope that if this bill passes
in this version is at least.
That we can finally have a road
map that's going to last beyond
any particular administration so
I think that's the purpose of
this bill I know we've had a
conversation about it during LA
Essie I'm.
I I think that it is absolutely
the best for our students in New
Mexico and outlook for two
Watching this develop and and
hopefully the outcome in the out
years and I'm talking about ten
years and beyond that we truly
have a plan for New Mexico this
is going to help not only our
students that are school
districts which are really under
the gun every time they have a
new secretary of education a new
administration everything
changes so this is a long term
plan and I think at the end of
the day all students will
benefit from this thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan we will
now move on to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill
you're one of my biggest
frustrations
since you haven't been the chair
LESC for the last couple of
years is I really feel like we
just had total time lost yeah we
were doing a really good job on
the LESC of looking at no time
to lose and really trying to
make some good changes to our
education system that work based
on politics that we're really
based on the children.
And quite frankly we've not done
that the last couple years and
so I'm really hopeful that this
type of commission will help us
get back to that one of the
other reasons I'm gonna
supporters I'm pretty sure that
you're gonna put me on it as a
joke but the
you know but I really do believe
that this is something we need
to look at that study that was
done by NCSL.
And look at how we can take some
of those things and change our
education system in New Mexico
all of us can agree that
something's broken.
I'm not sure if we can all agree
on what that something is so we
need to take a look at it and
really come back with here's
what we have found is broken now
how can we work together to fix
it just throwing more money at
it hasn't worked and we've done
that.
It hasn't fixed it so we have to
go back and really look at how
do we.
Take and tweak the system to
make it more effective not for
anyone but the students that's
got to be the focus we've got to
get back to the focus of
education being the students
and quite frankly have been very
disappointed that we haven't
done that for the last couple
years
and so I really appreciate your
leadership on this I appreciate
your leadership when you were or
the chair LESC
and I'm really hopeful that this
will help us figure out what's
going on in New Mexico when it
comes to education and how we
can fix it I like the fact that
you put in the a school board
member
I like the fact that you've put
in the superintendents
association gets to appoint
someone I was actually looking
through all the appointments as
well as waiting to speak I
actually really like the way you
put that together that's always
been one of the issues you know
that we come to on these and I
really just think it's a very
diverse group.
it's a wide ranging group that
we should have the expertise on
that group to be able to bring
back some really good
recommendations to the
legislature so no no real
questions but I really
appreciate you bringing thank
you very much Mr chair if you
could after we're done with the
bill come back to me I have some
I need to discuss with the
committee.
Well Senator Brandt.
Do we have any more comments or
questions from the committee.
All right so I will just if I
can make a comment Madam pro tem
um I appreciate the bill as well
you know coming up with the
commission to build that
strategic plan I know there are
some concerns and some emails
that I've gotten making sure
that we address you know the
Yazzie Martinez case and I'm
confident because I've already
worked with you and talk with
folks and and you're willing to
reach out and be inclusive with
this commission and just with
discussions with folks regarding
education so so thank you and I
will pass it over to you Madam
protein.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
at in closing I just want to
make a couple of comments so.
I think the criticism that we
already have plans out there and
this would start over is just
absolutely incorrect this
commission starts with those
plants this commission starts
reviewing the Yazzie Martinez
this commission will start where
we are now and we have a lot of
people that have been working on
this we just don't have
everybody at the same table now
we have a group here who has
their plan a group here who has
there's this commission really
needs to look at all of those
ideas those plans and it's
written in such a way so that
can happen so and they the
commission must report to the
legislature and the governor
every year that's where our
short term goals can be
addressed where the ideas that
the commission has come up with
can be presented to the
legislature but by having it
cross the political up at
elections that we have every two
years it it is designed to look
long term and really focus on
where we are now and where can
we go where can we get to and
how do we do that so I
appreciate the comments and
if this does go through I'm I
will work as far as I can to
make the successful so thank you
for the comments today.
Thank you madam protest it looks
like Mr chair Senator souls.
Thank you Mr chair I'd like to
move it to pass for.
Second.
We have a motion to pass from
Senator souls on the second from
Senator Kernan.
If we could get a roll call
vote.
From the education secretary
okay.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes in the bill yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes thank you
so yes we have a due pass.
Graduation settlement program
you have a do pass thank you Mr
and can I tie your committee one
thing I I was before you a week
or so ago with the bill for K.
five plus extended learning I've
received a lot of comments about
that bill I have turned it into
a committee substitute to try to
address everyone's concerns and
it will come back to your
committee but at some point I'd
love to come and chat with you
all about it so just keep that
in your back pocket when you're
not busy.
Thank you.
Mr chair if I could just for a
minute I've heard from Senator
Gallegos who is on the agenda he
cannot get online it's it's
something at his.
A place with the internet so he
needs to have his bills rollover
he is also apologized to the
committee he was looking forward
to presenting is built but his
internet is not working which is
just one of the things we're
having in this a very weird time
that we're in right now so I
just want to relay that to you
related to anyone who might have
been waiting for those bills to
come up thank you right and my
apologies Senator Braddock
forgot to come back to you so we
also need to address his vote as
well so I I guess we will
Representative was called that
will will have an excuse to.
Actually not on the committee he
was just going to be presenting
a couple bills to the committee
so we're good thank you Mr
president I got confused go
Mochrie is on conservation with
me so my apologies.
All right so we will move to the
next bill on the schedule we are
going to.
One second my apologies.
So we get Senate bill one thirty
five.
So the next bill will be Senate
bill one thirty nine Senator
Koppel's.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the Senate
Education Committee it's great
to be here with you today and I
fully support Senate bill one
forty eight as well and the
rationale as we all move forward
we all know that a long term
planning for the well being of
our children is first and
foremost and so that's essential
the bill that you have before
you Senate bill one thirty nine
in essence requests one hundred
thousand dollars
two from the general fund and
that is to go to a a and W.
through the public education
department for the upgrade of
equipment and services
as we continue to go ahead and
providers you will public radio.
Couple of things that I would
like to are reinforced to the
committee our and the reason and
rationale as we move forward
for.
The resources of this public
radio reports and spreads
throughout New Mexico and in
particularly in the areas of
northeastern and northwestern
New Mexico and what it does is
it helps with not only providing
an educational platform also the
emergency alert system that
emergency alert system is into
primary locations are one is run
by it will be the other poor
spike K. and W. and again in
order to continue to provide
needed services in our small
communities all as well as some
of the our wide areas of the
resources are essential are with
me today is also Michael Brasher
who is the general manager of
Katie and W. and if I may um Mr
chair members of the Senate
Education Committee this for him
to make a few comments in terms
of the need for these resources
and how we can continue to
actually it is you will.
The services that are necessary
to reach is looking to be
hearing possibly in the few
minutes some of the other needs
and technology as we do move
forward all of this does tied
together in our long term plans
to ensure that we communicate
and we communicate well when it
comes to education so that
Mr chair if I may again before
to Michael rush.
Our test Senator Campos you may
proceed much pressure thank you
very much Mr chairman chairman
To pressure if you would please
proceed with a pre state thank
you.
Mr chairman it seems like we're
having the.
Difficulties here and there we
go Mr chairman our apartment.
Mr chairman thank you very much
and and members of the committee
it's a pleasure to be here with
you a couple of quick notes K.
NW of course is a public radio
station which provides
programming to address the
problems the needs the interests
of the community.
The interest of the people in
the state of New Mexico the
station service a large area of
rural and underserved
communities including minority
communities and we do that with
ours as minority programming
cultural programming including
our New Mexico Spanish music
programming on KANW we have
noticed we have cultural
programming fine arts
programming and entertaining
entertainment programming and is
the.
Senator Campos mentioned K. and
W. is one of two primary E. A.
S. stations emergency alerts
stations.
And we're part of that broadcast
chain of stations that provide
information including hazards
severe weather or chemical
spills flash floods wildfires
highway closures and hopefully.
Never required national
emergencies in addition to that
the station is a radio
broadcasting class for we teach
young students from not just the
Albuquerque area but from around
the state of about radio
broadcasting and so the the the
classes held here at the radio
station
KANW provides up.
Our remote services where we
visit other communities to to
broadcast live and present
information about cultural
events and important news events
that are happening in the state
of New Mexico our of programming
also has an educational bent as
well we provide a program called
science Friday on Kate NW which
is popular and then we have news
and information programming.
And we think that we're an
important part of
Of helping to create a community
with the becomes active and
constructively involved in it in
a part of of the state of New
Mexico so we serve a lot of
people everybody pays into the
public broadcasting system we
serve people who would otherwise
not be able to receive that
service at the rate for.
Mr chair any any.
Thank you very much.
Chair open of course as we move
forward
we are available for our
questions regarding this
particular request for the
appropriation and again but I
reiterate is as we do move
forward.
Cation is going to be at the at
the corner post fifty well as we
do move forward in preparing a
stronger educational program a
platform to our throughout our
great state thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Campos and
thanks for bringing the radio
voices to the Education
Committee so create that as well
I will go and open this up for a
public comment do we have anyone
that is signed up for
opposition.
Are you there Markale.
Are you able to harass Markale I
am able to hear you Senator
unfortunately my the microphone
in my computer just is not
cooperating with me today so my
apologies however I did not have
anyone who emailed me ahead of
time to speak in opposition or
support for this bill so there
any members of the public that
are currently in the meeting
that would like to speak please
go ahead and raise your hand now
we're hearing comments of
opposition at this time.
I was just coming and going.
And it looks like we don't have
anyone so we will now give an
opportunity for those of the
public would like to speak and
support Senate bill one thirty
nine.
Do we have any supporters of
Senate bill one thirty nine that
would like to speak.
And it doesn't look like we have
anyone so that concludes
public comment for Senate bill
one thirty nine thank you.
Thank you more Kayla once again
for the folks on the webcast we
are on Senate bill one thirty
nine I will now I'll pass it
over for comments and questions
from the committee first up is
Senator Padilla.
I thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Senator Campos and
Mike Brasher good so good to see
you I just want to speak in
support and in favor of the lot
of a lot of times right now
especially in the pandemic you
don't have a whole lot of
options if your teacher out
there doing this and that trying
to to bring in a culturally and
linguistically and all these
other things into your classroom
this is one of those tools is
one of those ways to do that so
I just wanted to just voice my
mice full and and full throated
support for what Senator Campos
is doing here and I just hope
that we will all support thank
you.
Thank you Senator Padilla now we
will move over to chair souls.
Thank you Mr chairman and very
similar to center of the public
radio across the entire state of
New Mexico it provides for a
wonderful public service I with
their educational programming
with their news programming I am
with the opportunity I know down
at KRWG yes NMAA you where it is
a training ground for many of
our journalism students get
their start with the KRWG public
radio down there so it's the
same here we need to make sure
that we continue public funding
for public radio thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
would just.
Added that the comments that
were made it's just a and this
is just an important resource
resource to the public and we
need to support it
that being said I I want to has
over one more time to Senator
Campos if you have any closing
words.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I I see that the US senator
inTaos had this up I don't know
if you would like to go back to
center and so on that I funds
are however you wish to go ahead
and conduct that is satisfying
Mr thank you senator combos I
didn't see that I see that now I
will ask Senator Pinto to speak.
Thank you Mr chair thank thank
you members of the committee and
thank you for bringing this bill
Ford Senator Campos and I see
the up are you are that PED was
brought in on the discussion the
PED same thing about the doing
this but as far as an
alternative that.
Temporary art alternative
because we can't get broadband
out there
did they want to expand on it or
let's just just one radio
station.
Mr chairman Senator Pinto
incident it's a very good
question so PED is also thinking
as they move forward how they're
going to continue to expand the
educational message so it's a
and W. but within the locations
and one of the first time in a
few minutes to Mr Brasher but as
an example of this is going to
be one of the additional public
radio networks that will be
expanded as you well it
strengthening our western New
Mexico in northeastern New
Mexico in fact the
I understand that there are
negotiations still underway but
to work also through New Mexico
highlands university in
providing educational structure
their through that always so
this is even though one radio
station it is our one large
voice to bring in different
languages culture and the
educational programs and the Mr
chair if I may also Senator
Pinto quickly defer to what
Mister Brasher for a little bit
more information regarding that
question.
Mr chairman thank you very much
and Senator Campos thank you and
senator Shannon K. NW service
the Gallup area now and we do
that with the main channel we
also have additional band work
with for what they call H. D.
two and H. T. three these are
digital channels and so there is
a chance for some additional
channels of programming our
second one we've activated the
third one is yet to be activated
and that's something we need to
think about because we have
native American programming on
K. and W. every Monday night and
and frankly it have had.
A really good relationship with
with this the Gallup area.
Hi is Senator Campos on on the
Las Vegas
front with New Mexico highlands
university we now have a signed
agreement with them to to begin
using their existing facility
which they had taken off the air
K. E. P. and will begin
operating that in providing
service to the Las Vegas area as
well as a large portion of north
central western and southern New
Mexico.
Thank you very much thank you
very much Senator and.
Thank you Senator Campos and
thank you for that that the
comments are that's all I have
the Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Pinto so I
will pass it over to seeing no
other comments from the
committee I will pass over
Senator Senator Campos to close.
Thank you very much judge your
vote for this chairs souls as we
move forward Justin lows in and
I go to Senator The New
yourselves as you all have
indicated to the general public
that is we move forward
technology definitely is at the
forefront in providing as you
will means to provide
information to the general
public not only to our views but
to our elders as we move forward
what you have before you today
will be a series of pieces of
legislation that definitely hi
all of these messages and the
communication in other so with
that Mr chair all include my
remarks and to the members of
the committee thank you very
much for listening to us today
as we continue to improve
communications Water State thank
you Sir.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Padilla.
Mr chair with all of that said
and and with the comments made I
would move it to pass.
Do I have a second.
Senator Pinto.
So we have a new pastor center
Padilla second from Senator
Pinto if we could have a roll
call vote.
And Brandt though.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes.
Well.
Senator Neville.
Yes can you hear me yes I can
hear you now Senator Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes we have a due pass.
Graduation Senator Campos who
have a due pass on Senate bill
thirty nine we will now be
moving on to Senate bill one
forty four but for those on the
webcast just want to remind
folks that we are not going to
be hearing Senate bill one
thirty five today and also
Senate bill one fifty one and
Senate bill one fifty nine will
be rolled over as well as for
the folks on zoom and the folks
on the webcast.
Senator Campos you can go ahead
begin on Senate bill one forty
four request chair both members
of the Senate Education
Committee before you have Senate
bill one forty four which is the
remote education technology
infrastructure are you still a
distillation this is introduced
on behalf of the legislative
finance committee and as you all
have continued with your concern
and that more than that the
expertise and advocacy to ensure
that we do have technology at
all levels within our
educational system this is a
product of of those concerns so
before you what you have is the
of this particular bill which
will expand its already in the
public school capital outlay
council.
To provide great assistance from
the public school capital outlay
fund for broadband projects and
connect students teachers and
educational resources to the
internet for school work on the
school campus or in a remark
remote learning area of the
whole intent of this particular
piece of legislation Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Is first of all to expand and
develop the authority of the
public school capital outlay
council are to establish a
stronger framework and to use
within the existing resources
which can be up to ten million
dollars.
How we can connect if you will
in some cases that you talk
about the last mile in other
cases they talk about it as the
first mile in all of our
communities to ensure that young
people have access to our to
broadband in our state that can
come in the form of many
different ways but again the
prescriptive piece will be
developed by a task force by the
Canadian it sells to ensure that
we're doing this in an efficient
manner that will include if you
will broadband in general.
Possibility.
Utilizing our satellite Services
our time and if you will yes I
ensuring that we do have well I
are in our communities yes
that's available as well as of
wireless services in moving it
forward it also means that.
Person will have access if you
will over a period of time the
chrome books that they need to
the access to ongoing education
and so that we can make this not
only consistent.
To ensure that we do have this
as an effective means of
communication as you all can
tell as we
can to role in this whole area
of today's fiber technology one
of the things that we still need
to overcome is how we're all
going to be connected back
connectivity as we move forward
again is essential to the way
that we're gonna be doing
business in the future we're
hoping that soon of course that
we're through this COVID
nineteen variants but as we do
move forward that we're gonna be
able then to continue through
our iPhones or smartphones are
means of communication and to
continue to be able to
communicate visually R. as to
how we're going to be doing this
very efficiently so with that Mr
chair members of the committee
will be able for a questions and
of course we do have legislative
finance committee experts are
going to talk about.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the Senate Education
Committee.
Thank you Senator Campos we are
on Senate bill one forty four I
will now open it up for public
comment market would do we have
anyone in opposition to this
bill we did not receive any
emails for.
We did not receive any emails
for public comment in opposition
if there any members of the
public who would like to speak
in opposition.
He's raise your hand at this
time.
Doesn't look like we have anyone
are so we will go ahead and move
on to statements of support and
I believe we have missed Erica
Roberts to speak in support
Erica.
Good morning thank you.
Good morning Mr chair vice chair
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak today my
name is Eric Rovers I'm here on
behalf of New Mexico first and
I'm speaking in support of
Senate bill one forty four
remote education technology
infrastructure sponsored by
Senator Campos I'm this past
summer we had a remote town hall
meeting that was attended by
hundreds of New Mexico and New
Mexicans from all over the state
and our overarching topic was
health mind body and spirit.
Time and time again we heard
from health care providers
teachers students parents and
other stakeholders the COVID has
highlighted the inequities in
our state specifically when it
comes to access to broadband.
We've transitioned to virtual
learning those of us in more
urban spaces struggle but not
nearly as much as New Mexicans
in rural areas working hard not
just to survive but to continue
their education we cannot move
forward as a state without
better access to remote tech
infrastructure and as such we
have the consensus of over three
hundred stakeholders to expand
access to remote internet
especially to those rural areas
that are most disconnected
alongside community we stand in
full support of this.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak on this critical issue
today and thank you Senator
Campos for bringing this bill
forward.
Thank you very much.
that was the last member of the
public who requests to speak in
support do we have any other
members of the public that would
like to speak in support please
raise your hand at this time.
Deborah and with correct.
Yes this is Deborah Condit I'm
the right your lobbyist for
public charter schools of New
Mexico and charter schools of
New Mexico supports efforts to
connect all students with the
technology needed to learn.
The last year has shifted what
is needed to educate students
and we believe all students
deserve the next excellent
Education and should have the
tools and infrastructure to make
that happen we thank the sponsor
for bringing the bill and I hope
that you support Senate bill one
forty four thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who would like to speak.
I see Mr Joe via.
Thank you chairman open members
of the committee Jovian with the
New Mexico school boards
association or full membership
passed a resolution this past
December us that we expand on
the eligible activities in the
New Mexico public school capital
outlay program to include all
the equipment and the
the items necessary to get all
of our schools online.
also as as chair of the public
school capital outlay council we
are somewhat limited at this
point to providing state
matching funds of only for items
that are generally also funded
by the right
the federal E. rate program and
we provide the state match so
this legislation would open up
those eligible activities to
provide more of the
comprehensive nature of
broadband throughout our schools
but our rural schools so we are
in strong support and we think
Senator Campos for bringing this
forward.
Thank you Mr Stan rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee whether it's the
first model last mile earning
miles in between New Mexico
still has a wide digital divide
The New Mexico sept Association
like the New Mexico school board
association has continued in our
platform to urge good public
policy to move toward opening up
those horizons for every student
in New Mexico this change of
definition in the educational
technologists infrastructure
will build capacity an
opportunity we think a lot run
the ten million dollars so at
some point we're going to talk
about that but this is great
legislation it's an important
part of the overall plan to
eliminate the digital divide for
students in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr rounds of Mr drone
Campbell.
Good morning Mr chair and
Senator Campos I just like to
add my comments as well I agree
with the other I'm is that the
main as a person currently
running a school you can only
imagine that our technology has
been extremely important we're
very fortunate that we did give
our students each one of them a
PC laptop but without the
internet access that's who you
know I'm going to go so far for
those might appreciate hard data
about one out of every eight
students in my school I've had
to provide with the T. mobile
hot spot because they lack
internet access and it and
number here in the middle of
Albuquerque my screen is near
San Matteo and Montgomery so but
I definitely appreciate the
rural areas because I can only
imagine what that's like even
right here in the cities do have
low income students whose
parents cannot afford the
internet access and therefore
they're not capable of a
participating fully in our
academic program unless they get
this extra support so so the
route I took was the purchase
these T. mobile has but it's not
just basically pay the monthly
bill for those students so I
really appreciate this bill and
I definitely would recommend is
S. is is definitely needed.
One forty four thank you.
Thank you mark a lot we are on
Senate bill one forty four now I
will turn it over to comments
and questions from the committee
First this Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I
certainly don't oppose this bill
in fact I support the bill
just a couple questions with
regard to the state match that
will go along with
implementation descent followed
the same formula that yes said
uses with other projects within
school districts.
A very good question and thank
you very much Mr chair Senator
Kernan.
At this point I would indicate
yes however as the SLO's formula
is redeveloped and it's looked
at if there is going to be the
needs for adjustments then that
would occur specifically through
the task force and that the
modifications that will be made
but I'd also like to do is if I
could this for to us with the
LFC because he has been involved
in a lot of the internal
workings of what what that would
look like in the future if I may
Mr chair I'd like to do for.
Recently for a response from Mr
Lewis well.
You may proceed Center couples
thank you very much Mr Stewart
you available for us for the
response.
AS Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan I think
the short answer to your
question is yes it does apply
but
You know at given the.
Typical match with the right
you're probably contributing
about ten to twenty percent from
the state side for some of these
projects and a lot of the
federal E. rate program covers
most of the expenditures for
education technology
infrastructure.
And if I may thank you very much
the struggles of the response if
I may Mister chairman for
Senator Kernan in moving forward
there are there are so many
meetings as we are continue to
deal directly with
connecting if you well our
schools so it's not only the
right is a move forward yes
wanted first to public school
capital outlay and within that
it's also working with and
communities are with some of the
providers so there are a lot of
other contributors to ensure
that as we move forward that the
way we connect definitely for us
so it's not only the use of
those resources but leveraging a
long run in terms of how we can
all come to the table by that
the broadband is essential to
provide that for our students
thank you.
Thank you very much and and I
guess that just trying to figure
out how we.
Work to match the right I know
that's a significant part of
broadband for schools
just just need to understand
that moving forward it would
like to see those guidelines is
there develop so I think it's
extremely important to connect
everyone I have no no problem
with that we we're behind we
need to do that but I hope this
we are moving out of the COVID
data pandemic.
We begin to realize that virtual
education simply does not need
to go and we cannot continue to
consider or expect that this
online process of at the
educating our students is going
to to be successful over the
long term connectivity is
important no doubt for many
other reasons that we have to
get our children back in the
classroom face to face with
their teachers and then utilize
the internet broadband
connectivity for for many other
parts of education but until we
get our children back face to
face we're going to continue
to say loss of learning across
the state so so I understand the
need to build this out I'm not
opposed I think it's a what we
need to do I just want everyone
to remember that I'm.
The best education occurs in the
school room with teachers and so
with that that's all I have
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Kernan next we
will have Senator Padilla.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Campos just a couple of
questions.
So and two thousand seventeen
I'm chair or vice chair of the
interim committee on science
technology and
telecommunications and every
year that I'm chair I try to
make it the your broadband we
did pass a bill that you're that
created a statewide broadband
network it was Senator Ivy Soto
and former state representative
Jim Smith.
Can you tell me a little bit
about more about where this will
be different from that now what
we didn't do that year Senator
drive Campos that you may recall
as we passed the bill like we do
many times with a lot of
different things here in the
legislature but it wasn't funded
so they're at their it's on the
books as I understand but it's
not being designed developed and
implemented because of the
funding mechanism how does what
you're proposing here differ
from that solution that was
implemented that was passed that
you're.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Senator Padilla
the major difference is that
there is ten million dollars
that is available through the.
School capital outlay the
council that is utilized for on
going technology and projects
what happens with the expansion
of this definition in L. owls
the task force.
To deal directly with of the
guidelines for the ongoing usage
of those resources for expanded
broadband so the big difference
is that resources are available
we're not taking any additional
resources from any other
location and what we're doing is
we're setting up the guidelines
for so that is the major
difference in terms of what
we're dealing with the other
aspect and would like to bring
forward is that in in today's
world with the broader needs and
that has been mentioned earlier
which we probably will go into
the need for additional
resources but today as we move
forward we're looking at about
the expenditure of two million
dollars per year but in reality
just given the nature of COVID
and I want to go back real quick
to Senator Kernan I fully agree
there is nothing by the hands on
face to face instruction in the
classroom as.
A former educator of that
definitely was not only seen by
what I deal with but in the
rural areas as an example Las
Vegas to stop the just a matter
of eleven miles we found that
that we did not have the
available technology in order to
provide those services
especially at times when our
young people are not allowed
ours you will able to get in the
school so those are some of the
things that we need to look at
but the resources that we are
available and the structure will
be our for the design in order
to appropriate these resources
thank you.
Well okay so thank you the Mr
chairman and senator Campos
so the the work that's already
being done by the public schools
are by PED and and but by the
angle of the P. SFA excuse me.
one up yesterday but but that
the broadband group within the
PED.
This this did for their part of
developing this because I just
don't want to further exacerbate
the work that they're doing what
I'd rather do but I'd rather do
is I'd rather.
Fund with that the work that
they've already started so we're
not rebuilding something
different from what they're
already trying to accomplish.
So Mr chair of course a Senator
but the it's a very good point.
This line the use of those
resources for the work that is
already being done in the area
of improving infrastructure for
our educational system of this
will work in tandem not.
Be something that will be
developed in a different mall so
the whole intent is to the
public school capital outlay
council with the task force the
gathering event but with the
utilization of the resources
make that available some schools
have complete access to
broadband thank you Mr.
Yeah I guess I'm still a little
confused because I think one of
the issues that we have with the
the legislature on broadband
itself I heard it multiple times
as I've been working on this for
nine years now is that the
efficiency of the dollars that
we do expand on broadband I
would like to see us bring them
into into one both and have of
the boat rowing to everyone on
the boat rowing it together
rather than you know bunch of
boats in the water because then
the efficiency and the
throughput just may not be there
so I'm struggling with with how
to vote on this one I love it I
love the idea I I I really want
to see this happen but I'm
concerned that that we're doing
something that is maybe you says
you said Senator Campos in
tandem I'd rather it be with
rather than in tandem so that
the the throughput is is there
and the the dollars are
Are being used in a much more
efficient way so all right thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you very much Mr
chair thank Senator.
Thank you Center pretty
New Mexico about two Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman of thank
you Sir Campos right in the bill
What I'm trying to understand
is.
Right now they're allowed to do
the technology infrastructure
with in the school property.
And you're trying to expand this
to outside of that what does
that mean is I mean we're we're
we're going to go and put a land
line in to someone's home.
Does that look.
So again thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Senator Brandt
the question
because in essence what this
means and you'll see there and
this there it also includes
transportation so the whole P.
as we move forward with the
innovations is to ensure that
young people do that access to
technology in school and at
their home it does not mean
however that we would go into
Private property so late let's
say for example of fiber what it
means is through you know the
means of wireless satellite some
means of communication.
Be made available to those areas
with your dark spots but it does
not mean that we would be taking
any of the hardware the private
property and then once the
guidelines staff.
Again that would be used in
remote areas.
Provide the signal so you will
be able to and have access to
technology thank you.
In secluded areas.
As.
In some of the frontier areas
throughout New Mexico thank you
Mr chairman.
So Mr chairman senator lightning
I I guess we know we've got five
G. coming although that's
probably not going to be out in
those areas it might being
working with one of those
companies to put up a fight G.
tower for G. to our close enough
to home is that what we're
saying is that we would pay for
for hot spot for that home it is
that kind of work.
What you're looking at with the
server the LCS looking at with
us again thank you Mr chairman
Senator Brandt.
Let's say for example if it's a
great example that you use there
is the
there are companies and some of
the remote areas they decide
to go to invest in the tower but
at the hearts are so that within
that region
well a technology signal would
be made available so young
people within that area will be
have access to the internet in
order to apply to be provided if
you will
and that's the purpose and it
would be a combination of people
volunteering time and effort.
Designing if you will use to get
broadband and communication some
of the most remote areas
throughout the state.
You Mr chairman senator thank
you that that helps me
understand a little bit
I'm wondering about the
emergency clause
I'm pretty sure the public
school capital outlay have
already made their awards for
this year I doubt that they're
going to just because you put a
mortal sin Clause on this jump
in and trying to those.
wire why do we have an emergency
clause on the bill.
And that Mr chair Senator Brandt
as you dig into the weeds the
bottom line is this as we move
forward there are about two
million dollars worth of
The appropriations used for
various issues related to our
public school of improvements
within minutes the the urgency
happens around young people not
receiving full education today
so with the emergency clause
this makes the resources already
available
available with the expanded
definition for these additional
services so we can get the
communication to people.
Well the frontier areas in areas
where the communication is not
available today.
Thank you.
Mr chairman center I'm not sure
does that because this would be
money that would be filtered
through I I think it only
applies to the ten million
dollars that were already
filtered through the capital
outlay forty I don't think you
would actually free up that
other money I'm glad you brought
up some of that other money
though because you know the
federal the the latest COVID
relief package include three
point two billion dollars.
For the FCC for broadband access
to low income families
how hello this is a that work
with the US are they just two
separate pots and in two
separate issues I think I'm I
I'm hearing some of Senator
Padilla as concerns that we're
you know we're reinventing the
wheel or even you know we're
gonna put in a line in the
federal government's going to
come in and put in a line and
and and now we're multiplying
the multiplying the expense.
Mr chair and of course and
Senator Brandt I really
appreciate it again of the line
of questioning because in
essence what this does is that
thanks through the flow through
so we talk about the cures act
resources that's one part of
money this of course is another
but in order for us to align
working with groups like that
New Mexico first ensuring that
through the capital outlay
council it is a coordinated
effort and then there will not
be the duplication of resources
in essence what it means as we
need to get these dollars out
the as efficient and effective
as possible and provide as you
will the broadband communication
that people across the state
have definitely indicated they
need today thank you very much
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir I
appreciate the answers I think
you're.
I think you're mistaken on the
emergency clause issue I guess
it doesn't hurt anything for it
to be in there
but this is not gonna move
anything any faster because it's
got to go through the council
and they're going to have to
develop a plan and all those
things that kind of work can be
done before they ever have the
money the June date when this
would go to them under normal
circumstances is probably even
earlier than they would be able
to get this money out to the
field anyway so there's also.
My understanding is that we only
have five schools that don't
have fiber right now throughout
the state so maybe they can
prioritize getting the fiber to
those five schools but for the
most part our schools are
connected I think the bigger
concern here is the homes for
the students homes and maybe
even teachers homes being
connected
and so I think that's where it
becomes difficult because we
have some other.
You're competing legislation or
laws in our state that makes it
difficult to can connect to
people's homes are connected to
so I think you were.
Trying to deal with that earlier
so I appreciate it understand
the idea
I'm gonna listen some more I
really haven't decided where I'm
gonna vote on this
because I do think we need to
figure out some of those issues
even after COVID we really want
our students to be able to have
access at home because a lot of
you open up a lot of windows in
in the been homework settings.
in school learning settings I
mean home learning settings by
getting them connected and and
this is something that we need
to do so Brigitte your work on
this I really appreciate
certainty is work on this and
and so I'm just going to
continue to listen thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator Brett.
We will now be going to Senator
souls.
You're still this is
Thank you I took it off and then
I think more kallikrein and very
mute in the back in so that I
just a little clarification for
people who may not be clear we
got a number of New Senator is
also what we talk about the
emergency clause on the agenda
the little Asterix indicates
that the bill has an emergency
clause on it.
It has a higher threshold to
pass on the floor I believe it's
two thirds of the membership has
to approve it with an emergency
clause and if the bill passes
with the emergency clause it go
it becomes an act upon signing
not upon the beginning of the
next fiscal year and just so
what we talk about an emergency
clause that's what it the and
when you see on the agenda of
bill with a little Asterix next
to it that bill has an emergency
clause with so just so some
clarification so everybody knows
that some of the language that
we speak up here the public
doesn't always isn't always
aware of what that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator souls.
Well now go to Senator Hickey.
Thank you so the emergency
clause is being right and in
order to.
Take care of the students as
soon as possible with the
current COVID situation as are
kind of going back and forth as
to whether or not we're going to
be in school of the partial is
Mr chairman I'm sorry
and Senator Campos is that
correct thank you very much Mr
chairman Dr Senator Hickey in
terms of the emergency clause
that's exactly the purpose so
that the resources can be used
through the expanded definition
and that that can be developed
as soon as possible to ensure
resources are sent to where
they're needed as quickly as
possible.
Thank you.
Senator Campos one other
observation Mr chairman and
senator Campos and Senator
Padilla is involved with this as
well this is from a medical
observation
And I've said this before but I
think it is very appropriate for
this to be immersion and for
this to also be held in place
our as we move into next year
because we really do not know
what other virus may come may
lead to a disruption there's a
good probability that we're
going to be dealing with
disruption for another year
hopefully will be back in
school with our not forget with
the variant so again I
compliment you putting this
together and meeting this need
is emergency now well
disastrously and endorse that
when it comes is two thirds vote
for thank you very much thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Hickey and
I'll do a quick go back to
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and so we
we are allowed to go to two or
three or seven times Mr chairman
I would like but I appreciate
the way that you manage it
so I I I continue to struggle
with this and Senator Campos
admitted be honest with you
because I know that the need in
New Mexico somewhere between a
half a billion dollars and one
point three billion dollars to
bring the state into you know
that the FCC standards
guidelines etcetera mapping
process geospatial the whole
nine same thing with the monies
that we could bring down from
the USDA.
So there's there's a number of
ways to look at this
So to do this the right way what
is the funding for your your
project here why not your
project but pure initiative here
which would like to see have
happen I I know it's not ten
million dollars what is it what
what is the price taker I try to
find it in the FIR I couldn't
quite put my hands on it there
are a number of things you know
what we brought a hundred sixty
five million dollars into New
Mexico in December we brought
another hundred million and
fourteen and fifteen but we're
so we're still not even close to
some trying to figure out how
ten million dollars is truly
going to make an impact
equitably across the state can
you help me understand that.
Thank you very much Mr chair
a chorus Senator the and some of
the information has already been
brought forth in the question in
Force responses I know at the
end of the indication would be
there still possibly four or
five of our school districts
that you have some significant
broadband issues best with the
guidelines would assist that the
second portion is in your a
hundred percent correct.
The growing need continues
particularly with the upgrades
as we move into modern and
upgraded technology so in terms
of the resources that are
available with the immediacy
availability what we would find
is that would take care of the
most dire need areas in
providing you will broadband
services the others as they move
forward with a combination of
resources from the cares Act of
from Jordan talking to them in
terms of the growing needs of of
the resources for them to
upgrade their services.
It's it's still enormous on our
part but in terms of the
resources what this is is
another tool in the tool shed in
order for us to be able to move
this along utilize existing
resources just just one final
comment I have a five year old
in the other room she's a
granddaughter who is learning
online
her services are destructive on
a regular basis and earlier this
in your garden was was talking
are we do have the breakdown in
that form of communication and
there really isn't anything like
face to face.
But the point I'm getting to all
of that is we need to use what
we have available today to
continue to address those
growing needs that's.
The best response I can provide
but if I may have Mr chair of
all selected for to our Mr Lewis
I may because I'm sure you have
some additional information in
terms of the growing the
or technological.
If I may.
You may proceed Center couples
thank you very much Senator
are you available to discuss
recently of the growing needs of
for broadband services in New
Mexico.
Mr chair Senator thank you I
think most of the projected
needs you can find on page three
of the FIR so I'll let you who
is that but we also have our.
Program manager Micaela Fischer
from LFC could probably give you
a better picture of overall
broadband needs that are
committee is calculated and I
would just echo Senator Campos
as points that this bill
essentially provides a long term
expansion of hardware that's
eligible for use through the
public school capital outlay
fund
the initial funding from the
cares Act and the consolidated
appropriations act.
Is only available until fiscal
year twenty three and so this to
provide a a long term solution
as well as require the council
to coordinate these efforts into
statewide educational network
but if I may Mr chair if I can
have Micaela Fischer answer some
of the broadband
questions.
You may proceed Mr look.
Thank you Mr chairman Kayla
fishermen LFC program violation
chair yeah back on back in
October of our staff did some
calculations for in the LFC that
trying to figure out okay in
this remote learning environment
how many kids are living in
households that have access to
broadband but don't have
household subscriptions for one
reason or another probably the
cost how many are outside of
that area that in a hot spot
accessible area and how many
students are living in
households that couldnt be
served either by itself or hot
spot or by broadband right now
and we need some sort of
satellite internet hook up to
get internet there was hold.
The projections there this this
bill is only allowing.
The public school capital outlay
council to spend up to ten
million dollars on physical
hardware for broadband so that
first point about subsidized
subscriptions likely wouldn't
apply the last two about
providing hot spot services or
satellite internet could you can
see we estimated it would be you
know about fifteen million
dollars a year to serve kids
this was back in the fall and
since that is.
Senator Campos and sunny
mentioned there's been a lot of
federal in particular that's
flowed into our schools to help
support some of these needs so
it's likely that the needs are a
little bit lower than this
right now.
But the the ten million dollar
funding it would it would allow
that yes yes you some
flexibility in filling whatever
gap remains with hardware
providing schools with.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
miss Fisher and Mr Lewin Senator
Campos and Mr chairman
I guess you know that gets us
out of the parking lot on the
road driving down the road a
little bit I think that's good
Dr Hickey was correct in saying
that you know we we we probably
we could very possibly have
something right around the
corner that would push us back
home again after we in a so I I
get that.
Yeah I'm just still struggling
with the amount and what the
usage would be and and and the
coordination and the efficiency
of these dollars I just.
I'm gonna vote for this today
but eminent maybe doctor Campos
if you and I can sit down and
talk about this in much greater
detail because we have a number
of things that we're doing
Ross the legislature in across
state government that that is
the reason why I'm in
introducing a bill called the
broadband access and expansion
office the creation of that
office is going to pull
everything together so that we
see much greater efficiency with
each dollar and we put a plan
together that's top to bottom
upload download it cetera
right of way easements a
financial plan which we don't
have I'm I'm just fearful that
we're trying to do this much
like when I created the early
childhood education and care
department we were delivering
early education across four
different departments now that
we've we've taken iron to that
very wrinkled shirt we're seeing
the throughput and that the
efficiency of the dollars
there's a rolling financial plan
in in the department that that I
created and I'm putting a
rolling financial plan into this
new office that I'm looking at
I'm just worried that we're
creating another.
remedy for a bunch of other
remedies that they were already
attempting here so.
Reshape that thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Padilla we are
on Senate bill one forty four
and I would just add in from my
perspective that some of the
same concerns that are brought
up in the analysis you know
making sure that we're working
with the department of
information technology who's
leading on this I just want to
insure that there's not a lot of
duplication of effort a lot of
redundancy in what we're doing
here there's definitely a need
here and of course being in the
classroom in person is optimal
but unfortunately we have just
not been able to do that I mean
are we want to protect the lives
of New Mexicans but even going
forward now some schools are
going to go hybrid and even when
we are back in class we're still
gonna have students that do not
have access to the internet
which you know leave them behind
not only in the state in the
country but around the world so
we need to make this happen I I
would just want to make sure
that we are coordinating and
like I said we're not wasting
dollars by duplicating allotted
for but I am in support of the
bill so I see Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman I think Dr
Hickey was before me all all no
okay just one last thing I
wanted to mention Mr chairman
thank you for calling on me
again this is a one of my major
swim lanes are present so I know
that Senator Pinto this that the
let's just take this particular
project as an example so Senator
Pinto is working you know around
the clock to bring broadband to
in the library to a particular
area but she's having completely
rebuilt in her district with
these what would that library
project be.
With this with these dollars
beat all available because
there's there's obviously
learning that happens the
library there's a number of
things that happen the library
and I don't know maybe she wants
to chip chime in on this but I'm
trying to help her with this
particular project of hers I
think it's a beautiful one with
these dollars be available for a
project like that with with this
be out of that scope.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
senator of the of these dollars
would be available for of the
technology portion of the
project so you have a
combination of course of
construction and then ten
minutes you will of the
technological services as well
yes Sir thank you.
You Mr chairman so because it's
not on on school grounds it's in
the library is and I'm surprised
to hear that if anyone else
wants to chime in.
Mr chair if I may just quickly
as long as it's not going to be
on the
public grounds or as we deal
with the
and and I'm not sure specific to
for the library ends but I I
anticipate.
The public libraries.
It is a public library.
That was the the assumption that
I use for the response thank you
very much Mr chair.
All right thank you I'm really
surprised to hear that I'm I'm
happy to hear that and I guess
all the libraries can apply to
this fund that that's very
interesting.
Thank you Senator Padilla
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Padilla and Senator Campos point
of clarification
and also learning at this point
there are multiple projects in
the no sins are here you've been
working on this for years to get
this moving and for native and
and this does need to be
coordinated I mean again
reinvention of technology we
offices is very expensive and
then trying to interface and is
not just expensive it's a god
awful nightmare
if there that isn't planned for
in the beginning so I do recall
I believe and I'm just trying to
see if I'm correct that you are
in the process of looking to
sponsor a division that
department or whatever
broadband
implementation in the state
where things like these would be
coordinated and if and if you
aren't is that happening and the
I. T.
department thank you very much.
Mr chair was a question for me
or for Senator that I'm I I
apologize that questions
initially for you since you've
been working on the broadband
that is your swim lane are.
Yeah I appreciate it Mr chairman
if it's with your permission
I'll respond I I don't know that
we normally do that in in
committee its it's but I'm happy
to say the at the office of
broadband access and expansion
will be a statewide office that
will will be administratively
attached to the department of
information technology where it
should be but it will be
reporting to the governor of the
state and it and and that's and
will be in statute which is very
different from how we do it
today and it will tie in every
aspect of broadband delivery at
that the state government level.
Thank you Senator Padilla and
Senator Campos says is that work
for you in this bill thank you
very much Mr chairman accords
and Senator Hickey.
In that does work as we move
forward and I want to go back a
little bit because I've been
dealing with
educational technologies for
this thirty years I've been in
the Senate and over the years as
an example working with the
National Guard trying to go and
providers will towers Act
unification are doing all these
other things and Senator he and
I worked in concert to ensure
that we can move this forward
this would be one of the aspects
or tools or resources could be
available so whenever the
division is created along with
the resources all of this to be
cumulative and utilize that as
we move forward with the
uniformed foremost technologies
in the state of New Mexico and
thank you very much Senator
Hickey for bringing that that
question forward because it does
create the continuity is
centered and I continue to work
on this and other issues along
with yourselves Senator open one
of these others all of us are
very interested in how we're
going to be efficient when it
comes to the use of broadband
communications thank you Mr
chair.
At Mr chair thank you so
expressions and and thank
Senator Padilla Senator Campos
there is.
Thank you Senator Hickey
I do not see any more comments
or questions from the committee
once again we are on Senate bill
one forty four.
So do I have any motions from
the committee.
For any other some of.
do pass.
All right so we have a motion to
do pass from Senator Hickey do
we have a second.
I'll second that.
Thank you so we have a motion to
do passed Senate bill one forty
four the second from Senator
souls.
Can we take a roll call vote
Merion.
Yes Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes.
Intersil's yes.
We have a due pass.
Graduation Senator Campos we
have a due pass on Senate bill
one forty four.
For the folks in the zoom and in
the webcast just a reminder that
Senate bills one fifty one five
one and Senate bill one five
nine will not be heard today
they're going to be rolled over
to Monday and we will now move
on to Senate bill one sixty
great center complex yeah.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the
committee Center by the end
please be assured I will work
with you to ensure that we
technology forward together as
state senators so I appreciate
that.
You Mr chairman of course
members of the committee Senate
bill I believe one sixty three
is the small business
development center request for
an appropriation in the amount
of of two hundred thousand
dollars are from the general
fund to the higher education
department and and the rationale
again as we move forward with
the SPDC of this is been a very
strong organization over the
years and I still recall about
twenty years ago but we move the
funding directly into the
general appropriations act and
of course the purpose for this
is to continue with
No cost counseling advice and
the development of us small
businesses across the state of
New Mexico as we know with the
various small business
development centers the majority
of them are located in community
colleges they reach out if you
will in to allow small
communities and large
communities and also into the
areas as an example of the sons
of the desert area and there in
particular we have the
international business operator
of that also helps with the
exporting and importing of goods
but they are providing the
technical assistance in that
area the point that I'm getting
to with this particular entity
is that over the years we have
continued to cut the resources
from the small business
development centers but in
essence today with the growing
need if you will of the
assistance needed to help small
businesses are what we would
like to do is to try to return
to at least a
Level
where we were at the last couple
of years and that even at that
we saw the decline as you will
and resources use but we want to
continue with the outreach but
it's been very difficult with
limited staff and limited
resources of this amount of
course would be
The ocean of those resources to
help us so we can continue doing
these are dire areas to help
small businesses continue with
their development.
Just recently we held a small
business development will
showcase across the state where
many small businesses were held
within the last several months
with extra time and effort to
ensure that their businesses
were kept open so again this is
crucial
project it's very important to
all of us and if I may um Mr
chairman our members of the
Senate Education Committee
columns to Russell Wyrick was
executive state director New
Mexico small business
development center and also Mr
Glenn Walters is a senior of
special projects coordinator
with the New Mexico and speech
the to help us a little bit
better understand the enormity
of the needs of not only the
resources but providing small
businesses with the framework
and the substance of the well
for them to be successful in
their small communities across
the state our community colleges
and of course in our urban areas
as well thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Campos you may proceed
Mr Wyrick.
Much Mr chairman.
Thank you the chairman and
Senator Campos my name is
Russell Wyrick I'm executive
state director for the New
Mexico small business
development center network it's
so good to see so many faces
there and all the strong support
you've provided to small
businesses for many years and we
really appreciate that small
business development center as a
program it's been an incredible
incredibly challenging year for
the state small businesses
we've seen a significant
increase in demand for services
we just between March and
October of twenty twenty we had
over fifty five thousand
contacts and over almost eleven
thousand hours of of direct one
on one counseling
resulted in about four thousand
three hundred save jobs in the
state
market can Ewing to work with
those so we're really we are
nineteen centers across the
state as a statewide program
where the boots on the ground
helping.
this small businesses
participate in all of the other
programs that you do that you're
doing there and you're
supporting so participating Lita
in J. tip all the financial
situations
every program that the federal
government coming out were the
ones that are behind the scenes
helping the individuals and
small businesses understand how
to apply for that how to fill
out those applications how to
get their financial forms
together and get their financial
statements together so they can
apply for those loans.
And as a matter of fact in the
previous year we did over a
hundred assisted of with over a
hundred and five million dollars
of a capital acquired by our
small businesses in the state
and so again as a program we are
in our PSP sometimes we seem to
fall through the cracks a little
bit but we don't
We don't think anyone
intentionally
see that with small business but
but you know from that
experience we received a six
percent the across the board cut
to our PS fees
it during the special session
and then on the table currently
in the recommendations of three
percent across the board
so a little bit of a challenging
I'll do what I can with the
funding that you're able to
provide but especially with
where the state is I can I can
make a difference if I've got
the qualified staff to be able
to help the small businesses
recovering growth thank you.
Mr chair if I may I would also
like to defer to Mister Glenn
Walters is a senior special
projects coordinator
international again behind that
this presentation today is to
express of the growing concerns
how we're gonna take care of our
small businesses not only stay
open but continued to readjust
their portfolio and their long
term strategy and operations so
as I meant like before again to
Mister Walters you may proceed
Senator Campos thank you very
much Senator both structures.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
Senator Campos just a couple
quick real quick points first of
all even though the money goes
to Santa Fe community college or
make sure it's clear that money
is and spread out to all the
community colleges one all of
the STTC is on nineteen centers
the of of P. tak IBA funding all
flows to Santa Fe community
college in the distributed to
all the other community colleges
across the state on that one
fund.
The goes across the state I'll
be just fine out of obviously
these are very interesting times
legislature from passing
different things even for the
state and if you don't know if
the SBHCs is really the
technical provider for those
bills to pass.
For relief and people come to us
if you know if you go to the
Economic Development website for
example you'll see that the less
the SPD seizes the technical
provider because we have the
state you know the staff that's
out there the community that can
help folks and lastly I would
just point out that the recently
released governor's economic
recovery councils roadmap to
recovery that was released to
January twelfth does make the
following of policy
recommendation and that is to
restore the six percent budget
cut of two hundred fifty
thousand that the New Mexico
SBDC network received as a
result of a the special session
so is that RecoveryCouncil is
looking at road route for
recovery they're definitely
recognizing the role of the
value that the SPD sees play and
made that recommendation in the
report thank you Mr chair and
members the committee and so are
Campos.
Thank you very much Senator open
thank you all to the presenters
as we all know there in nineteen
of the service centers are
located throughout Mexico and
again now the higher education
department is where they're
over state so again looking
forward.
Questions thank you.
Thank you Senator Campos we are
on Senate bill one sixty right
now we will open it up to public
comments mark Taylor do let's
start with any opposition to
Senate bill one sixty three.
I do not receive any emails from
anyone in the public who would
like to speak in opposition are
there any members of the public
within the meeting would like to
speak in opposition at this time
go ahead and raise your hand.
And it appears we don't have any
members of the public would like
to speak in opposition are there
any members of the public would
like to speak in support of
Senate bill one sixty three.
One more time are there any
members of the public would like
to speak in support.
Okay that concludes public
statement for Senate bill one
sixty three thank you.
Thank you mark a lot we will now
go to the committee I will first
off all start off with Senator
Padilla I would thank you Mr
chairman and I just stand in
full support this is an
operation in our state that
provides a very valuable and
much needed service they do a
wonderful job they are always
open minded to anything that
lands on their lap because I
know that I sent many things
that come across my desk in many
constituent issues from all over
the state because I'm identified
in in a in a large way with the
small business development
council because of the work I've
done with them over the years
and videos and all the other
things that they do and and I
just want to thank them because
when when constituencies and
someone just struggling with
with something with their
business it might already be in
existence are there's trying to
start up a business or doing
this or that or that we have a
small business development
office and in my district and
they're doing OK continue to do
a very good job I send them to
the STTC and and they always
come away with a smile or very
perplexed on the nineteen things
they didn't do before they they
showed up so I think this is a
very valuable service I just
want to let the the committee
now and when I was starting my
business is what which has
resulted in and and the little a
separate several thousand jobs
here in New Mexico I was doing
this about twenty one years ago
it it had a different name at
the time if I recall but but it
was definitely the same service
and it was very valuable and
helpful to me so I just want to
let that support to do so this
bill thank you thank you Senator
Campos.
Thank you Senator Padilla will
now go to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Campos us just looking at the F.
I. R. and it says that the LFC
has recommended three point
eight million for the US the PC
is this in addition to that.
And is that an increase.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course Senator Brandt.
It is in addition to that amount
and if I may I'd like to do for
to
the director of Mr Wyrick for
one reason as we move forward
that budget in years and as
indicated earlier he works with
the resources of the best
receive but within that given
the nature of COVID and what
we're dealing with now.
I believe it's important for us
to add the additional resource
but again Mr chair of Senator
brand manager surgeons to wired
for a brief response of course
and if you could answer whether
or not the three point eight
million would be an increase
over its budget from last year
that would be great I appreciate
that thank you very much
director wired please.
Chair as senator thank you so
the FY twenty one appropriation
originally of was four million
one hundred sixty one thousand.
And then there was a across the
board six percent cut during the
special session which took us to
three million nine hundred and
eleven thousand
at six hundred and currently on
the recommendation is an
additional three percent cut
which would take us to three
million seven hundred and ninety
four thousand three hundred.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate that I appreciate the
work that you do
your your your good friend my
good friend sorry a little
Walter's.
Testimony really helps me to
support this so I just want to
kind of know where we were at
and whether or not to your
budget was being cut increased
already thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt will
now move on to senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chair I just wanted
to have my support to the
species that sound County it's
located on the campus of San
Juan college of course in the in
the in conjunction with yes we
sailors in New Mexico better
incubator program that provides
office space warehouse space for
new businesses there's a.
Sen Warner's economic
development is located there
of the chamber of commerce
recently located in one facility
so you can walk into the
building basically get have all
the resources you need for
starting up the bill a business
and this SPDC is our internal
part of that is actually through
my two cents worth thank you
share.
Thank you senator Neville I
don't see any other hands up
from committee members I do see.
did you have a comment Mr
Walters.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I just wanted to point
out to replace the new members
you know when you're getting
questions from constituents
about one's PPP what is idle
what is this bill what is that
bill for federal relief whatever
we selected the SPDC because
we're there to help those those
folks so yes in case you don't
know about us where there were
there to help please send your
constituents are asking you what
do I do about these federal
programs how do I do the
employee retention tax credit
send them our way thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Padilla your
comment Mr chair with with your
permission I would move it to
pass thank you.
Our before we move on for second
I I just want to closing comment
that
I'm in support of this bill as
well this is gonna be one of the
tools in the economic recovery
so I'm in support do we have a
second Senator Padilla has a
motion for do pass on Senate
bill I would so please and we
have a second from Senator
Brandt Marianna if we could take
a roll call vote.
And your Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
Senate Bill yes Senator Padilla
yes Senator Pinto.
No.
Yes.
Senator rules yes.
We have a due pass.
Congratulations again Senator
Campos able to pass on Senate
bill one sixty three.
That's going to complete our
agenda for today just for minor
for the folks in the settlement
in the webcast Senate bill one
thirty five was not heard today
that's going to be rolled over
until Monday I believe and also
Senate bill one fifty one five
one and Senate bill one five
nine will be heard on Monday as
well I will go ahead and pass it
to our chairman bill souls to
close to me.
Thank you Center pope we're
running a very smooth efficient
meeting very ably I truly
appreciate appreciate that might
be able to sit just as a member
of what you performance right
also very much appreciate this
committee the public those two
bills SB one fifty one one fifty
nine were rolled over at the
sponsor request was having
internet trouble getting on
today so we hope to get those
but by putting three bills from
today on to Monday we're gonna
have a fairly busy schedule on
Monday of I believe the agenda
is already out and we will put
those at the top of it a new
agenda of do bills will be
coming out shortly but we've got
SB one sixty nine with uh
Senator Gonzales St hired
coordinating council with the
one seventy out that have built
on financial literacy for school
credit SB one seventy one on
campus education public health
emergency guy a ghosts and
Kernan SB one seventy seven you
are Hospital structuring Federal
yells SB two oh six after school
program funding all the SB to
ten ethnic studies for education
which is the Senator Lopez and
F. B. two twenty five use up
some revenue for school funding
for the public to maybe watching
if you want to be able to speak
on any of those please make sure
that you sent an email to the S.
E. C. at NM Legislature go mark
hello will get your information
and make sure that you get on
the soon to actually be able to
give public comment public is
always welcome to watch the
webcast etcetera but the I see
your hand up that you have a
question or comment.
I thank you Mr chairman I did
have a question on the financial
literacy piece or bill that
we're going to hear I know we're
not debating or discussing it
right now but I would like to
ask you if you could ask your
staff to take a look at if
that's already on the books
somewhere it seems to me like it
is something that Representative
my Estes did about I want to say
eight or ten years ago I don't
think it was ever funded and and
I I know I I I I I apologize
Mister chairman I I should've
brought this up on Monday or
with this bills being heard but
I just thought I'd ask now so
maybe the staff can be can bring
us some and I appreciate it.
And that's Senator they ARE this
also has a parallel bill going
on over in the house yes how
which has is Representative
Willie D. Madrid and senator or
Representative my S. this I
think are both working on that
so if an extension or goes
beyond anything that might
currently be on the books for
that thank you seems like it
seems like we'll hear more about
that and thank you so much yes.
I think we also center.
Yes just on that point about the
financial literacy I believe
it's an option when after they
pass algebra two they can either
take up financial literacy or
we're going to trick so that
leads that up to them and that
still up to the teacher to
corporate that into the
curriculum if they can't thank
you.
Yes I think we'll have a full
discussion on that come Monday
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman our I just
want to raise your of that
the bill that you passed earlier
in the week aces sent me doing
some research and I have a
graduate student working with me
and I'm going to send you I just
want to let you that in your of
legislation now and that's one
of the emails there will be
something from me that does yes
ma'am Alice's son how well aces
that work are are good the
program you're doing and how
well it works in other states
thank you.
Thank you thank you and I think
you're referring to the bill we
call the at age eighty Institute
so for that and and I have a
production I promised you also
some information about that so
any other comments from any of
the committee members.
Then I so appreciate this
committee it is efficient it
sticks to the point gets things
done you all a very appreciated
so thank you and if not we'll
see you all Monday morning.
