Expansion or renovation of
facilities or to pay off the
least purchase agreements when I
when mf was doing their due
diligence to start the program
let's see they heard from on
holders that the current statute
stating that the public school
capital out they council may
provide lease assistance as
viewed as caring considerable
risk to bond holders they
interpreted it to mean that list
assistance could go away at any
time and that interest rates for
charter schools could become
higher than other opportunities
as a result this bill remedy is
that issue by changing that may
to a shell on page four line
sixteen and without waste and
for questions.
Thank you anything you need
dead.
Just that it should the the
statute change doesn't change
the practice of psc or sea what
it changes is the perception
that there's risk in the formed
they thank you for having those
in support in the audience
anyone in opposition.
With your permission is already
just move ahead I don't think
there's any thirty oppositions
questions from the committee.
Most second by senator post if
you'll call the role please.
Yes
yes
you have a new pass
they keep sure.
The.
The.
So this is a set of moral for
yes okay so for those in the
audience and those online when I
on senate memorial for senator
soles you have the floor thank
you memorial for and i'm doing
this for center store
just request the lfc the conduct
a study with collaboration of
the interim investment and
pensions oversight committee and
beeber at university of new
mexico to examine the history of
make recommendations for
equalising the pension benefits
of the e r b and the p r a
all right thank you senator do
we have any support in the
committee room of a could by
show hands is only support on
senate memorial for
how what online.
Many support for center memorial
for
none alright do we have any
opposition to senate memorial
for.
How about
we don't that will go to the
committee any questions comments
we have a due pass from center
center hiki and senator will.
You may not know the answer this
but I said on it when we did the
period restructure and few years
ago I said on the committee
and we've looked at the are
being not so much to do anything
about it but to compare the
numbers of pretty wide apart as
far as making them equal as far
as the third equally thrown
together you'll make the overall
number come down I guess so is
there I guess that's what we're
going to try to find out what
the study is that correct mr
chairman mr chair and center
novel my understanding is this
study is to to look at those
kinds of things that necessarily
even the convincement to to
ensure that the benefits are
very similar for both of those
so that one group or the other
doesn't feel like they're being
shorted with one of the state
there wasn't there
intentional designed by the rb
and ancient history too
take more upfront money and
less.
Benefits item i'm just asking
questions here rumors may mister
chair and and center I have
heard such things I don't know
the history of of how those were
set up I have heard that in the
education one that they
purposely at one point.
A more the benefits forward
instead of after but I don't
know it is anything more than
fair enough thank you mister
questions we ever motion from
center hiki do we have a second
second by center in a bill
mary if you can call center for
a.
The.
Yes
yes center my estimates center
novel said the pinto
center poll yes senator soul yes
alright
you have a new past senator and
they don't go singer gay goes is
here if not I think I can put on
his center meal
I am
not going to meet armio i'm so
sorry
I apologize for me how.
And this is just been that
normal please need a wareness
week a month center sold I
apologize just want to let
everybody know where now and
senate memorial seven for those
online in the room the other
four of my apologies no
apologies set memorial seven
just request a public education
department to clear the week of
october fourteen to eighteen as
no poisoning awareness we can
encourage his local school
boards and government bodies
charge schools to provide age
appropriate educational
activities and information
pressing the risk we know what a
scourge that knows ben and
certainly within our high
schools and communities and the
more we can raise awareness I
think the better
thank you senator do we have any
support for senate moral seven
in the committee room or anyone
who wanted to speak and support.
How about only
all right do we have any
opposition.
And online
alright we'll now go to the
committee
will you have a due pass from
senator hickey
and a second from senator ville.
Mary if you can call the boat
center branch.
Yes
yes there nobody center pento
center poll yes
yes
you have another due pass
senator you got some extra
