As we can to thank you.
Committee Taurus we think New
Mexico on the twenty twenty New
Mexico teacher of the year I
also wanted to point out that
within the bill it would look at
recommend recommending a new
system is to information system
that is statewide that would
really help in relieving some of
the burdens for districts and
would allow easier access to
some of the the data that we
have so in order to support
student progress and success all
levels of our systems work to
maximize our efforts and
supporting what happens in the
classroom ensuring that we stay
committed to working efficiently
at the highest levels we can
reduce administrative burdens on
our school leaders who in turn
can have more time to focus on
student outcomes we believe that
data reporting should serve a
purpose and not merely it be
printed or be put on a shelf or
in a file folder a survey
conducted by the American
Association of school
administrators found that ninety
nine percent of superintendents
across the nation feel that
state do data could be more
useful there are times when it
seems that report simply get a
desktop audit and are not being
used to support or educators and
or schools is intended by the
state statute not only that but
superintendents across the
country also reported that they
need tools to act on information
and more training and ongoing
support of reporting analyzing
and communicating data.
The state national survey of
superintendent ninety percent of
those leaders Phillip they had
better access to information
they would be more confident in
their abilities to make
decisions for their district by
investing in a statewide
information system data can be
more easily accessible to all
those who seek it and it would
not come at a cost of time and
manpower to our districts our
district school leaders be it
need to be able to focus on the
health of their school ecosystem
by streamlining administrative
burdens our leaders would have
more time for problem solving
more time to innovate and more
time to work on retaining talent
in our schools.
And Christina Fisher from the
New Mexico just available to
answer questions turn the Mike a
little towards.
We're and speak up a little
further.
Just available to answer
questions yes nothing further so
those in the audience in
support.
We wanted opposition.
Many supporters would like to
come and and make comments
please come up to the the Mike
thirty one on one.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee jokey and with The
New Mexico school boards
association the our our
membership has long had a
position on this I think we're a
but I five to seven years on
this but it reads New Mexico
supports creation of a task
force to identify remove all
funded unnecessary duplicative
laws regulations and reporting
requirements so this fits right
up perfectly with that we
support this legislation thank
you thank you Joe.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico
two things I want to convey in
our support of this memorial is
first our charter schools that
were very thin administrative
where when you're talking to a
charter school director there
often the federal programs
coordinator the special ed
director they played many roles
with their school so they feel
the pinch of administrative
burden and so we appreciate our
inclusion in this memorial
secondly
I just want to prep everyone
that this may cost money there
is a report six years ago about
the Arcadia CA data systems that
we operate in and while they're
well administered they are old
and so we have these moments in
time with some kind of money
that we have to make
infrastructure investments and I
hope that that's part of the
conversation as we move forward
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you to sponsors thank you Matt.
And it turned good morning Stan
rounds of the school
superintendents in the colors of
educational leaders we do stand
in support of this memorial I
think my colleague Senate very
well I will say this we really
have an opportunity here to
solve a years long issue.
Of that we haven't New Mexico
public schools we work really
hard to be able to get to date
and have the correct data but we
haven't figured out how to
reduce the reporting side of it
the increased inclusion into
administrative time and worst of
all the duplication of data sets
and therefore the inaccuracies
that come out of that we're
really do need to know what we
know so Mister chairman we whole
heartedly support this we
appreciate the inclusion in the
the named as far as those of
other and we look forward here
provision of the.
Thank you we do have to online
the Dennis Roch.
This superintendents.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am
superintendent Dennis Ross from
Logan schools but I'm also a
former member of the house and I
was privileged to author the
bill reference in the first
where oz clauses Memorial
Hospital for fifty three back in
twenty seventeen it was born out
of an alley Essie Commission
study that identified reports
that had outlived their
usefulness and I'm I was pleased
we were able to get some of
those reporting requirements
eliminated in twenty seventeen
but this that was never intended
to be a one time effort and so
I'm delighted to see that the
work continues and I think the
senators the sponsors of this
memorial for a picking up the
picking up the baton that I may
have dropped when I left the
legislature and getting back to
the work of cutting down on the
administrative burdens thanks so
much for supporting this
memorial thank you
superintendent and Ruth
Williams.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am Ruth
Williams chief of staff for the
Santa Fe public schools our
district is in full support of
Senate Joint Memorial fourteen
and we think the Sanchez for
bringing this forward
identifying duplicative part in
state and federal reporting
requirements is critical so
districts can focus on providing
high quality education to
students within state reporting
on numerous templates many
having information duplicated in
other templates and Eric can
stand across four different
templates because the same
information is replicated four
different times additionally
administrative oversight is
needed by districts for tactical
planning spending and required
reporting for compliance that
many state funding streams have
restrictions regarding
coordination of administrative
support which results in an
unfunded mandate this study
proposed in this memorial is
much needed we are need to pass
the memorial.
Thank you.
to questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator key generally is the
who's on the top of page three
there's a lot of powerful
entities that are requested to
convene a working group who is
gonna.
Kind of lead the charge and who
is going to opt administer.
Mr chair Senator that's a that's
a great question I think the
natural entity to sort of be the
lead on that would be LFC in
partnership with PED since this
is kind of squarely in their
warehouse okay but it doesn't
say that but let's let's make
sure it happens that way thank
you.
The questions.
The.
And just kind of a COVID along
those lines the L. E. S. C. over
the last two years has already
been talking about this has
worked with the PED and already
eliminated some of the reporting
there is lots more to be done
and getting all these groups
together out my concern is the
deadline of December first is
fairly late in this process if
we're trying to get legislation
ready for next session
We could change the date and
deadlines create urgency or the
committee could try and be done
by the nice if it were done by
October so that the last couple
of meetings of the LFC can
really finalize what legislation
needs to happen in order to fix
this but Mr Mr chair Committee I
think you make a great point
this is nothing like a deadline
to get something done and we're
we're what would you recommend
to Mr chair I Senator I guess I
would ask some of the advocates
Joe again with school board
association of stand might have
left the.
Greg L. E. S. C. does it make
sense to have a deadline of
October first can it be done
that quickly is that reasonable.
Agree with your reasoning on
that and I I think.
As soon as possible but no later
than so.
October seems to be more it
sounds like lots of the people
are in the room for that I don't
know we have to change it of but
again deadlines create urgency
and so.
I I guess it with the
committee's indulgence I would
recommend when yes please.
And I think that makes good
sense and particularly the
comments about the updated
system system.
That we done it is just one of
the the letters in there but as
you know what funding is needed
to to put in an updated system
in particular but part of the
point of an earlier one is so
the L. E. S. C. to get in line
with which things we can do this
year at which things need to be
part of the two.
Process of Mister chair I I I I
agree with you I mean I think
this is going to be a long
process particularly
implementation of the I. T. and
the funding for it yes but
there's nothing like having an
agenda and a planned and the
deadline to move things along
and so wild a recommendation may
be a stage to.
I would agree with stage one and
then see if we can't get this on
the governor's agenda if we
haven't really tightly put
together it's a pretty simple
I mean the key is getting the
plan written.
And having.
The the part about putting money
into IT to update systems that's
clearly within the.
Yes the purview of next year's
session
other types of reducing
reporting may not be and be part
of the two year so I guess I
would need to change the
deadline or is the July or the
December one deadline.
Good enough for what we need to
do.
Hi Mr chair can measure can can
I make a recommendation for an
amendment sitting here of course
okay yes I would recommend that
we change December first to
October first.
Okay and I think when nodding
that that's good with that okay
so the amendment to change the
date on page page for lying ten
to October one twenty twenty.
That should be twenty the twenty
twenty three.
The only places state so the
potential of any other places.
Okay I'll move I guess as a
member of the committee that
assertion to that amendment.
If not we are amended any other
comments or questions from the
committee.
I'm a pass Mr Richard second by
center messages if you'll call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes Senator Kernan Senator
biases yes there Neville Senator
Pinto Senator pope yes Senator
all yes if you can be doing
thank you committee as amended.
The next of Representative Brown
educational retirement changes.
House bill one eighty nine as
amended.
Whenever you're ready thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
the Senate.
Excuse me house bill one eighty
nine as amended does two things
it allows employees of southeast
New Mexico college those who are
eligible to participate in the
alternative retirement plan the
current statute does not mention
that institution by name and to
be a qualifying state
educational institution it needs
to be found in statute and
secondly Mr chairman members of
what this bill does is tie the
state statute on what the
required minimum distribution
age is for pensioners instead
of.
having to change our state
statute every time the federal
government changes what it
requires on that this would just
tie this to the iris code and I
have with me David Archuleta the
executive director of the
educational retirement board
with the to help with technical
questions thank you Mr chair
okay.
The this pointer just if
questions come up Mr chairman of
the committee I just like to
thank the sponsor this bill for
bringing it forward and this may
seem like groundhog day because
you just pass twenty recently
which is identical to this bill.
Thank you people in the
committee and the audience in
support.
There is a one in opposition.
Don't need to speak to anyone.
Okay questions of the committee.
A motion from the committee we
have a bill like this yes the
weaker to couple weeks ago that
most.
Motion for a new classic so you
by center mass this is your call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yeah Senator Kernan center by
Estes yes the Nobel Center
Pentaho.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes you have to do thank you.
Two eighty as amended American
Indian ed tech assistance
Senator of.
Centers.
Representative Allison welcome
Senate education.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
this bill house bill two eighty
American Indian Education
technical assistance centers
this bill directs the higher
and.
To establish to technical
assistance centers for Indian
education in collaboration with
ATD and the governor's office
enabled us to develop this bill.
Of these technical assistance
centers are an important piece
of the Indian Education puzzle
in our state the Indian
Education Act grant schools
tribes in universities to work
together to find a culturally
relevant education for native
students but there is no support
system that brings stakeholders
together and those systems or
guidance in addressing native
Americans needs.
The Yazzie Martinez court ruling
found that the state has a duty
to provide technical assistance
on Indian Education but that the
PED had failed to do so.
To find this expertise we must
look to our native cult of
faculty and our many native led
academic programs and our tribal
universities and colleges that's
why this bill establishes to
technical assistance centers
operated by experts it is my
expert witness I got a W.
secretary Patricia Trujillo and
tribal liaison for higher and
make the most Moquino.
Looking to.
With that we sent for questions
Mr chair thank you in the
audience those in support.
He wanted opposition.
Couple of supporters would like
to come and speak you don't all
need to unless you feel so
compelled.
Secretary Rodriguez thank you Mr
chair I promise I'll make this
short I want to address
something the bill did have an
appropriation of two point two
five million dollars we took
that out of House Appropriations
in the executive budget
recommendations we did request
that we did not receive that on
the house side or the Senate
side however there are two
avenues that we can seek for
funding the first is the Indian
Affairs Department has a twenty
five million dollar fund which
they can transfer two point two
five million dollars over to our
agency through an MO you we also
have a plan B. that's the Indian
education fund in the public
education department to
establish the Senators we do
have tribal leader support for
the tribal assistance centers
and we are willing to look at
both options to fund this moving
forward thank you thank you
Secretary.
The server.
Forty.
Senators Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is sorry I
can't make a phone call with
your are sorry everybody.
It's got that listening in thing
or whatever and.
You heard something that it.
Wanted to respond to.
Okay no objection and members of
the committee my name is former
governor Rick be here for the
public to suki
just what was shared by the
secretary I also was involved in
also in higher education we work
with many of the universities
way back plan to create
scholarship opportunities for
our students and being a higher
education advocate in the public
to suki we advocated for higher
education and we have a.
Top of young people young man
that I have received their
master's bachelor's degree their
doctor's degree so I encourage
the committee to support support
house bill two eighty and I
appreciate the sponsors for
their leadership thank you and
have a great day thank you Sir
governor.
What else okay we have a couple
online we don't have any
opposition and so you know if
it's alright we'll I don't think
we need to yes Sir to hear from
them of so questions from the
committee.
Portion of the bill thank you.
This for clarity is this kind of
similar to our regional.
The ones we.
Already fund.
Senator and you you are asked
that was given to the question I
asked to the sounds very much
like an are you see for the the
native communities okay and
without funding the we but I
think we put a hundred and some
thousand in the ones we have
around the state has what's
going did somebody say something
about funding for this.
Yes and Mr chair members of the
committee
as we begin to think about these
we really did look at the REC as
models but they would be
separate and distinct in that
they particularly serve the
native communities throughout
the state and as far as funding
goes they were the two avenues
mentioned that either they will
be a transfer from IAD to HEP or
we will work with PED for a
transfer from the Indian
education fund and okay thank
you Mr.
Other questions.
My only question was is this
model like REC already asked and
it sounded very much like it
very much needed.
I'm of the two thousand passed
by Senator to build second by
Senator pope if you'll call the
roll please Senator Brandt
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
I just.
There Neville yes Senator Pinto
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes you have a due process thank
you.
etcetera Representative Baca
house bill four oh one we need
technology Education Act.
Others see with your.
Representative whenever you're
ready thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee house before
one in the digital Education Act
is really I I those three things
that one it remains an existing
the technology.
As far as the technology
department it sets to define.
or create or cleanup
definitions.
It also talks about the
The technology that would the
longer it no longer is optical
to the technology plan.
To host before one.
It does outline a counsel that
will help and support to the
oversight of the new
Digital equity in education act
before we I'd be questions I do
want to introduce my experts
here I have merry Montoya and
John Chadwick who are here for
questions.
With that Mr chairman I stand
for questions thank you the
audience those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
With this is a very a cohesive.
End of support also.
Of any of you would like to come
in and speak briefly.
Mr chairman of the stand rounds
again for the superintendents
of.
This act is also designed to.
Put us in the colleague with the
current practice you see
everything what many things
haven't stature outdated
antiquated this not only will
serve to fix that today but also
in the future you have this
group for together technology is
an important backbone of what we
do Mr chairman as we talked many
times and we urge you to support
this.
Thank you David.
Yes Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is drew
Lovelace I am the operations
manager for the office of
broadband access expansion and
there's many overlaps with our
mission of digital equity in
this bill as well as we and das
probably gets a Council see on
this and we appreciate the
ability to have the input and
continue our good working
relationship with our partners
over the PED on these important
issues a digital equity thank
you thank you.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee jokey in with the
Mexico school boards and also as
chair of the public school
capital outlay council digital
access is extremely important to
schools broadband access we're
working on that with the all of
our partner so we do support
this bill thank you thank you.
No one online.
So questions from the committee.
Motion from the committee that.
The pope.
I just have one question sorry
Mr chair representative so we're
we're renaming.
This act but I guess what it
what other I guess changes from
that would happen with what
we're doing here thank you Mr
chairman thank you just Senator
pope I did begin it does rename
with the technology department
from the technology for
Education Act to now the digital
equity Education Act the other
thing Mr chairman and senator
pope there's some definitions in
there's some technology that was
at one point
Part of the technology backed
but like the floppy does that we
may have used many years ago may
have been referencing the old
technology act and are no longer
optical so that's really what
this does that also with the it
talks about a school districts
responsibilities okay every
school district must have to
have a plan for technology how
we operated how technology will
be dispersed and also how will
bring access to kids so that's
another.
Alright we're it re defines and
clarifies the responsibility of
the school district and then it
talks about the of the council
that will support this it it it
talks about both small school
a large school representatives
of this council so that is
really the meat of this acted
really is is is renaming of a
carbine of definitions and
technologies Mister chairman
Senator pope thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative right I think you
other questions.
Motion.
The bill also do pass second by
Senator pope you call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan center biases yes Senate
bill is Senator Pinto yeah
Senator pope yes Senator also
yes.
Representative that's thank you
Mr chairman thank you everybody
for joining us
Good move down to the house bill
forty one Representative Lane.
I don't see joy Garrett will do
both are yes before the last
we'll do both together then.
Representative whenever you're
ready morning Mr chairman of the
committee so house bill forty
one this model rises the reading
materials funds so this is the
language changes really all it
does so we're trying to
encourage local districts to
select corn someone submitted
materials emphasize structured
literacy so I with me I have
amend it gone is my expert this
morning and we stand for any
questions.
Thank you those in support.
Does anyone in opposition.
Would you like speaker good okay
anyone online.
So that if you would please.
This but.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Danny
product and the network
coordinator for teach plus New
Mexico and former kindergarten
teacher thirteen years children
in New Mexico are struggling to
read reading learning to read is
not innate it doesn't happen on
its own children need explicit
and focused instruction to learn
how to read and comprehend what
they have read.
This bill ensures that teachers
and students have access to a
well thought out an approved
plan for implementing the
elements of structured literacy
aligned with the science of
reading in grades K. through
five what is probably most
important to note about this
bill that it provides funding
for literacy materials for those
districts that take action and
apply are struggling readers
need us to not only improve
literacy materials and
instruction but you just do it
now by prioritizing literacy in
the eyes and the hearts of all
stakeholders better student
outcomes will follow but only if
we act with immediate urgency
and support bills like HB four
eighty one our students come
first thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Questions from the committee.
That that that yes thank you.
There is a question that was
emailed to me about the the a
monolingual English standards.
Is that still in this bill.
Mr element.
I Mr chair and senator would you
mind repeating your question the
I'm on the line the state would
they use with a monolingual
English.
So how are you lining this when
you say you're lining the school
reading material.
Mr chair Senator so the public
education department reviews
court instructional materials
for alignment with best practice
for structured literacy so this
bill for court material says
anything that is approved by the
PED and has the structure
literacy designation would be
approved for districts to use.
It doesn't say anything about
coaches sensitive or having it
is it available in other in
Spanish.
Mr chair Senator at the
resources on the list provided
by the Public Education
Department our English resources
but there are.
Supplemental and supplemental
materials available in other
languages and most importantly
the public education department
in their framework for by
literacy has also aligned their
practice for instruction in
other languages to the
foundations of structured
literacy so this only enhances
bilingual instruction and in no
way kind of supersedes it so why
would we do have to put it in
statute if it's already being
done by.
I'm Mr chair Senator so what we
are doing in this
bill in front of you is real
lines what's defined as high
quality instructional materials
for early literacy from how we
define it when the fund was
originally created in two
thousand six to how we define
best practice and structure
literacy today so it's just
modernizing the language.
Modernizing it to Mr chair and
representative to.
To English.
Mr chair and senator so when the
bill was passed around when the
fund was created in two thousand
six the best practice guidance
was coming from Oregon and
Florida now our New Mexico
Public Education Department
reviews these card curricular
materials to best align to
structured literacy so we
decided it would be best to use
the New Mexico less moving
forward.
In.
Mr chair and.
So it came from other state.
R. or again and let's see other
state choose Mr chair Senator
Florida Florida so are they a
bilingual state.
Mr chair Senator I believe both
have bilingual programs but the
what we have learned about the
science of reading over the last
twenty years is profound and so
every state in the country is
doing their best to do what
we're trying to do here which is
get districts to adopt the best
curriculum materials to train
our young students brains to be
able to read written language
primarily in English but
supplementary in our bilingual
instruction which is
complementary to the science of
reading so when the fund was
originally created in two
thousand six we have less
information about what worked in
reading.
The fund was created to address
what we thought was best at the
time which was the best at the
time but in the last twenty
years we've learned a lot more
at the less have improved and
our own review of those less
here in New Mexico has improved
which is why we now have a New
Mexico less that we can use the
prescription and so you're
saying the list the list the
priority of the list is only
English.
Mr chair Senator the.
Primary.
On be careful how I say this.
The the resources on the New
Mexico less our English
resources to use to help our
case three readers learn to read
in English while are by literacy
framework which is aligned with
these resources emphasizes the
way that we're helping our
children be proficient in both
English and whatever their
second language might be the Mr
chair the materials that you are
saying that priorities not in
Spanish or in per se to could be
adopted into other bilingual it
it would just be primarily
English Senator if I can help
having been an elementary
principal it of bilingual school
the materials in Spanish very
much support learning and
learning to read in Spanish
because the initial pieces of
learning to read are decoding
those funny little squiggles on
the paper into sounds and
information about always
planning on transitioning
students into English and so I
don't think this precludes any
of those structured literacy
type things in Spanish or in the
native language or other things
but this is more of the member
were you down in Los crucis with
yet had the L. E. S. C. and we
went out to the elementary
school there watched the
teachers doing the letters
program of okay.
It was very powerful program but
it's actually teaching how those
little squiggles actually means
sounds and information and
things and it's it's really
devoid of a particular language
in the early level we can be in
any language thank you Mr chair
the inside interrupt but I.
At.
So my district the local control
the board elected to adopt
whatever reading material or
whatever resources whatever
program they felt was necessary
When it.
Those students that are
participating seem to be doing
well in that sense that's what
my where is this alignment
coming from highly
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you step up.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I just want to
clarify and there I just heard
mentioned or again in Florida
earlier in I think the analysis
here saying based off kind of
the Colorado list is that what
we're going off in this bill.
Mr chair Senator so yes when the
fund was created it reference
organ in Florida the current
iteration in front of you
prioritizes the New Mexico list
for court instructional
materials and the Colorado list
only for supplemental and
intervention materials the
reason that we're not using The
New Mexico just for supplemental
and intervention is New Mexico
does not school or are
supplemental and intervention
materials so we don't have the
structured literacy designation
for those categories but
Colorado does so where we have
our own list for using the New
Mexico just for court
instructional materials and the
Colorado list for supplemental
and intervention.
Thank you that's all I have
Mister.
The questions from the
committee.
I very much appreciated we all
those Mimi Stewart for years has
been pushing that we have to do
more structure literacy the
specific teaching of reading
that it does not have it's not
something that happens innately
we had very powerful
presentation down in Los crucis
when we went out to visit an
elementary school at watch the
teachers doing structured
literacy and I think most of us
came away with oh my gosh I want
my kid in that classroom was
very very powerful and the kids
learning how to decode those
will squiggles on the paper into
sounds and information and
knowledge of lots of our
teachers coming out of teacher
preparation programs have not
been well trained in structured
literacy and so currently we're
doing lots of it is I understand
through professional development
afterwards but trying to now
work with our colleges of
education to put that as part of
the core curriculum for teachers
on how to teach structured
literacy and you have to have
materials in some language but
it really is devoid of
particular language that it
works in Spanish it works in
English and affect things like
Spanish I'm not as familiar with
native languages obviously but
in Spanish where.
The the languages so fanatical
on everything I'm like English
it's actually works much better
there and the learn to read very
quickly because it's so
fanatical and then the
transition English tends to be
better afterwards if they are
fully versed in that so more of
a my little speech your diatribe
trying to sell it I'm trying to
channel Mimi Stewart is K. I do
and.
So thank you for that
representative for bringing this
for understanding you know how
important this is for our little
ones to learn to read
effectively.
Pleasure the committee.
Yes those for the past Center
Hickey.
Secretary pope seconded you'll
call the roll please Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey yes
Senator Kernan Senator Maestas
senator bill is Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator so yes
yeah I would.
Thank you Representative
Chandler are used would you like
to do has Joint Memorial seven
or are you working on or with
both of those with
Representative Senator I am
working on Senate house joint
memorial service Joint Memorial
seven wonderful.
Every ready thank you very much
I I think you're all very aware
of the need for good ventilation
in our schools for the safety of
our children and our staff and
we started actually with a
fairly ambitious bill that would
have required ventilation
assessments in the schools and
then action plans once they were
identified and that seemed a
little bit too ambitious this
year and there were some concern
that was putting too much on the
school systems at this point
time so what we are suggesting
with this memorial is that a
study be done by the public
school capital outlay group
working with others to evaluate
and develop a plan forward on
how to improve the ventilation
our school systems and of course
we recognize that some schools
need more work and some schools
need less work and we want to
ensure that we have a path
forward in improving on that I
think COVID obviously raise this
at elevated this as an issue but
it hasn't gone away and I think
it really does help in terms of
eliminating or mitigating
against us serious illness and
you know the the spread of
illness in the schools with that
we stand for questions and I
have I say as empty with me who
is with the sheet metal workers.
Thank you up.
Up to the audience those in
support.
We would not anyone opposition.
Supporters would like to come
Madam.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to again of with the
New Mexico school boards
association and with as chair of
the public school capital outlay
council we we agree with the
intent of this is going to
probably use the microphone was
ours thank you
there are going to be some of
costs involved in conducting the
study and I'm a little concerned
that the staff of the public
school capital outlay oversight
task force will the will have
the staff and of course they can
they can work with P. SFA public
school facilities authority and
others but I I do think it might
be a little bit of a stretch for
the.
Thank you Joe.
Sir thank you Mr chair members
the committee John Lipschutz
with that New Mexico federation
of labor we stand in strong
support of this memorial and
we're actually hoping for a
little bit more in the bill but
we definitely think the sponsor
for bringing this up were
obviously very much in favor of
safety safety for communities
safety for our children and also
safety for our educators and
that is exactly what this study
will hopefully help provide so
for those reasons we ask you to
support thank you thank you.
Mr
chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
mechanical contractors
association in the sheet metal
contractors association we send
a strong support of the memorial
again this is just about you
know we know safety and and air
quality is important in the
classroom and this is really
just looking at how can we find
this in the future thank you
thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chair members
of the committee gender to they
have to New Mexico we won't
belabor what has been said
already but we also stand in
support of this moral thank you
thank you and we have online
Joan Baker.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is John
Baker I'm with United
association local four twelve
that's the plumber pipefitters
union we also stand in strong
support of this measure indoor
air quality is not just a
buzzword it's very important
thing I mean there are buildings
that have sick building syndrome
they found buildings in the
eighties but the that passed
around legionnaire disease this
is really a health and safety
concerns and doing it properly
with studies and making sure
that we know what we're tackling
is a very great approach and I
ask you to support thank you
thank you questions from the
committee.
The chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for bringing this a memorial
Ford
I think it's going to be a
little bit too late bill I think
PTS they they should put more
money into it because there are
some schools where I've seen
every classroom has to have its
own air conditioning unit
because the main the air
conditioning in that that it's
all rusted out come fall through
and even the
We just need all the help all
the schools but by time this
study gets done I think those
schools are already going to be
in that I don't think they can
have summer school at some of
the schools because of the issue
of the the ventilation.
So my Mentzer.
Thank you Sam in support but I
don't see how it's going to
really address our issue right
now less R. P. T. unless our
budget actually has addressed it
thank you Mr chair thank you
other questions.
My only comments I'm gonna be
during the public school capital
outlay oversight task force this
summer and certainly this is one
of the things we can talk about
during that time and what needs
to be done how best to to
manage.
All of that and make sure that
that we've got a plan and the
idea again coming out of that
that we have legislation that's
going to be needed if it's a
capital monies of from finance
that will come with a plan for
how to address where the needs
are I know that public school
facilities authority keeps close
track I do believe in joke your
budget had if I get it right but
one of the things that school
districts are able to use monies
for our systems like H. back
systems and upgrades on a and
you're not in your head that I
work for all of those type of
things if anything we've had
problems over the last couple
years getting districts to
actually go out and do that and
put in for those kinds of
systems there's.
Lots of money sitting over there
in public school facilities
authority that when districts
come with a plan for how they
need to use it this is one of
the allowable uses of I believe
this still would require the
state local match this is not
one of the exceptions that we've
approved going through out of
this particular one but so would
encourage districts to make sure
that you're looking getting your
plans in so we can push that
money out and work on some of
the HX systems so any comments
or you're welcome well I'm I'm
conducting a Mister chair I I
guess I in response to Senator
Pinto this really is not
replacing any activities that
the schools are doing right now
this is a way to develop a path
forward and we worked with Ellie
S. C. and the director to come
up with what she and others felt
where it wasn't legitimate and
appropriate way to try to
address the problem so I would
encourage you all to please
support the memorial.
Thank you.
Budget committee Mr chair over
the past right to pass and
seconded by Senator Hickey if
you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes Senator Kernan Senator my
Estes Center Novell yes Senator
Pinto yeah.
Senator pope yes Senator also
yes would you pass the memorial
and thank you public school
capital outlay oversight task
force will be looking at it over
the interim.
Representative at perfect on
time for last one we got ready
for you thank you and Senator
pope your child actors to your
tier just passed.
Okay
Good morning Mr chairman
committee to change my head I do
have expert witness should we
need them online it's Winston
Berkman Breen he's the policy
council and deputy director for
advocacy at the student borrower
protection center so house bill
four oh three is amended as the
public service loan forgiveness
multiplier and it in two
thousand seven the bipartisan of
public service loan forgiveness
act was passed and it allows
borrowers who work full time for
nonprofits and government
agencies including colleges
public schools and other
agencies to have their
outstanding debt forgiven on
federal direct loans after the
make one hundred and twenty
payments of based on their bar
or plan would house bill four oh
three as amended does it right
it creates a multiplier for
admissions in higher education
who haven't always been able to
certify that their full time
workers because they might get
credit for like six credit hours
are nine credit hours but the
fact that they have office hours
preparation time isn't honored
and this bill what it's doing is
been passed in several states
and it is approved by the
department of education so a
college certifies that a faculty
member works full time
by having this multiplier in
affects so the act requires
higher education institutions to
multiply the number of credit
hours or student contact hours
by minimum of four point three
five and and remember this money
has nothing to do with New
Mexico in general funds it's a.
Federal program so in addition
to teachers at several colleges
can then qualify if they meet
that
program and as our higher
education department here stated
well action instructors are
frequently considered part time
employees some adjunct faculty
accept numerous courses sign
equipment in a semester and
perform the work load equivalent
of a full time professor or
instructor this bill provides a
calculation methodology
multiplier and directs
postsecondary institutions to
provide certification for those
that then meet that full time
requirement and with that I
stand for questions thank you at
the audience those in support.
Thank you anyone in opposition.
I would say.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee gender to they
have to New Mexico ought to keep
it really brief on this but that
sponsor really got to the heart
of this issue this bill really
acknowledges that it's not just
the credit hours that someone is
assigned to three the six the
nine credit hours with an
acknowledgement that instruction
occurs to tutor integrating
through advisement and all of
those things that are I jumped
instructors provide in our
colleges and and universities
we know that New Mexico like
other states is relying on a
joint and non tenured faculty
more and more so this is an
acknowledgement that that these
individuals are providing a lot
of services for institutions I
might mention that this is an
area that the federal government
has allowed states to make
policy and as was noted by the
sponsor and just last week
Colorado our neighbor to the
north past Tom nearly identical
legislation to that so we would
definitely urge your support
today on four three as amended
thank you.
Thank you there is no one online
and no opposition so questions
from the committee.
The doctor thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative and
first off thank you for a
presenting my bill getting it
passed well I had to stay in
here
but more importantly
this legislation I think just
the importance of the fact that
a lot of red giants are actually
doing this work and this should
be a recognize and should get
credit for the public service
and get help in repaying these
loans so
I will be supporting this and
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you other questions not
pleasure committee.
Do that social for you passed by
the bill thank you bye Center
pope you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan Senator my Estes Senate
Bill Senator Pinto yeah Senator
pope yes Senator also yes.
You have to do that thank you.
Thank you all today in the
committee for getting those done
this is that we're trying to
here when things could happen
fast we have this room is
reserved for tomorrow afternoon
if there are some bills that
come over from the house that
are high priority we may have a
meeting tomorrow afternoon after
the floor session otherwise we
are looking at Friday morning
we've got a couple of memorials
or maybe some others that are
not such a high priority of but
state to everyone and thank you
all very much we will have at
least one more meeting either
tomorrow afternoon or Friday
morning so any comments
questions mid may and you're
