And the order on it will be a
little bit differently better
request from the Senate pro tem
Stewart that should have heard
bill first she's got some other
bills in rural so we're going to
jump her to the front of the
line on Friday and then plan on
continuing through the list in
order afterwards at this point
so just as you're looking at
your agenda there will be a
little bit of changing the order
for that with that let's get
started on Senate bill ninety
four student athlete endorsement
act Senator Moores Europe thank
you senator thank you are chair
thank you members of the
committee I do have a expert
witness remind G. with the our
players Association I see that
the Mario the electric grid New
Mexico state's also online so
I'm not sure he was going to be
an expert witness but we want to
testify on this bill I just so
you Masser can know about that
student or someone accident bill
ninety four as you all know
collegian sports is a multi
billion dollar industry this day
in age of athletes are prevented
from endorsing products are
receiving compensation from
drugs per NCAA and conference
rules what is happening in a
number of states including
California started this a number
years ago which actually is
prevents a law that passed
unanimously California that
would prevent the NCA from and
the conferences from the nine
student athletes to rights to a
license their image name and
likeness and also obscene sense
then is movie and discussion of
the NCAA that it's been very
slow has not moved forward and
six other states since then I've
passed the similar legislation
that this is based off of this
allows athletes to actually
earned our.
the door Smith money from their
name likeness and images what's
really important as a
competitive standpoint for us
here in New Mexico is that
California and Colorado have
passed this legislation already
in those your sports fans know
that in the mountain west
conference for are you in in and
then also New Mexico State in
nine west I of there are our
competitors are either
California or Colorado what is
that a significant disadvantage
for recruiting from other states
are that are are going to be
your tools in this in the same
situation for New Mexico state
so it's become a competitive
issue for us as well as a fair
decisions for the student
athletes who are are you know
often from limited means poor
poor social economic backgrounds
I don't have the abilities of of
other our students to actually
make a living and earn money off
their likeness so with that if
that's alright with the chair of
like Ramadi whom up with the
National Players Association to
provide any comments and I don't
know if Mario wanted to provide
comments also.
So Mr if you would please.
good morning my name is remote
viewing of the executive
director of the NCPA
international crosswords
Association first I did the
Germans those members of this
committee for allowing me to
testify today and say it will
support the Senate bill ninety
Ford because Ford the fifteen
billion dollar per year
commercial industries were multi
billion dollar TV deals your
multi million dollars dollars
for coaches the ministry
missioners the NCAA basketball
tournament alone generates over
one billion dollars per year and
apparel companies are paying
colleges millions of dollars to
require players to serve as
walking billboards to advertise
the logo's name drugs.
Meanwhile the NCAA denies
players third party maintenance
electives publication claiming
it's to protect college operates
from the force the
commercialization.
This double standard hasn't
dictated serious economic harm
jobs college athletes many of
whom are black out these
lowincome backwards.
This is spent the last year
pretending it would adopt the
minutes like this reasons for
college athletes others are
taking action the N. A. I. A.
because at it so association
similar to the NCAA with sixty
eight thousand dollars after
eight proactively adopted chair
like insurance for its athletes
NCAA could have done the same
but is refused to do so
meanwhile other states have
taken action this is been a
primary I've given over a dozen
states that has adopted have
adopted or are pursuing name is
a like this legislation
including the state of Florida
Florida's law will allow its
costs at these there have been
streams beginning this July.
Mexico because Adams deserved
economic freedoms making their
way to college athletes in other
states and other athletic
associations they need their
state lawmakers that strongly
decisively on their behalf by
voting yes on Senate bill ninety
four thank you.
There are more than anything
else.
No I was remiss not to also
point my co sponsor as you all
know I played college football
players in New Mexico a co
sponsor of a bill Neil also
played at on Cornell and so this
is why we're very passionate
about this issue trying to give
other a college athlete some
opportunities that we.
Senator Moores was a Mr Moshe
would see what your experts or
just a.
Public comment
I will defer to if you want to
do public comment or if you want
to chime in now.
Yeah I I can I can chime in now
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee more a more
emotion director of athletics
and former student athlete at
New Mexico State University yeah
we stand in support of Senate
bill ninety four in anticipation
of new NCAA federal legislative
legislation also thanks to
Senator Moore and Senator
o'neill for bring this bill
forward and supporting our
student athletes.
It is worth anything else array
for public comment just that
this isn't just a bipartisan
issue this bill brings locals
agas together so that that says
a lot right there.
I tell if you would take us up
to public comment.
Yes we'll be hearing from Chris
balls all know for support we
didn't have anyone signed up for
opposition.
Mr chairman I I have not signed
up for on this bill the next two
bills yeah but not for this bill
thank you your next workers.
I'm at this time I'd like to
open up to anyone who is here
who would like to speak
I that was the only email I had
received as I could see any
hands.
And it doesn't appear we have
any Sputnik statements at this
time.
Thank you that way we'll go to
questions from the committee.
Really if you have any questions
about this bill ninety four.
I see senator Neville.
Senator bill please I got my.
Thank you Mr chairman senator
Morris just a I'm not opposed to
bill at all.
But I'm curious how many of
which is to say how many
athletes say it New Mexico state
or uranium actually be tapped
for some kind of sponsorship I
know you might have a hot shot
quarterback or center of the
basketball team but
It would basically only favor of
a couple of athletes probably
any team at any one time would
not.
Senator Mr chair I I joked when
I introduce this bill that maybe
the offense aligned to do
indoors then for an all you can
eat buffet but I will I will
explain some of what's happening
some of the other states are
that are looking at this
economic what's after actually
have happening.
Sure that's a great question
really and and this isn't just
about you know big football and
basketball player names this is
about a college athlete in may
have an idea for small business
are we've had walk ons who are
subject to the same and say
restrictions were of ideas for
small businesses they're not
allowed to pursue because it
takes your name you have to use
your name in order to create a
small business many athletes
have they have a name in their
own high school they could start
to create a fan base that can go
back to the old high school to a
camp autograph signing sell
apparel things like that even if
it's not too tens of thousands
of people maybe to a couple
hundred people and for them if
they get a few hundred Bucks a
few thousand dollars a year as
well as Olympic athletes and
many of them you know they do
well actually go into the
Olympics and and they have a
phone as well some of them are
very charismatic have hundreds
of thousands of followers on
social media even if they're not
from a large school were large
sport because of their
personalities those they can
receive tens of thousands of
dollars on rate social media
posts so really it's about
allowing college athletes to be
able to experience America just
like the regular student the
regular American anything that
you have that you can bring to
this country that's of value you
have that opportunity right now
and say rules don't don't allow
and states are saying that's not
OK it is are the same people
freedoms.
Sure I wanted to start the money
from an athlete one of the have
a little yogurt shop on the side
I would be in violation of
current.
Raul was into that lays out what
you're telling most likely yes
because you have to be able to
use your name in order to get in
the door or be so heavily
restricted drafted refused to
use our normal would be able to
capitalize on the value that you
have as an apple so they would
say well you can imagine your
that your nap well during these
for five years that actually
amplifies the value then you
should have all you know all
access to that as well you know
whether you have a the over shop
or car wash detail company it's
okay for absolute for people
potential customers know that
you play a sport in college
right now that's not the case.
Very good thank you might add a
I think so Senator renewable is
that a lot of the attention
obviously is the on the
football or the basketball team
or you see a lot of time
specially with the Olympic
sports are volleyball is
Olympians going you know there
are some great testimony when
the schools and for our
California from
a star level player from
Stanford and she had after she
were to win big she had to give
up all for eligibility because
you have the opportunity to
actually capitalize on some
indoor Spence after the Olympics
and she could not should make
the choice not to go back to
Stanford and continue to play
for school and even when I at
university Mexico we had mailed
in this Jim this to want to the
Olympics and they were not able
to come back when won the gold
medal
and he was not able to come back
to school after that because he
was able to capitalize on the
door so we had to make that
choice to actually make a living
and capitalize on what he had
done first going back to school
and finishing his college degree
and earned a competing for his
university.
Who.
That's all I had Mr chairman.
Senator pope.
I just want to think about
senator Morris center o'neill
for a bring for this legislation
I've been following up some of
the lawsuits you know with using
likenesses on the video games
and now the jerseys and we know
that the NCAA in these
institutions are making billions
of dollars off of these athletes
so I think it's an obligation to
look out for these athletes as
well and make it fair and give
them an opportunity to make a
living as well because a lot of
them will not be going in the
pro ranks within you be having
that opportunity.
To be a you know making money
off of the hard work that
they've given as an athlete so I
applauded and I will be
supporting bill.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up from committee members
I do vote for a motion.
But moved to pass Mr chairman
have a due process etcetera but
the other.
Mr.
And the second I think that was
Senator Kernan that I that I
heard time and for a second and
if you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Under current.
Yes center in the bill yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto no.
Senator pope yes Senator soul.
Yes.
We have a.
You have a do pass I wish you
well I I think it's it's time
that people are allowed to
capitalize on their hard work
thank you you think members of
the committee thank you Mr.
And I think we have a.
Senator Gonzales Senator
Gonzales F. B. one oh seven
career readiness systems
statewide.
Well Mr chairman thank you can
you hear me well.
Yes Sir okay very well with all
Senate bill one of seven the.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of this is a college
and career system goal is to
establish a system that supports
college and career readiness for
all New Mexico students as
outlined in the Martinez Yazzie
settlement findings.
Of supporting all schools.
And districts our goal is to
support districts that already
established a college and career
programs support and develop of
the new program and provide
additional support to those that
may be struggling due to the
funding and support our goals to
develop a comprehensive K.
through twelve system of college
and career readiness for all New
Mexico students.
Any funds of the New Mexico
legislature allocated to our
bill.
Would be sent to the New Mexico
public education department the
college and the career division
led by Dr Elaine Perea and we'll
go through an RFP process.
Any comprehensive college and
career readiness system must
also have a robust program of
professional development for
teachers if the COVID could make
has taught us anything it is
that our teachers are our front
line workers continue to need
support with professional
development support did digital
learning for all students.
Any funds of the New Mexico
legislature allocated by our
bill will be sent I'm sorry.
Any system that supports a
college and career readiness
should also include social
emotional and support embedded
as part of the curriculum and at
this point Mr chairman I do have
some expert witnesses and with
your permission I would like to
call on the first one the.
Dr Channell Wilson so would a.
On and you.
Doctor Segura please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
sorry Senator souls.
Yes.
this.
Can you hear me.
That's going to be the best line
of the year.
Please hold million whether
something else this is Merion
the committee secretary Senator
Gonzales you have an amendment
to this particular bill.
Is this.
Mr chair no that is correct and
let me see if I can get to it
real quick to no.
yes it is said no Mr chair
So the amendment to sell.
I'm trying to get the point of
it but anyway health.
The list we have the amendment
is up on the screen now so that
we can see it but if you could.
Okay
very.
This would be
on the the tracking number of
that is point two one nine four
five six point one.
And what the amendment does the
song on page one line twenty
strike.
Contract with the with an
organization to.
And on page two line twenty two
strike within and insert in lieu
they're all and.
And the third party is on page
two line twenty four and twenty
five strike and distribution of
funds and insert in lieu they're
off in accordance with the
criteria set forth in this
section.
Mr chairman members what this so
does this so in how CTE cation.
it was changed and they wanted
to have all.
Plus a different word other than
organization which we went to
districts and so the amendment
would be a matter of for
tracking with the with the house
bill.
If I might Senator of.
The house change that this year
and so you're trying to to just
make sure the amendments that
the house put on also show up in
the Senate bill is accurate Mr
chair that is correct.
Okay if somebody would move the
amendment so we can discuss
that.
Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you senator
Neville and for discussion and
so Committee members any
discussion on the amendment.
Mr chair Sir right.
Yes Senator Brandt.
Back up there again I'm trying
to look at it in the bill
there some typos in the
amendment and some of us just
not fitting.
Yes I think it's back up of some
of the typos are it looks like
where they that there aren't
spaces.
In all the right places
organization so I've never heard
of but you know that's you know
whatever so we need to make sure
we correct that to space but on
page two one twenty two.
assist right within.
There isn't a within on page
twenty two our page to like
twenty two.
I'm trying to bring up my copy
of the bill here.
Yes Sir Gonzales I at I think
Center brand is absolutely
correct this is not tracking
with the actual bill that we
have in front of us as far as
where the amendment is making
changes.
Maybe there is something and so
after districts is that we're
that within is needed but Lewis
and.
Hello Mr chairman of Senator
Brandt that would work.
Mr chair Sir I I think I
misspoke minute ago so on line
twenty two right after school
district says with and so
that'll be coming out annual
strike that put in lieu of and
we'll school districts and the
New Mexico Alliance for college
and careers up what you are
intending yes yes Mister
chairman.
Super truck rest.
Senator Brandt you're you're
still on and I realize you're
trying to read and follow and
would you like me to come back
to you or as others have
questions about the amendment.
No Mr chairman I think the rest
is fine so we just need to fix
the typo in the point one out of
space between organization and
to and the rest looks like it's
it tracks so thank you okay
thank you Senator Brandt Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you senator
Gonzalez I'm.
With the FIR tested did relates
to HB eighty seven and.
because of the relationship to
the US the the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit with this amendment kind
of duplicate that bill or would
it create the bring it a little
more different than HB eighty
seven.
Of.
Mr chairman and senator building
till of maybe if you can just
refresh my memory about total
you said house bill eighty
seven.
Mr chair and members of the
committee yes HB eighty seven I
think that celebrities Bill I
think he has of several of them
that are in a row there that
I've been asked to support the.
Navajo Nation.
President so I'm trying to
really see will it will this
amendment bring it in line and
context of that bill or will it
create.
A difference
making them very different
bills.
Mr chairman and senator being
told no all the the purpose of
the amendment was.
That you know how CTE cation
they just did not want the word
organization.
So all it is is the changing of
well word of organization to
districts.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you any other discussion
on the amendment.
I'm not seeing any other hands
go up
if someone would like to the
move would you pass on the
amendment or I have whatever you
choose on the amendment.
Moviepass Mr chairman.
Have a motion for two passed in
center for the up.
Their second.
Also active mission and senator
Neville seconds million if
you'll call the roll on the the
amendment.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
One yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla.
Yes ma'am yes I'm sorry I had
you Sir.
Yes.
Pope yes.
Souls yes.
You have an amended and amended
bill I'm sorry for the
inconvenience it's nice to get
have the technical stuff out of
the way Senator Gonzales we'll
go back now your expertise.
Okay
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
should also good and the
superintendent act to the
consequences municipal school
district as well as the co chair
of the New Mexico Alliance for
college and career readiness The
New Mexico Alliance for college
and career readiness is a small
but growing alliance of
districts who are interested in
securing funding for college and
career readiness system across
New Mexico.
The goal of SB one oh seven is
to establish sustainable and
recurring funding for
comprehensive K. twelve systems
of college and career readiness
for all New Mexico students as
outlined in the Yazzie Martinez
Madam findings.
Our objective is to support all
New Mexico districts and schools
that already have established
college and career readiness
system.
To provide additional support
for the development of new
college and career readiness
system.
And to provide additional
support for those that may be
struggling to sustain their
current college and career
readiness systems due to lack of
recurring funding.
Any funds that the legislature
allocates to our bills will be
sent to the college and career
readiness bureau as Senator
Gonzales stated and will go
through an RFP process for all
districts to be able to apply.
I'm again as Senator Gonzales
stated we want to ensure that
any comprehensive college and
career readiness system also has
a robust program of professional
development for teachers and
leaders if COVID has taught us
anything it's that our teachers
they continue to need I'm
focused support with
professional development to
support digital learning and
twenty first century skills for
all of our students.
I'm we look to also have you
know any college and career
readiness system also have that
social emotional support
invented
we feel that students and staff
sixty when they experience
support success purpose and
belonging students who are
engaged who have that sense of
purpose and belonging are less
likely to fall through the
cracks which has been an
unfortunate narrative of many of
our New Mexico students.
We know that New Mexico
experiences high leader and
teacher turnover each year due
to lack of support and tools to
experience successful outcomes.
High turnover we all know just
reps teaching and learning in
schools and so we believe that
strong systems and cultures of
college and career readiness are
necessary for continuity of
learning and the steady teacher
and leader workforce.
In my experience as a teacher
and principal at capital high
school in Santa Fe I had to
fight for funding each year to
continue my college and career
readiness programming I applied
for gear UP I applied for Carl
Perkins requests but these
requests required coordinators
which takes a chunk of the
funding for salary and benefits
and the reporting is extremely
overwhelming which made many of
my staff and I often contemplate
whether or not we should even
apply.
As a superintendent of a small
rural school district I'm
currently looking for funding to
continue our efforts to provide
rigorous and engaging college
and career readiness
opportunities for our students
and to also just the stain my
current career pathways.
It would be a relief I know for
me as well as many of my
colleagues to know that we had
established and recurring
funding each year to support our
college and career readiness
systems incorrect pathways.
Again our goal is to establish
at that funding for districts
and schools to implement or
continue research based college
and career readiness systems and
programming to support all of
our kids with the essential and
executive skills that they need
for post secondary success and
achievement in college and in
the work force at the alliance
is hopeful that with your
support are requests for three
million dollars will make it
through the legislature so that
our districts can continue their
college and career readiness
efforts to prepare every student
in New Mexico for a bright and
prosperous future thank you all
so much for your time.
Thank you Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales we are back to
you Sir.
There I think I'm okay now yes
Sir
Mr chair I don't know what the
time frame is on the committee
we do have some other expert
witness but I'll in lieu of time
if we would be on your part we
would also scanned we can stand
for questions.
Thank you senator of we'll move
on to public comment one remind
people and Senate education
public comment is limited to two
minutes all the way back to when
you've got about five or ten
seconds to go and you're a part
of it's going to you do if you
go beyond we usually don't have
any problem with that are tell
us you would please allow people
who registered for public
comment.
Yes first you'll be hearing from
me sharing Berman Mr Berman.
Hello thank you and good morning
Mr chair and committee members
I'm Sherin Berman and I'm civic
engagement and policy manager at
New Mexico first I'm also
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico's first thank you for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
Senate bill one of seven and
thank you Senator Gonzales for
introducing it.
This bill is in keeping with
recommendations from our most
recent town halls in the last
six years which focused on
economic development higher
education and workforce and
health.
Nearly one thousand people who
participated in our cross
partisan to
emphasize the importance of
career and college readiness the
bill contains many key points
that are paid to participants
emphasized over the years.
And repairing our students to
enter the workforce and ideally
remain in New Mexico is critical
to the health and well being of
our state.
Please support Senate bill one
of seven thanks Mr chair
committee members and Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you next please mark hello
next we'll be hearing from stand
rounds Mr rounds.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee good
morning we would ask that the
committee act favorably on this
bill moving forward in the
process I think the foundation's
been sent by Mr Gorham and we
support our superintendents as
they continue to provide
appropriate funding sources to
allow them to move this
important part of their
curriculum forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Allen's.
Thank you Mr rounds now hear
from Mister Joe again Mr Qian.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Joe again with New
Mexico school boards association
the school board association
supports funding and legislation
to establish a career and
technical pathways financial
assistance job opportunities and
insert internship programs for
students we feel very strongly
about this bill and supported we
also supported the of the
amendments that you addressed
and took care of that would send
money more directly to our
districts so the bill would
provide critical preparedness
training for students and we we
supported and we think of
Senator Gonzales for caring this
bill.
Thank you Mr in.
Thank you Mr Qian out now we'll
hear from John direst your
church my apologies John.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is John to
sure teachers we also support
the shift towards career
technical education and the
efforts throughout the state to
support that as we recognize
that not all of our students and
staff.
The.
four year degree passed so we do
stand in support of increased
supports around
Thank you.
We will hear from Dr Meredith
Machen.
Dr Meredith.
It is an entry she's available
is Dr Eileen van why available.
She doesn't appear to be
available either so we will hear
from Chris balls on.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee Chris boson
register lobbyist for Las Cruces
public schools are we support
this piece of legislation we
support as well the amendment we
appreciate this sponsor bring
that up I was one of our
concerns and was taking care off
online with the house bill as
well this is something that is
on the legislative priorities
for school district and we are
to the committee to support this
piece of legislation.
Mr chair all also the registered
lobbyist for the net college and
then at colleges support of this
piece of legislation as well we
appreciate set up in those point
bringing up house Boue seven
which we also support and and
the right time we gonna come
here and stand on that as well
but we want to just to let the
committee know that when it
comes to create readiness
the college I stand in support
of that four of four for a state
in the northwest region where we
work together with someone
college up there and we school
districts thank you so much for.
Thank you.
Yes thank you that was the last
person who signed up for public
comment if anyone like to raise
their hand from the public I
would like to speak.
Okay and that looks like that is
it for public statements for
Senate bill one of seven at this
time.
Thank you mark hello and thank
you for the public comment
people we'll go to committee
members the first one that I see
is Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Gonzales I and and
to your have the kids I'm very
excited about this particular
piece of legislation college and
career readiness is going to
really truly help us with the
throughput with the monies that
we put into higher education and
really getting more of our
kiddos ready to start that part
of their educational journey I
did have just a follow up on the
R. F. P. component Mr chairman
and senator Gonzalez is there
anything with the letter the R.
F. P. here that would be
different to any of the are you
changing anything about the
procurement code with related
are peace at all I'm assuming
you're going to say no but I do
want to put words in your mouth
Mr chair representative by the
you're correct and no there's no
change.
And how far is the reach I
apologize I'm doing about
nineteen things over here as we
all are everyone is so busy Mr
chairman and senator Gonzalez
how far is the reach with regard
to how many districts are going
to be is this everybody are what
how many districts are we
touching here.
All Mr chair Senator of the of.
I can know how one of my
witnesses so respond to part of
any fund not correct but I
believe that right now all we
have approximately about
eighteen districts that are
implementing the program and
though this would open the.
This will open the statewide to
everyone.
Thank you Mr chairman and to
Senator Gonzales twenty
witnesses want to chime in as
well.
that would be fine I can ask of
one of them if they would want
to.
Hello.
Doctor Segura would you want to
respond to that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla
yes so like currently for
example in my district we have
as for college and at
careerpathways but we also have
project lead the way to
implement medical pathway and a
computer science pathway and we
also have our average college
and career readiness system and
so I'm with that districts
throughout the state who ever
wants to apply to secure funding
to help again either support
their current programming to
implement new programming than
it is open to every single
district within our state.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and doctor Segura
congratulations on your new role
as the superintendent of tier C.
I lived in tier C. as a child I
think they're in great hands
with you so thank you for taking
that long
so if the district or high
school or that particular area
state wants to engage this
programming
who are they going to contact
who's on the ground in New
Mexico making this thing happen.
Hello Mr chair though Senator
Padilla at this point it would
have to be public education
department okay.
Okay I can appreciate that I am
fully supported I'm I'm a strong
cheerleader on this particular
Programming because it just
really is that you know when
when the you know the kids are
still have so many things on
their minds these days imported
they need some real direction
and they're doing great you know
with everything we've put in
front of them but I don't want
this portion of their of their
life to be lost in the think
this really brings that focus so
I really appreciated Senator
Gonzales I I really support your
initiative thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman I have just a couple
of questions the only a C.
analysis
Called out that this sounds an
awful lot like to use the same
language as the current avid
program is this just a way of
getting additional funding for
avid jurors also.
Mr chairman of the Senator
Brandt that is correct it is to
get additional money and to
increase the program my son
mentioned of.
Right now it's so with very L.
you know maybe about a third of
the districts this would open
its statewide that is the intent
is to help everyone statewide.
Mr chair etcetera so it's it's
specifically written for avid.
Mr chair and representative of
that is corrected this this is
the.
Based on the foundation of the
avid program.
And I appreciate that Mr
chairman senator are you know I
I just think we need to be
really clear about that this is
for that specific program
because we talked about putting
it out for our the
but if we write the language so
tightly that only one program
would qualify
that we just need to be clear
that's what we're doing is
funding a specific program which
I'm not a big fan of doing as a.
Everyone probably knows.
I'm fine with you saying that we
need funding for a specific.
What type of program but to make
the language so tight the only
one program would qualify for
it.
I I think is not the best thing
for our students nor is it the
best thing for schools is it
doesn't allow them to pick a
program that maybe is better in
their community.
this year has you know some
admirers it also has some people
that are so thrilled with the.
And don't think it's that great
of a program so
Know that that concerns me a
little bit.
I'm trying to figure out with
you removing the organization.
Alright in the amendment
How the funding then go so the
funding would go
To the districts at this point.
And then they would pay the
organization or how is that now
going to work.
All Mr chairman the Senator
Brandt
It would be based as it was
mentioned by requests for
proposal and would go to the
districts.
You know from there you know
that districts would have to
meet the criteria for the
program but the funding is to.
Be able to the disbursement
would be from the public
education department.
Mr chairman
sure it's also it would only be
for New.
Programs for schools that
already so the third of our
schools already use the avid
program so would only be for the
new ones or does it would
include the ones that already
have that program in place
because I don't see anything
saying it's only for new ones.
Mr chairman senator brandy would
be for would be for both.
That's that's what I thought I
just want to make sure that that
I clarified that
and so in on page two.
Section B. it says receive funds
the organization shall have a
proven college and career
readiness program do we still
want to leave the organization
there over this that you know
like we did earlier need to be
taken out systems you might want
to look at I don't know.
I'm not asking you to change
that here today but some you
might want to look at to.
Keep the language the same
throughout the bill.
The other issue that I saw in I
can't members the for the LFC
analysis but it actually said
the LFC has requested five
million dollars to expand this
program in the budgets and LFC
has requested two million
dollars
with this be in addition to
those or would this be
Part of that.
Mr chair senator I would say
that eventually will come to
all.
You know to all an agreement you
know between the you know on the
numbers but you know you would
not be additional we're all
talking about the same.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate the opportunity and I
think the the expert witness
wanted to say something and so I
didn't want I just looked up and
saw her hand raised or one to
answer one of my questions on if
you want to feel to her.
Of the Center brand if you would
like to ask that I've heard that
that is your prerogative at this
point she had her hand I always
like to be polite so we should
letter.
Our.
The significant a.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator requests I I do want to
clarified that.
D. isn't just for the avid's
system that this if that
districts chooses to if they are
you have an avid system in place
if they have a project lead the
way I'm system in place if
they're utilizing college and
College Board AP than this can
enhance any I'm of those and so
I'm I think there is some
confusion that this is just for
avid art for districts who want
abit as a superintendent I'm
trying to provide funding for
the systems that I have and that
I'm going to be implementing to
enhance my career pathways and
again you know I am investing
you know efforts and time and
and resources for avid because I
do believe that it does have the
ability to reach every single
student regardless of whichever
career path we that they're in
and also enhances the court I'm
content areas but I'm also
looking for funding to help find
my career pathways for
biomedical science as well as
computer science at through
project lead the way and so it's
as well as my eighty programs so
there's multiple modalities and
through the RFP process that
would be my proposal coming from
truth or consequences but you
may have I know in Santa Fe they
have an amazing medical program
there too and every year are
constantly trying to find
funding to support that because
it has proven success you
project lead the way so this is
whichever comprehensive system
that works for the district if
they wants to invest their focus
time and effort and resources
into enhancing what they already
have or if they wanted to
implement something knowing that
there's going to be sustainable
funding so that they.
I think okay well we're going to
give it a go for two years and
funding is going to dry up and
then it'll be gone in budget
cuts and here we go first thing
with budget cuts comes
programming and you get rid of
programming because you have to
make sure that people are there
so I just wanted to make that
clarification thank you Mr
chairman doctor Segura thank you
for that you believe then that
the language is broad enough.
To not just be that would be the
only ones to qualify for the R.
P. because I've seen are fees
written in a way for a specific
program because you know.
Areas reasons I won't go into
some of the correct reasons but
for various reasons that was the
only program they wanted to be
funded you believe this is
written broadly enough that
multiple programs would qualify.
Mr chair Senator Brandt yes I do
again we have there are many
College and career readiness
systems are programs out there
we want to make sure that we're
not wasting money we want to
make sure that whoever applies
whichever districts applied for
this funding they're committing
to implementing a strong system
for their district for their
school and like I said it's it's
not just avid it is it could be
avid I'm again project lead the
way and college forty P. there's
there's others out there those
are the ones that research based
I know that work in my
experience so that's as a
superintendent that's what I'm
going to be I'm applying for if
the school provided goes
through.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
doctor Segura that helps me
because I will tell you the
reason that confusion is there
is because the language in the
bill is almost word for word
what the promotional materials
from Avid says.
And so that's where the
confusion is coming in is
because it's almost like avid
wrote the bill.
and so I think that we need to
be really careful about that and
and I'm not sure support bill
because of that because I want
these written in such a way that
the local school districts can
decide what works best like you
were saying in Santa Fe that got
a program works I know my
community actually uses abit
in fact my middle son was in
Abbas which is by the way is why
I don't like you and that's just
a personal thing it was not a
good program for him so but when
the language in the bill is
almost word for word what the
promotional materials from
expertise your program Avid
says that kind of raises
everyone still red flag.
And so I just wanted to to make
sure that you understood why
there was a concern in their
thank you Mr chairman I really
appreciate the time.
Thank you senator Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Gonzales and I
appreciate the comments of Dr
secure I think that helps me
support the bill because I
certainly support career
technical education moving
forward and we need funding to
do that I am concerned and have
a question with regard to what
is already anticipated to be in
house bill two and three going
forward I think two million
dollars from the reform Fund is
earmarked so I'm Senator
Gonzales do you know if.
I have concern how much money do
you that do we know what will be
in house bill two coming out for
for career technical education
and you know we need a bucket of
money that I'm just concerned
and confused about the different
sources of funding
for C. T. can you clarify what
is Sen anticipated in funding
coming over.
All Mr chair under Senator
Kernan I don't have that number
now but I'd be willing to visit
with the.
With the House Appropriations
and with the house Education
Committee to see what they have
but I don't have that
information now okay I think
that Mr chairman I think.
We certainly need to to make
sure we've got funding and I
agree it should be open to to
all career technical programs
that are available whether
Sankey or Avid or whatever
districts want to use and I want
to be sure that that's clear I
going forward in the bill that
that's open enough that it's not
going to just want and so I
agree with senator brand on that
issue for certain I'm also
concerned about in this really
doesn't relate to your bill that
in fact I think your bill.
Makes more sense of the fact
that I don't want to use reform
Fund money for purposes other
than the extended learning time
in K. five plus which what it
was intended for so perhaps this
is the way to go where we get a
separate appropriation that does
not impact that reform Fund so
that's a positive I do worry
about the recurring a portion of
that we have a good year this
year I think that going forward
and I've stated it before we
need to be prepared that that
money may not be here I in the
next couple of years so I would
be very cautious about that I'm
explain to me the process is
this going to be like below the
line money that we've seen in
the past where if districts are
interested they applied some are
going to receive some money some
are not
with regard to have that PED is
going to allocate those funds is
it to have based on what
districts apply for it is
certain that for everyone to
have some Weiss is not but about
the line for districts so that
they can use that data in in any
manner that that which.
Well Mister chairman no Senator
Kernan the of this would be
considered you know below the
line and you would be based on
what kind of information from
public education department goes
out to the districts of the
availability of the programs so
what I would see that they
probably would manage so the
average funding allocation based
on the how many applicants that
they would receive.
Within the program but it would
be L. criteria YC would be
L. set by Public Education
Department.
Okay and again you know that
concerns me I as we've tried to
move away from the allow the
line funding process and.
You know every time we put money
but what below the line that's
money that that is not available
for up SEG dollars so but I do
support C. D. E. and I think as
long as we're sure that these
funds are going to be.
Able to be used and contracted
with with more than one company
or one organization I'm more
comfortable with that that I I
think districts should have the
opportunity to to pick and
choose the career technical
programs that work best in their
school if you can assure me of
that and I can support the bill
at certainly for at one time
year but we'll see what happens
going forward but that we need
the money in CTE and I agree
with that thank you Mr chair.
Thank you I don't see any other
bands from members and so I've
got some questions if I might
On page one of the bill are down
on pay online twenty four
Senator it says that these
programs have to have a long
history of successful track
record in New Mexico of serving
that how many programs for up I
guess the work talk about
programs would meet that
criteria of a long history of
successful track record in New
Mexico how many programs of this
sort we currently have in New
Mexico.
Mr chairman of Google to our
witness saw doctor Segura.
Yes Mister chairman I'm members
of the committee we have we have
found that and why I'm investing
in the current systems and and a
system but I want to implement
here within my district is a
project lead the way avid's and
then advanced College Board
Advanced Placement I'm and ten
just you know kind of enhance
what we're doing there
there's also programming called
high school of business that we
I invested in when I was at high
school principal that works
really well and we alligned it
down into
middle school and and elementary
so we really try to align our
pathways so that students
starting from elementary were
aware of their feeder and career
pathways for their high schools
and so we engaged in that way
those are those to be the three
that I would
that I would invest in that I
know that New Mexico has
implemented in multiple
districts.
And so Senator and the doctor
Segura on the second page for in
order receive funds this has to
have a comprehensive
kindergarten through twelfth
grade professional learning
around leadership instruction
cultural relevance equity
improving systems of those
project lead the way go down to
the elementary that that meet
that criteria that specific
criteria and does they do meet
that specific criteria of a
comprehensive kindergarten
program.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I yes project lead the
way does have elementary
programming and what program.
What's that kindergarten program
yes yes so they do have
an elementary programming middle
school program called gateway as
well as the high school
career pathway programs that
they can choose and with in each
of those they have professional
development the appointments and
materials and
and that I'm going I'm training
that teachers and principals
have to have.
And so
Of Senator Gonzales said that
doctor Segura is AP.
What sell Mr chairman and
members of the committee when I
look as a former AP teacher
I didn't have the reach to be
able to aligned with I'm middle
school and elementary but as a
superintendent we are looking
for this summer to be aligning
our curriculum guides to be
implementing those rigorous
AP and honors strategies those
high yield strategies that we
know from high school middle
school with the pre AP and
letting them flow down into
elementary I know that College
Board doesn't have specific
elementary training per se but
they do for middle and high
school and that's that's through
my experience and what I know
Senator was to go to a AP would
not count as far as how this
bill is particularly written and
it says the organization must
have that so AP would not count.
Yes Mister chairman members of
the committee so.
I brought up College Board AP is
something that I'm implementing
within my district that we have
in that we're increasing as part
of my college and career
readiness efforts within my
district that may not qualify
and I know that project lead the
way and avid blood which
I'm to speak to our other
senators concern thank as a
superintendent I wish that
college and career readiness was
an above the line allocation I
know that that's probably not
feasible I'm so we're starting
off with this to see how we can
gain some traction and for the
districts who are truly
interested in embedding
something that's sustainable
that's not just a bandaid to say
okay well let's see if this
works for that school let's see
if this works for that school as
a bandaid and then the
implementation isn't done with
finality to anything and then we
don't see the outcomes that that
we want to see so I'm sorry if
my own efforts within my
district we're confusing but
those were my kind of key I'm
areas for college and career
readiness so Senator Gonzales
how many of the districts that
are currently implementing this
and I think it was there were
you said that there were
eighteen how many of those are
doing Avid and how many of them
are doing of some other program.
Mr chair the doctor Segura can
you respond to that.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee out of our
districts many of them are
either utilizing avid or project
lead the way as their college
and career readiness system some
have begun them but because of
budget cuts and dried up funding
they stopped doing them and so
we're looking to be able to
enhance that opportunity so that
we're not having to again apply
for grants outside of that just
are really difficult
to sustain.
And so Senator Gonzales I when
we talk about New Mexico
Alliance for college and career
readiness how many of those are
doing a program other than that.
Dr so would anyone respond.
yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee we I don't have
that current information in
front of me I do know that
Many are like I said have either
implemented avid at some point I
know that Santa Fe has a strong
project lead the way program for
medical as well as for
engineering I'm not sure of any
of the other districts with
project lead the way but we can
get that information to you all.
And and senator my concern is on
page two on C. it says the
public at Department shall work
in tandem with representatives
of the school districts within
the New Mexico Alliance for
college and career readiness it
sounds like those districts are
avid districts and it's having
those people determine what the
criteria are you would be to get
distribution and so again of
Senator this bill reads with the
exception of one paragraph of
the Yazzie Martinez one exactly
like the program last year that
was specifically for avid back
to the question districts that
are currently have avid or other
programs how are they being
funded.
Mr chair
one part is so.
Last year they did receive an
appropriations the four hundred
thousand dollars and I'm not
sure if the department of.
Hello additional funding to that
the but all and doctor Segura
might helpful respond to that I
know that on some districts you
know how the news in some of
their money their own money
you know to to be able to have a
program in place but doctor
Segura one at or to.
Yes Mr chairman and senator
Gonzales I'm as far as.
Again what we what I have
utilized within my experience we
have utilized external requests
such as your app and Carl
Perkins which again are very
tedious grants because of the at
paperwork the reporting and then
a big chunk goes to having to
have a coordinator
we also have utilized some at
title one funding
and we have also and utilized in
title to as well as operational
and I think that's where it's
really difficult because we
don't have an established
creation that just supports our
efforts for college and career
readiness stand in our
operational that goes mostly to
salaries and benefits and so
this is our effort to say you
know we would like for the I'm.
Public education department at
college and career readiness
bureau to be able to create a to
they would create some quite the
criteria for districts to say
okay we want to commit to doing
Abyan see this is how we are
going to implement it K. twelve
and and go from there.
Senator and yeah I guess if
again my my concern is that in
the end it says the public get
department is going to work with
the New Mexico Alliance for
college and career readiness
which is heavily avid
associated in order to set the
criteria it indicates on the
first page that they have to
have a long history track record
here again that it contains
comprehensive kindergarten I
mean all of the things similar
to what Senator Brandt was
indicating that is very specific
for one program of from what I
understand from what that was
just said districts have an
option to determine how they're
going to fund it currently
districts are doing get out of
operational from various
requests if this were to go
through it would allow districts
to support those monies they're
already doing that and move
monies elsewhere and so it's
very much a decision of the
school board the superintendent
as to how they spend their
current money I'm very much
concerned about below the line
below the line is not recurring
monies that is always going to
be there very much as we move to
more of college career readiness
advanced manufacturing programs
at high schools that does need
to be above the line buddies
where local districts are
determining how to do that of
the other questions I see
Senator Kernan has her hand up
if it's very short but typically
we don't go back for a second
round of questions less this is
to make a motion Senator.
Now Mr chair I just wanted
clarification but I think you've
covered it with regard to
programs such as I do taking
care of that thank you okay of
thank you
My particular questions at this
point I'd be open for a
promotion Mr chairman I move to
table.
We have a motion to table it is
not debatable Marianna if you
will call the roll a motion of a
test would be to table this bill
and it would not move on.
I'm sorry Senator Brandt yes
Senator Hickey hello.
Senator Kernan yes.
Renewable yes Senator Padilla
no.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Senator souls yes.
We have a table bill this bill
has been tabled.
Mr chair members the committee
of thank you thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Are at this point it's ten after
ten we will move on to the next
bill Senator pope if you will
take over
Senate bill sixty three is my
bill.
Thank you Mr chair we will be
moving to Senate bill sixty
three and you have the floors Mr
chair.
Got that right at this bill
sixty three is that right yes
okay I've got the wrong screen
in front of me
Thank you committee of this bill
is very similar to the bill we
have last time where we talk
about being a goal to put solar
panels on as a systems
requirement on a retro fits for
school this bill would you would
have that any new school
constructed in the state of New
Mexico deprivations of this bill
would become law in July that is
proposed it comes before the.
Capital I will the school
capital outlay council that it
would require that it have a PED
solar panels on it
What of the other technical
things are very similar doesn't
change anything as far as the
priorities that the.
Public school facilities
authority might have any of the
other process but if a school
building is being constructed
with public funds through the
capital or the school year
buildings Authority that it must
have solar panels as part of
that system you will be happy to
answer any questions if the
relatively short as far as the
actual changes that are being
made you have reached our
chaplain as one of my experts.
And Mr chair if you are there
and available if you would
please.
Yes Sir thank you Senator souls
the Mr chair members good to
talk with you all again.
This morning so as a Senator
mentioned this bill proposes
changes to the public school
capital outlay act.
That would to make TV systems
global Techsystems eligible for
state funding and required for
upcoming standards based
projects.
So.
Two issues of note to draw out
of the LFC and LESC analysis
quickly.
From the earliest the analysis
the.
They point out that standards
based program is the the core
program that the state uses to
respond to the on goings in the
lawsuit and with the.
Districts court judge's ruling
in late December of last year
twenty twenty that case is still
very much active of the
connection here to the Zuni
lawsuit in our programs
potentially is
photovoltaic systems have not
been in eligible system yet
through our programs.
Historically the standards based
program is funded
educational space needs of the
capital improvements projects
that need to happen.
To provide the minimum levels of
educational space sufficiency
throughout the state.
So the program since two
thousand four as the focused
very much on educational space
needs and funding educational
space projects.
to improve schools
this would be a potential
expansion of that underlying
goal of the program to now
include
some goal of sustainability and
energy efficiency as part of the
underlying goal for the program.
I'll just mention that over time
of state participation funding
participation on projects has
expense.
And has a built in the early
days of the program before two
thousand ten the standard space
program really did only and
solely focus really general ed
classroom space.
And so in the early days of the
program even educational space
things like special ed.
special our programs music
language culture weren't
necessarily eligible for state
funding in every case.
The state group pretty firm line
in the early years to just focus
on education the core
educational space needs now the
program is involved in that is
funding a broader array of
educational space types so that
this would be a continuation of
that trend I would say for the
program over time.
with teacher housing now being
eligible as of last year that's
another example.
Another quick example is HX
systems early early days the
program the state drew the line
and said we won't fund anything
other than twinkling now we do
refrigerated air.
Another simple example of how
the program has evolved over
time.
LFC certain Alice's sign ours
the point out that the previous
systems are up Representative
potential increase in the cost
of any new school project.
Our anticipated range of
additional costs for future
projects would be one the three
percent.
Of increased cost for a new
project in the future and again
going back to the conversation
we had the other day the intent
of the Peavey system when
installed is you invest some
capital dollars up front and
then you save operational
dollars throughout the life of
that system and throughout the
life of the building with lower
utility bills.
So that's the that's the trade
off that would potentially
benefit districts.
With some operational cost
savings over time
the.
Other other issues technical
issues that are outlined in the
LFC analysis in our analysis as
well our is the.
The particular design size of
portable deck systems for
schools and one reason why we
have in our analysis so that
shows up in the table there in
the LFC analysis the potential
range of one to three percent
for any school regardless of our
size is we think that there's a
functional design limit maximum
size to put it simply for
affordable picks system on a
school and a as is mentioned
there in the analysis of sixty
to eighty five percent of the
energy needs of the school if
you can get that produce therapy
system that's the target.
So those are some other good
points that were raised in the
analysis and I can go on but
I'll leave it there Mr chairman
taking the questions you may
have thank you.
Thank you end up as we move
forward and I think you stated I
want to amplify the comment is
once this building has.
Maybe systems on it it
affectively reduces operational
costs and that means more money
were dollars available to go
into classrooms rather than
paying for electricity and
that's a continued saving for
the life of the building once
the systems are on their I the
actual designs would go through
the same process that we
currently have for design of
school buildings the design
could be everything from rooftop
it could be ground out it it
could be of covered parking any
of those type of things would
all be appropriate as part of
the design of the new school
also this doesn't have any
district jumping the line
because they've got photovoltaic
systems any new schools that are
getting funding through the New
Mexico public school capital
outlay process would be required
to put photovoltaic systems on
it and with that Mr chair I
think we would be open for
public comment and questions.
All right thank you Mr chair
market would if we want to start
with the public comment if we
have anyone in opposition.
I'm at I see we have a Gary
Payton are you speaking in
opposition Sir.
I am not.
Okay I'm I didn't have anyone on
my list specifically who signed
up for opposition so there any
members of the public who are
here in the meeting at this
moment we would like to sign up
for opposition please raise your
hand.
Mr Chris balls on our are you
raising your hand opposition no
I'm not a budget and support
with my terms.
Okay no problem so one more
minute any opposers.
No okay I guess we have
overwhelming support today suki
waffler if you are on the line
go ahead and make your statement
now.
Okay it looks like she's
unavailable so we will go to
Alex Hanna Alexander go ahead.
Education Committee I am Alex in
major.
You're right.
Some funding for our schools is
coming from fossil fuels what is
important is that you have the
power not only to the side for
your generation but our
generation your kids and
grandkids generation.
That some of our school funding
comes from the fossil fuels that
destroy our future.
Now that we all know the signs
of global warming it is
important to take a stab at to
make a change our our schools by
solar we encounter to be honest
we were in shock after.
Zero to restore your eyes burn
we've seen the towering oil
refineries the flaring.
The fracking that releases
methane pollution as you all are
methane emissions from New
Mexico can be seen by NASA from
space we have any County who
suffer from the frequent
nosebleeds and headaches from
the air pollution caused by
fracking is this the polluted
New Mexico that we want for kids
like me.
Yes.
The schools we learning are
funded by what destroys our
future.
Both first solar on new schools.
The future of New Mexico vote
for the children in New Mexico
thank you for your time.
Thank you now we will hear from
Gary Payton Mr Payne.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning committee members my
name is Gary Payton and I'm
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a coalition consisting of
the elected leaders of Santa Fe
Los crucis Albuquerque and Santa
Fe County.
We support this bill investment
in new school potable takes in
this decade will produce
millions and cumulative
operational cost savings in
future decades as the
temperature systems continued to
work in the state continues to
rise and the H. fax systems in
our schools will be required to
be able to meet the increase.
This bill calls for support
today with impacts that are both
environmental and financial that
continue into the next century
and likely far behind.
We urge you to vote yes
president bill sixty three thank
you very much thank you senator
souls for bringing this forward.
Thank you Mr Payne we will now
hear from Mr Ben Shelton Mister
Shelton are you available.
It appears he isn't so we will
move on to Mr Burciaga also
honor.
Mr chair Chris balls on a
registered lobbyist for Las
Cruces public schools we stand
in support of this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr balls on now we
will hear from Camille the the
woman Camilla thank you I'm
Camilla I will then I'm the
director of the Rio Grande
chapter at this year standing in
support of Senate bill sixty
three on behalf of our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters around the state but
I'm also standing in support as
the mom of the four year old and
an eight year old stepdaughter.
these investment early in new
schools on solar will do as the
sponsor suggests that it will
save money an ongoing utility
bills that can be reinvested in
kids education so for that
reason and in the frame of the
global climate crisis we stand
and support.
Thank you Mr and now we will
hear from Craig o'hare Mr
o'hare.
Yes good morning members of the
committee and Mr chairman my
name is Craig o'hare
representing myself in support
of the bill real quickly about
me I was the special assistant
for renewable energy in the
energy minerals and natural
resources department from two
thousand and three to twenty ten
and I have a bachelors degree in
business economics I'd like to
focus on the up front cost of
these solar systems in
comparison to the long term
return on investment that they
provide solar systems reliably
produce electricity for over
twenty five years dramatically
reducing in this case a school
districts energy utility costs
from the electric utility if you
were to accumulate those
financial cost savings over the
full twenty five year life of
the solar system they would
roughly double the up front
costs putting the solar system
in the first place and I I would
argue that that represents one
of the best return on investment
of any use of our tax dollars
that the state currently.
It uses unfortunately your
fiscal impact report with all
due respect to the good folks at
LFC is not structure to capture
that financial benefit it only
looks at the first three years
and it only looks at cost it
doesn't attempt to quantify that
financial benefit cost savings
over twenty five years and in
essence it's it's essentially
like doing a cost benefit
analysis but choosing to ignore
the financial benefits in the
only look at the costs and I
would say that again if you had
a a cost benefit analysis that
looked at the twenty if you're
twenty five year life of the
system you would find that it
was really a really wise
investment for our scarce
taxpayer dollars I would just
like to quickly address
reliability solar systems what
about source schools that also
have a solar system will still
be connected to electric
utilities grid so for some
reason the solar system fails
not really very likely but if it
does the school won't miss a
beat with respect to continuing
to receive reliable electricity
from its electric utility thank
you much and I urge you to
consider supporting the bill.
Thank you Mr o'hare and then I
didn't have any other emails
from the public that wanted to
speak so if you are a member of
the public I would like to speak
now is the time to raise your
hand.
It looks like we don't have any
other members of the public
school would like to speak so
that is it for Senate bill sixty
three I thank you market when we
are on Senate bill sixty three I
will now turn it over to
questions and comments from the
committee first off I senator
Neville.
Mr chair
First off a good example I have
this up here in San Juan County
We have a.
Municipal loan utility and our
rates are extremely low compared
to the rest of state.
I'm not sure what the all of the
components are but I know that
significant part of our
generation is from hydro of
Navajo dam city owns that
facility up there.
They also by hydro sometimes off
the grid they're sick and we're
just in a unique situation where
we have a lot of natural
hydroelectric available.
And it is conceivable that if
we're going to build a new
school.
The the.
Cost to.
Really higher than installing
traditional stuff because but in
the long run it would be much
cheaper for us to tie into our
local system so are there any
provisions uh Senator Sanchez.
That would allow for us to.
At least negotiate the need and
offset in some degree to.
To the fact that we have
essentially renewable power
available in the it would be
less feasible for us to put in
the solar.
And senator bill and thank you
and you know there are some
unique situations certainly this
really is looking forward to the
life of that school and the
hydro power that you have
certainly is wonderful on the
grid it's very clean energy at
some of the the claim is that we
typically have but as we've got
climate change water
availability in New Mexico is
becoming more scarce and as we
have continued growth over the
next twenty thirty forty years
the amount of electricity that
you can get from the hydro is
typically fixed it is not
something that continues solar
energy can continue and this is
only on new schools and again
this is to where districts are
going to be getting a state
match with whatever the local
amounts would be and so we're
talking about one of the three
percent of the cost of the
school to add this on there it
doesn't have much in the way of
downsides and the state speaking
part of the cost of all of this
to ensure that we've got
sustainable energy into the
future.
Mr chair senator I'm not opposed
to solar even considered it on
my own property so I certainly
don't to disagree that it's a
good idea I just I disagree
somewhat with the concept that
it's mandatory because in some
situations ours might be one may
not be in the long run it might
not be feasible for a school
districts particularly in some
parts of the state we're we're
it's not necessarily a.
Of the best option financially
the best option.
Environmentally it might be that
I am a little concerned that
we're mandating something that
might not be in the best
interest
of the school district that's
that's my biggest concern thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Neville we
were going we will move on to
Senator current.
Thank you Mr chair I have a
question with regard to.
Eligible drugs projects
currently so
Mr chairman currently can a
school district I'm submit I'm a
project that includes I'm.
The this particular type of as
our system currently under P.
SFA so it what this is all due
to up in allowing I know it's
mandatory but currently can they
do this type of project now you
get state funding.
So Mr chairman Senator Kernan to
your question currently the
rules for state funding.
Don't allow for state funding
participation for photovoltaic
systems there have been projects
in the last few years especially
around the state different
districts that included total
Techsystems.
For whole building in a large
campus replacement projects
others of the component.
In those instances the local
district pays for of that
percentage of the cost of the
project with their own dollars
entirely under present district
funded at this point and so
right now it's it's not eligible
on the who are programs some
just clarify Mr Adam at Champlin
and and maybe even Senator soul
state to help me understand the
bill so basically this now
allows yes it rate to fund at
PED systems on schools I'm in
addition to that it makes it
mandatory for new schools to to
do this type of.
System so it so this is a two
part built does it do both in
this one built.
Mr chair and and Senator Kernan
the bill that we heard the other
day is one that would allow
solar's on retrofits on current
schools.
This bill deals only with new
schools if there are new schools
that are in line they already
been approved and they don't
have solar on them this bill
does not retroactively go back
and require them to put solar on
it and I think from what Mr
Champlin indicated please
correct me as I'm if I'm wrong
this bill does not go back and
allow.
Of solar systems on schools that
are in the queue but have not
started yet of those that would
have to go through the other
bill in order to put those
systems on as more of a retro
that is how I would read this
only deals with schools that get
on the list after July one.
So Mr chairman Mr chair and
senator souls
The other bill we're talking
about course that's going to the
process now we don't know for
sure if it's gonna pass we don't
know if it's going to be signed
this bill could go through and
and and pass and be signed so I
don't have a problem with the
SFA funding this type of system
if the school district chooses
to go in that direction and
certainly there certain areas of
the state that it could make a
lot of sense to make that kind
of investment
but I think I agree with senator
Neville it's a mandatory piece
because so many districts that
might not want to do this for
various reasons are you talk
about where to site.
How to build this in even in net
construction what do you have
the land available to do it on
land where the you're going to
have a parking
system where it's on top of that
and you know I just think
districts should have the
opportunity to choose.
How they want to provide.
It the energy to their schools
are really opposed the mandatory
piece with regard to that what
about a school district that
Receives no matcher chooses not
to apply for PS I think funding
to those districts are they
required to to use this kind of
the system.
Mr chair and senator now this is
only if it goes through the
public school facilities
authority for the matching
monies that districts are
required to put this on.
So Mr chair and senator many
districts I have lost a
significant matched with
legislation that we passed a
year ago or two years ago and
their matches been reduced
Down to to a very small amount
they get it's going to be an
increase in cost so basically in
some cases I make it no match at
all just because of the the
increase in the cost of this
type of system and the reduction
in their match from the state if
they would be required to do it
at this the problems I see the
bill I think the mandatory piece
is a problem I think where many
districts fall with regard to
match is a problem because it is
going to increase the cost and.
I I really have to have a
problem with the bill as you can
imagine and I think the irony of
that is that we're funding the
systems up from fossil fuel
severance taxes so that's the RD
and you know my position on that
that but any time you mandate
something from a school
districts are as diverse this is
status and that's different as
we are with our our views and
and how we believe I think that
that that's gonna be a problem
for me thank you very much thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan we will
move on to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir souls
I think I have some of the same
issues that there are my
colleagues surveillance our
current had on the mandatory
nature of this again I actually
have no problem with us
allowing.
The public school capital outlay
authority to do this when I do
what I would like to ask though
is why wasn't this bill that is
through the scope of.
Up.
Thank you Senator Brandt let's
go to that only two meetings
this summer both of those were
update types of meetings we
talked about a couple of them
the bill was made aware of the
members but we did not have a
formal discussion of a number of
things that got up to talk about
over the course of things and so
it was not purposeful it was the
bill wasn't ready at the time we
had to go to and so without
having an actual bill to talk
about.
Yeah we weren't able to do that
again because of the the COVID
at that distance of all of the
interim committees we only had
to go to meetings I think the
last one Mr chairman correct me
but I think it was somewhere
near the beginning of November
and this bill was not prepared
at that point.
And I appreciate that Mr chair
Senators souls but it really
seems like this is something
that the oversight task force
should look at they should have
talked about and see how that
really fits into your increasing
the cost there's also some
concerns in.
The F. I. R. I think it's
interesting that they're
actually brought out by yes of
the unit Mr chairman this year
so I think that's an interesting
thing talking about the hundred
percent requirement
and whether or not that's
reasonable or even doable
because of restrictions by the
utilities on the one back over
megawatt a requirement that you
can't go above that so your
larger schools might not even be
able to reach the hundred
percent and yet you got it
mandatory that's a hundred
percent so that's a concern as
well all of your mandatory that
you have for the systems on but
it's mandatory that the systems
cover a hundred percent of the
utility or a hundred percent of
the Energy and I'm not sure
that's even pool.
currently and so could you
address that Lewis.
And senator Byrd Mr chair and
senator Brandt the the actual
language that you hear that
changes is very short and I my
plan is as this moves forward is
going to change one word in
there from and I'm trying to
find where that particular.
That is on it
but.
Thank you just a moment here.
Shall include assistance to
Ishant is what you're talking
about sufficient indicates a
hundred percent is to change
that to substantial which that
makes it work doesn't have to be
a hundred percent there
sometimes when if they be
producing more than is being
used in other times where will
be pulling off of the grant and
so as it moves to the next
committee I plan on introducing
at that point an amendment and
you have my word on doing so
that says sufficient.
Thank you Mr chairman
our financial application I
apologize.
Understand the and I appreciate
that I think that's a change
that needs to happen.
I'm not sure if that wording is
even sufficient but
A little play on words there but
you know it I think that you
know some of the other concerns
are the timing this is going to
go into effect in July of any
projects going forward this year
I think that's a concern you've
got school districts that have
already been in the planning
process they've already got
their plants together
some schools may not have enough
land.
To be able to put a full system
on that way and so now they're
going to have to go out and try
to get more land around that may
not even be possible to get land
where they're planning to build
and yet this doesn't really give
that will the way there's no
waiver process in here there's
no reasonable consideration and
I think the timing of doing this
this year you need to look at
that timing factor I think you
have and you know maybe looking
to phasing in factor in almost
all the the.
The energy changes that were
making we put in some type of
phase in and we're going from
you can't do it all in the
funded to you have to do it and
you have to do it today a
hundred percent and that's going
into effect this year and I'm
just not sure that that's
reasonable I think that's that's
you know shutting it down the
throat a little too much
in in the what about the other
quote unquote clean energy
sources your why couldn't a
school district due a windmill
on there
School property if they wanted
to I just think there's this is
so prescriptive.
that I have to wonder why.
If you want to dress that.
Again it is very very
restrictive you got it you got
it now it's got to be a hundred
percent now and it has to happen
this year instead of you know if
you already been working on
these plans for the past two or
three years which you know for
how school districts do their
planning and now they've got to
go back to the drawing board and
start over again.
Mr chair for most districts and
they would work through with the
public school facilities
authority Abbey they work with
districts all the time on
of ensuring that they are
meeting the requirements that
are in statute for new school
buildings that are getting
public funding there are there
is flexibility on where the
system is located whether it be
over parking of ground mounted
roof mounted types of things if
we change the word to
substantial that also takes care
of if they can't put in a full
size system of such out it also
would allow that they put a wind
turbine on to beat the other
about to get to that hundred
percent that you were concerned
about so I don't see that as a
problem moving forward we only
have a couple of schools each
year that are building new
facilities and so it's not like
every single districts suddenly
is thrown a look for this there
only a few that are planning
those most of those will
probably jump at the chance in
order to have this available to
them so that they can divert the
the extra monies to the
classroom.
Mr chair center I I agree that
most districts would probably
jump at the chance which is why
they are still in the back of
mandatory
because most districts are gonna
say Hey I get to take out of the
silo you know we talk about
silos last week and I for some
of the new members are different
silos of funding in your if you
build a school board yeah you
know that if you can get it out
of the operational silo even if
it doesn't make financial sense
you're doing that so yes most
districts would jump at the
opportunity.
So I I get that that is again
rises why are we needing to make
this mandatory and wiring to
make it mandatory now and so I
just you know for a very host of
reasons I can't support the bill
but I think that you understand
the technical issues that I
think this bill has and maybe we
can work on those.
Thank you Mr chairman for the
opportunity to.
Thank you Senator Brandt will
move over to Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator souls for introducing
this bill
I love the concept and
also the observations about
water water not being you know
not attention a sustainable more
in this drought ridden state
over time also appreciate that
the difficulty and and the use
of the word mandatory but your
last comment Senator souls in
regards that you know it's not
like we're gonna be popping
these things hundreds of schools
per year they're going to be a
few that we're doing it I think
makes a very reasonable and I
agree that the that schools
would opt to do it
my the main reason I raise my
hand is to essentially kind of
defend the mandatory component
changes hard it is just very
very hard and
And you know I mean there is an
inevitability in terms of going
electric throughout the nation
and so forth and when you do it
but if we keep putting it off
and off we are going to start
and we have to start
our our future those two boys
who spoke certainly they're
talking about.
They're up there their ability
to have good health in the
future but also it is their
future and I think this bill
starts us now and because of the
mandatory component and I will
certainly stand in favor of it
and thank you for bringing it
forth.
And I'm finished Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
And I will pass it over to you
Chair souls one last time if you
have any closing comments.
Mr chair no I don't have any
closing comments thank you right
so I have a a motion from the
committee.
Some of.
We have a we have a motion to
pass from Senator Hickey I'm
sorry.
And do we have a second.
I second Senator been second
from Senator Pinto.
If we could have the committee
secretary do a roll call vote.
And your plants no Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan no
Senator Neville no.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Hope.
Yes Senator souls yes.
We have a deep pass.
All right thank you Mr chairman
you have a do pass and I will
pass the chairmanship back over
to you.
Thank you Center pope you very
ably manages chair when I'm
presenting I very much
appreciated your your you very
smooth in doing so Committee
this is the end of what we have
today with the new bills that
were introduced on Monday we
have approximately I think it's
about twenty eight of them we're
gonna be trying to get somewhere
six seven eight of them died
today on Friday I believe that
the agenda is already been sent
out ideas available also to the
public I think there are seven
bills on for Friday
Senate pro tem of.
The store will be the first bill
up she has another bill and also
committee if you know that
you've got another bill in
another committee did you need
to be gonna be either schedule a
bill that you got at a
particular time please let me
know for all of our members we
will try to work around other
commitments that you have in
other committees to ensure that
this committee continues to run
very smoothly again as always I
appreciate the very good
dialogue and discussion within
this committee and if anybody
has any comments and otherwise
we will in the meeting so I will
open it up and if there are any
in races for short announcements
or anything of that sort.
Mr chair center Brandt I just
want to say it is very obvious
that Senator pope had a lot of
Air Force training hello because
he is he's really stepped in
really well as you're when
you're not able to chair and I
just I want to echo your
comments on that I think it's
it's pretty clear was from his
Air Force training the that's
you're really helping to do that
course both of us are Air Force
so that's why I bring that up
but I I just want to commend him
for that I think is a really
good job stepping in.
Yes thank you and thank you as
always to my teleporter smoothly
running the backside of ours you
meetings and merry and always
for keeping us on track
recording our votes and making
sure that all the technical
sides of of this process are
working well I don't see other
hands and so with that we will
adjourn until nine o'clock on
Friday thank you all.
