Representative can you turn them
just a little more directional
towards you I think i'll help.
They try in the back to temper
those depending on how loud
people are but thank you we
appreciate every I think
everybody hates these new bikes
I would agree with you mister
chair so this is a build that
require your state funded post
secondary educational
institutions to adopt policies
and procedures addressing
affirmative consent and
prevention of sexual assault
domestic violence dating
violence violence and harassment
or stocking in this we have run
this bill at least three times
before we have taken out the k
twelve portion of it and now we
are right now really focusing on
the postdashsecondary edge and
part of the reason for that is
all of their sensationalism
around what happened at the
mexico state with their
basketball team.
And my experts are alexandria
taylor they executive director
of the sexual assault programs
and
joan youngers who was an
attorney.
I listed chairman i'm happy to
carry this bill on the sellet
side and so this bill is no
stranger to the committee before
you've seen it and the requires
troubling for policies and
responses by post secondary
educational institutions that
resteave state funds creates
partnerships between
universities and local rape
crisis centers to provide
survivors with free access to
counseling medical and legal
services and protect survivors
and bicycles from punishment in
the school student could have
conduct
it broken or if near the
incident of sexual violence and
with that will take any
questions on the committee.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is helies awk and i'm the staff
attorney from southwest women's
law center admittedly when I was
in college I partied quite a lot
and I remember the people would
talk about a certain party house
on campus to stay away from
because everyone would always
get in trouble for drinking but
nobody would ever get in trouble
for the sexual salt this should
never be the case and to me my
experience underscore the need
for a paradime shift in how
educational institutions are
addressed sexual violence
out of breath
it is with this background that
I express my strong support for
each b one fifty one the
provision protecting survivors
and buy standards from
punishment even in cases were a
schools as during code of
conduct may have been broken
underscores a commitment to
prioritising the well being of
those who have indoor trauma and
I urge you to support it today
and after providing this public
comment not at house health and
human services i'm one of these
students they are from unam
turned around in express to me
that that party house on campus
is still there and that is still
going on so I urge you to
support this today because we
obviously really need it thank
you mr chairman we're getting
text messages at the zoom is not
being broadcast okay thank you
okay thank you center thank you
let me go here
mister chair
below I care like I like that's
perfect it's awkward but I think
members of the committee my name
is heather smith I am from all
the futures new mexico and we
strongly support this bill
affirmative constant education
as critical to the journey for
liberation and house one fifty
one does that it's about
destinating conversations it is
about teaching young people the
ways to measure an invor- and
enforce boundaries for our
bodies it is about learning how
to navigate the world in a way
that leaves us hole and less
traumatist please support this
but.
The.
Thank you.
Good morning good morning mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is march on my
t and s and the executive
director of equality new mexico
when I was growing up no one
touched me about consent in fact
I grip as a game and believing
that all men always want to
engage in sexual activity
because of this I didn't know
for many years that I didn't
have to.
This legislation ensures that
college students have access to
information about what consent
is and that if we experience
college sexual violence on
college campuses our claims will
be heard and we won't be
silenced because one
administrator one faculty member
things that we should have said
no more clearly more loudly or
even publicly.
Eligibility youth experienced
sexual violence and
significantly higher rates than
our non lgpiers and we know that
all youth deserve to learn in
safe environments we should do
everything we can to create
those of environments everywhere
in new mexico and I think we
should start at the bear minimum
with college campuses house bill
one fifty one is an education
issue it's a public safety issue
it's a matter of algerbi tech to
liberation and we urge your
support.
Thank you
good morning honourable chair
and members of the committee my
name is jennifer gatz and i'm
the executive director for the
commission on the status of
women.
Um and the commission stands and
strong support of hb one fifty
one.
Part of my job is to speak to
women around the state about
what is the most affecting their
lives and I hear time and again
that sexual assault is one of
the issues that is most
affecting the women of new
mexico.
HB one fifty one provide support
for women affected by this type
of violence in our schools and
the training and education that
could change the way man and
women communicate about consent
when I was in college my
roommate was raped she left
school to recover physically
from her trauma but she was so
traumatic ties that she really
never recovered mentally and she
never returned to school.
I'm asking you all to please
support HB one fifty one.
Thank you anyone else in the
room
if not i've got three people on
the list in support on zoom
janet williams.
Thereman and members of the
committee the system i'm janet
williams with the national
organization for women and we
strongly support this bill
teaching affirmative consent
will help prevent sexual
wireless on university campuses
thank you very much thank you
janet jones sanford.
Did morning this is john the
money and sanford i'm the
executive director of the new
mexico religious coalition or
reproductive choice one of our
core beliefs is that sex is a
gift of the divine and must be
expressed with respect.
Affirmative consent makes that
possible.
And protects our young people so
for those reasons we urge a do
pass on HB one fifty one thank
you.
Thank you jone and last janet.
Cutking got can.
Go ahead and it.
Opens I was muted good morning
my name is jan got can I
remember of the santa fe chapter
of the national organization for
a women and were standing and
false support of hb one fifty
one the bill with all with the
long name and the big purpose
this has been important bill a
bill born out of violence and
the need to stem sexual violence
on our college campuses and
beyond.
We all know the horrific
statistics and the personal.
The personal cost of sexual
violence in new mexico
will not make this better
overnight what it will do is
create an environment for
cultural change and for
conversation it will give
college students and opportunity
to learn about consent it will
create training for faculty and
staff and it will uphold title
mind.
It will begin to make campus is
safer and make new mexico safer.
This bill is a seed a beginning
I urge you to vote do pass an HB
one fifty one.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in the room in
opposition to HB one fifty one.
He knows there are anyone online
in opposition
no then we're questions from the
committee.
Any mister chair I move a
dupass.
Thank you I do have one question
when did you have
to talk about it
yeah well well mister charley
to get it done that's me but I I
did have a question that I
talked to the sponsors ahead of
time
but
this has a lot of things that
hired universities are supposed
to do does not have an
appropriation how is this not an
unfunded mandate.
Thank you for asking that so we
have intentionally crafted this
bill to cover that in several
ways one all of our higher ed
institutions are already me
indeed it to be providing um a
title nine coordinator and we
have talked to leaders at the
different higher ed institutions
across the state and recognize
the different resources that the
institutions have northern new
mexico because.
In so some institutions I have
that person named as the title
nine coordinator and they may
not act.
So number one in this bill we're
making it clear that those are
ready required positions under
federal law.
The.
And so instead of an additional
mandate it's kind of insuring
the the are ready existing
mandate isn't pleased the second
thing that we did to be very
intentional is not say that they
had the institutions of higher
education mister chair have to
be the ones to provide the
services that they need to have
linkages to their their.
That people coming forward have
access to legal resources to
advocacy.
But not that the institution is
required to provide the.
The community based resourc.
Thank you.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you
automate the young.
Is what is the difference
between this year's bill and
last year's.
Mr cheering represented my as to
stow as a flash back senator my
estimate basically we stripped
out the cape twelve requirements
that were in there we had we had
previously a requirement at all
public schools teach affirmative
consent as part of their sex at
classes
we we decided to slim it down a
little bit not we've given up on
that part for this year we're
just going for high rate thank
you mister chairman
representative in the um and if
someone is the.
The.
The victim of sexual assault or
discusses with their.
Unexpected or horrific who do
they talk to at the university.
Senator there are processes so
first under title nine each
school is required to establish
agreements process.
And there is a whole number of
steps that folks take when they
come forward and so if they are
speaking back alter member or a
staff there's an obligation for
the title nine court needed to
be notified whether verbally or
in writing but the person coming
forward the victim has the
option to file a formal
complaint or not they have the
option to request a formal
investigation or not and the
title nine coordinator at the at
the institution of higher ed has
has the responsibility of not
only investigating or not but
also hearing what other
resolutions th.
Restored if justice practices a
accommodation such as moving
housing
should there be a.
Thank you mister chairman
generally so they formal
complaint to homer.
Chair senator it differs on
every campus and so part of the
reason for this policy is to
ensure that all of our campuses
in new mexico have a policy.
And how the students know this.
Senator moyest as mine him is
joining younger I represent a
due spanger men and william
benjamin in the law suit against
new mexico state university that
a roadside of the sexual assault
of development okay
i'm here it was my honor to
represent them and i'm here
really to give them boys but
also to share their experience
because their experience points
out that what we have had wasn't
enough
and you know the words do
spanger men were about how this
tragedy is impacted he's
publicly state first it hurts
then it changes you is father as
publicly stated my child has
been failed my family it's been
fail so how were they failed the
yes there are title nine
processes in plates already yet
not the title nine here
both the perpetrators in the
victim said they didn't know the
processes.
They didn't understand the
policies so this is where the
prevention aspect of this bill
is so significant we don't want
policies that are window
dressing that are words on
papers but no one knows we don't
want any more children and
families failed by our
institutions a higher so we need
to do more to prevent
this state this bill will set up
a means of preventing and
requires those policies and that
once something happens we ate
everybody to know what south
here to remediate how will this
be investigated where do people
go
how do they delete
what safety nets do they have in
its those very issues that this
bill is designed to address into
budgeters so it serves two huge
prevention and intervention
slash remediation would be the
way I would put it how do we
address it yet occurs and that's
a place where we know from the
new mexico state case that the
system failed people didn't so
we need bigger policies and they
need to be no by everyone from
the students through the
facility through the
administration thank you miss
mister chair that there is a
mandatory training on this in
the orientation for college
students thank you thank you
mister kerin deli with the names
you mention that one family with
those but that's the the
basketball place
yes
two of the players of several
thank you mister chairman
representatives of my questions
that the orientation and
hopefully what a mouth of just
consciousness particularly
students who live on campus.
And.
What is
on page one at like twenty four
what is trauma informed
policies.
And trauma informed responses
what those words mean mr
chairing senator mysters
essentially that means don't
make it worse with your line of
questioning we're trying to keep
it make we all know I have heard
of the to things hopefully in
the past about what were you
wearing and you know how much
did you have to drink in all
those kind of things we we want
to protect the victim and not
retraumatize them with the
investigation and the questions
I am mister.
There's a definition of informed
then twenty four gives the
definition of try.
The.
And is there a legal obligation
to to inform long forcement if
university staffer believes a
crime may have been committed.
Mr chair and senator
it depends but but
if they're if it's a child if
they're not yet eighteen and
there's mandatory reporting but
in terms of the sexual assault
we we want to victim to be in
control essentially no this is
key mister minutes at some.
The.
The state has a an interest the
university mavin interest but
ultimately it's the.
Punishing a perpetrator.
When making a complaint could
potential consequence.
In the bill there are.
The under title nine is supposed
to be written is that a both
parties are supposed to be
notified and provid.
What potentially can happen.
I have the privilege of
representing the state white
sexual thought coalition.
Have people approach me and tell
me their stories and what I hear
from them is that that is not
happening and so what we're.
And.
I'm through this process all
around because it is a kind of
hidden process as it's younger
said people don't know that they
have the right to go through
this process they don't know
what expect of the process and
so to try to make this more
visible think you think it was
german thank you.
Under the civil rights act king
back in the sixty four actually
because I really became the most
important title in the act of it
it has changed more lives than
maybe some of the other
provisions of the act as him and
rolled back.
And we think of it in terms of
sports equalities of like that
but it's really this type of
stuff it's really making.
You know women safe.
And empowered on campus to
achieve their academic pursuits
and stuff so anyway it thanks
for that the work on this bill
and and explaining it answer.
Thank you yes
thank you mister chair a couple
of things what's the consequence
to a university for failing to
adapt and thoroughly put this
process into place.
Chair senator hickey
there's not a real consequence
other than higher ed having the
ability to say you need to be in
compliance we don't have a
mechanism in house bill one
fifty one that finds the
university or would have them
risk their federal compliance to
receive funding it really is us
working with higher ed and with
our hire are higher at it
institutions i'm in coming into
compliance.
Thank you mister chair and.
Animal
filters nada of a formal
consequence.
Is there some sort of oversight.
I would call joint commission in
health care that checks to see
that this is in place and fall
and some sort of periodic basis.
Mr chair senator hired the
higher education department will
be working to do that.
So there there will be a review
of compliance at least with the
requirements of this in some
formal mechanism.
Thank you
and then lastly.
Lots of good intentions in here
and I hear the word education
but will each university come up
with a plan that is reviewed and
how they are going to educate
each student about this
and have that
again this is going back to my
health care but
you know we do have to print
healthcare you have to prove
that you're doing all these
things and to me one of the most
difficult things is going to be
educating the students where do
you get to the forums where the
ireducated are they educated
together so there's dialogue I I
just I and i'm assuming that the
university was set up a
regulatory format to do that
but being it to me it seems that
every somehow some way every
student has to be educated about
this although I mean ignorance
is not going to give them many
free passes obviously but just
again to be sure that everyone
because you know this seems it's
not a culture change I mean it
because it changes a long time
ago but for some people they're
not living in a foley and
foreign.
Young persons are
aspect of how we look at how we
look at the world the diverses.
So I just I want to be sure that
every one.
Is getting educated and and you
know maybe there's a sign of
find it somewhere that they have
been educated there's sheep yet
in there.
That they they've learned those
pieces.
The.
And I don't know if you have any
response.
I believe the provision in the
bill for training as part of
orientation is designed to
specifically address that and
it's also part in personal of
the mandate for what policies
must be adopted and how they'll
be carried out and the bill is
written so that each institution
a higher admin tailor about
policy to me that very important
goal that you have identified
because it's not necessarily a
one size fits all for all of our
colleges in universities and all
of our campuses on the state
that received public funds for
student assistance which is
what's in companies so there's
despite design allowance for
policies to be set up that makes
sense into briefly address some
of the issues you mentioned
earlier too higher add has
already been stepping up and
stepping in particularly in
response to what happened in the
new mexico state basketball
program they have been demanding
accountability and responses and
they've been getting and it's
our hope that that will
continue.
And that be bolstered and how
more teeth through the passage
of house bill one fifty one
thank you when last question i'm
part time students.
It's my believed that that would
be encompass all students that
there's no leicester duty to
students by virtue of how many
hours they're carrying.
The.
The other questions if not we
have emotion on the floor by
center pope and security by
senator never you'll call the
role please.
Sender guy against.
Sinder hickey sitter my estimate
yes sir novel center pinto.
Sender pope yes under soul yes
yeah unanimous pass
thank you all in for those who
were here today at this point
i'm not aware that we have
anything on the friday calendar
but this is the time a year
where lots of things are passing
over their most likely will be
some plane at this point is
friday at nine o'clock
but i'll let people know with
that changes and certainly with
the ranking member and keeping
him up the date of what bills
we've got what's coming over
thank you all and otherwise we
are journey till nine o'clock.
