And then we're gonna jump down
to the new business of House
Bill 5464. House Bill 365 is
being rolled over and will not
be heard today and Senate
Memorial K-12 Water Conservation
curriculum, um, and I think all
of us, you know, we're doing
some of the dance of having to
leave for a different committees
and other things, so we'll do
our best to, to try and keep
people informed as to what's
going on, and he announcements
from other members.
And I believe that we're on the
floor at 11 today and so, you
know, we'll have a, a hard stop
at about 5 till 11 unless they
change when the floor session is
is starting.
With that center Cia Lopez, if
you want to come up and I think
we were to the point of public
comment.
And so anyone in the room in
support of Senate Bill 552.
would like to come up and speak,
you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Desiree Condit, and I am the
store manager of Books on the
Bosque. It's an independent
bookstore on the west side of
Albuquerque. I stand in strong
support of SB 552. Over the last
couple of years, it has been
alarming to watch the number of
books that are being banned
throughout the country. In the
2024 school year, 44,0231 titles
were added to the banned book
list. This is a 65% increase
over the 20
22 school year, and a staggering
128% increase over 2021. Even
worse is legislation that
criminalizes librarians,
booksellers and publishers. I am
glad to see that this
legislation protects our school
librarians. SB 552 is a step in
the direction toward protecting
school libraries. This bill
establishes written policies on
the acquisition of books, it
clearly states that public
school libraries shall
with the First Amendment rights,
establishes rules for the
removal of books and most
importantly, this bill protects
librarians from termination,
demotion of disciplining for
refusing to remove a book before
the.
I'm sorry, before the book has
been reviewed in accordance of
the established rules, please.
Oh my goodness, please pass.
SB 552. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is John Durch with the
American Federation of Teachers
in New Mexico. We're here in
support of Senate Bill 552. Um,
this goes a long way to really
protect the professional
autonomy and judgment of our
school librarians and it's a
really critical key. We talked a
lot about teacher autonomy and
professional standards and
judgment that should extend to
our school libraries as well. We
also really like that this does
not fully um remove a, an
opportunity for members of the
school community to have
questions about what materials
are present.
presented in school libraries,
but it doesn't ensure that those
folks making those uh potential
challenges are actual members of
that school community. So that's
a really key point of this bill,
and we also like the
better term, the sort of layout
period on titles once they've
been reviewed, that those are
kind of like off that list for a
while, um, you know, to prevent
this sort of like continual
review of materials. So the, the
biggest aspect of this spill is
the professional respect and
autonomy and that protection for
First Amendment right for our,
for our school librarians. So we
do urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of this
committee, and thank you for the
opportunity to express my
support for Bill 552. My name is
Mary Parker, and I am a resident
of Bernalillo County.
I have 2 daughters who graduated
from Sila High School, 3
stepdaughters, and 4
grandchildren with 1 on the way.
I am informed by both
professional and personal
reasons.
I'm a retired marriage and
family therapist, and listen to
the stories of the most tragic
kind for which relief from
trauma was required. None of
these stories.
Arose from reading a book.
And more personally, raising my
daughters had had its
challenges, but none like I see
my grandchildren must face in
this current climate.
Thus my joining grandparents for
truth.
We are a family that represents
a wide, I'm nervous, sorry. We
are a family represents a wide
range of skin tones.
Hair textures, languages spoken
at home.
And people who have the freedom
to choose who they love and how
to express themselves. I think
I'm less nervous and more
motivated.
I am quite aware of the subtle
and not so subtle experiences of
racism and prejudice. Our family
represents the diversity of New
Mexico and of humankind.
As such, I believe the resources
provided in school libraries can
and should be equally diverse.
Please protect our public
schools library so they may
continue to be a safe place
where every student can access
information that will support
self-understanding and provide
the means to grow in the belief
they belong.
I thank Senator Stille.
Lopez was sponsoring this bill
and the librarians and teachers
who have worked hard to enrich
our children's lives, and to
keep safe the tools needed for
such enrichment.
I urge you to pass.
Thank you Senate Bill 552. Thank
you.
Anyone else in the room in
support.
We have 2 in support online, um,
Ellen Bernstein, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, as
stated previously, more than
4000 unique titles have been
challenged in public libraries
and school libraries in the last
few years. Librarians are often
caught in the middle of these
campaigns and and um they face
criminalization, harassment, and
in some cases, they have been
fired for refusing to remove
books. This bill deals fairly
and
with transparency with both of
these issues, protecting the
books and the librarians.
Although late in the session, I
hope this bill is able to make
it to the finish line. Reading
is essential to learning, which
in turn is essential for an
educated populace in a
democracy. Thank you.
Thank you. And then Valerie, and
if you can give your full name
as you start speaking, Valerie.
Thank you.
Good morning, Senator Souls and
committee members. My name is
Valerie Nyi and I'm the library
director at Santa Fe Community
College. I've worked in
libraries in New Mexico for over
25 years, and I strongly support
this bill.
School libraries are essential
to student success. They provide
resources that foster curiosity,
critical thinking, and lifelong
learning.
Ensuring that students have
access to a wide range of
materials helps prepare them to
engage fully with the world
around them and prepares them
for colleges like Santa Fe
Community College. Importantly,
this act keeps decisions about
library resources at the local
level, empowering schools and
school boards to reflect on
their community's needs. It also
supports people who work in
libraries, Professional
librarians are not always in
charge of school libraries in
New Mexico and this.
Bill establishes best practices
to guide inform decision making
for each school and each
community.
Finally, it protects library
staff from retaliation, ensuring
they can do their jobs without
fear. This act strengthens our
schools in New Mexico and
support student learning. I urge
you to vote in favor of the
Senate Bill 552. Thank you.
Thank you
Anyone else
In the room, anyone in
opposition.
In opposition group and we have
4 in opposition online and so
first is Luke Betzner.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Luke, please go ahead.
Well, he seems to be having
trouble getting on. Can we go to
DJ Andrade.
Yes, can you hear me? Yes,
please go ahead.
Thank you, sharing Committee. My
name is DJ Andrade, and I stand
in opposition to SB 552 due to
the following reasons.
SB 552 has a lack of
transparency, either through
complacency or ignorance, and is
too vague.
As in one section, and as in
section 1 and 2 of SB 552, it
states only about new material
that shall be protected and goes
on to say in subsection A of
Section 2. What a library's
resource is defined as.
Nowhere in the bill does it
address the material that
already exists in the public
school libraries across New
Mexico.
In fact, Section 5, which
addresses reconsideration of
library resources pertains,
again, only to new material and
does nothing for already
existing material. Additionally,
in Section 5, subsection D,
pertaining to reconsideration
times of materials, which is 2
years, I believe it's too far
long of a period to reconsider
materials, especially those of
sexually explicit content.
It's more reasonable to do it by
semester, so we can effectively
protect the minds of our
children and up to-date fashion.
There ought to be a better way
of handling the proposals in SB
552 without alienating the
parents from the equation.
These issues should and ought to
stay with the communities of
every school district and this
law would be a sweeping law of
the land that would alienate the
input of parents and what
material their children consume.
There are many issues that could
be said, but not in 1 to 2
minutes, and I don't know if
this bill was rushed, as I am to
be finished, but
I need it, I submit that it
needs to be put back on the
drawing board and amended.
Because it is too vague and
doesn't address what is already
in existence. Thank you, Chair
on board for your time and
consideration.
They
Please go ahead.
All right, can you hear me?
OK, thank you Chair and
committee. My name is Dema
Andrade, and I oppose SB 552 due
to the following reasons. If
there were no objectionable
materials in the library that
perhaps a revision of SB 552
wouldn't be urgent. However,
there are objectionable
materials that are not
appropriate for miners currently
in elementary, middle, and high
schools. SB 552 does not strike
the right balance between
protecting the innocence and the
psychology of our children. This
lack of balance
result in books such as tricks
by Ellen Hopkins, which is found
at Harrison Middle School and
multiple high schools and
contains sexually explicit
excerpts involving minors, child
rape and abuse, graphic
violence, underage alcohol, and
adult and child prostitution.
This is just 1 out of 125 plus
books at APS.
These types of books increase
the threat to our children and
grandchildren mentally, whether
you're a Democrat or Republican,
that should be basic common
sense, not to advocate for this
material, and in doing so, shows
that you have, whether through
apathy, antipathy, lack of
vigilance, or deliberate action
are breaking the trust of
hundreds of parents and
grandparents who see this
material in the hands of the
little ones. Free speech should
not be at the expense of
willfully giving our children
sexually explicit materials to
be put in their minds.
The grading criteria for these
materials needs to be subject to
systems for movies, television,
and video games. It needs to be
standardized like every other
media instead of creating a
straw man and saying we're both
banners.
You have a duty to protect our
children and grandchildren while
they're away from us at school.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. And Jodie Hendricks.
Please go ahead.
Hello, hello, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jody Hendrix, the executive
director of New Mexico Family
Action Movement, and I urge you
to oppose Senate Bill 552
because it removes common sense
protections that ensure children
are not exposed to sexually
explicit content before their
developmentally ready. We aren't
interested in banning books. We
are interested in making sure
our kids can't come across them
before they're ready for them.
This is about protecting
childhood, not restricting
education.
Science tells us that a child's
brain is still developing well
into their mid-twenties. The
prefrontal cortex, which helps
with impulse control, decision
making, and emotional regulation
is not fully formed in young
children and adolescents.
Exposure to sexual content at an
early age can disrupt healthy
development, leading to
confusion, anxiety, and
unhealthy behaviors in
relationships. Instead of making
it harder to remove sexually
explicit material from school
libraries.
We should be promoting books
that reflect healthy family
relationships, character
building, and age appropriate
discussions on love and respect.
Books that teach virtue,
kindness, and strong family
values should not be pushed
aside in favor of materials that
introduce children to sexual
themes, they are not yet
equipped to process. Then at
Bill 552 fails to protect
children.
I urge you to vote no and ensure
that New Mexico's schools remain
safe learning environments that
promote healthy childhood
development. Thank you.
Thank you. And is Luke ever get
back on, we ever connecting with
him.
OK.
Then we'll move on, uh, any
comments before we get to
questions from the committee.
who support who haven't been
able to get on.
I don't know if maybe just
double check or are we done?
We've already been through, you
know, that was those were the
ones that were on the list.
Thank you, and I just wanted to
say this bill, I was trying to
understand why the commenter um
thought that this only applied
to new material and I believe
it's because on line 21.
It says new material, but that
just reflects that this is new
material. Um,
And I, I think that what's great
about this bill is it does
provide for local control.
Thank you, thank you. I'm, we're
ready for questions, questions
from the committee, please,
Senator Booth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh.
And Senator
Senator, uh, would you, uh,
Be specific.
About what
Types of material you're wanting
to protect with this bill.
Um, Senator Boone, I make it a
point to read books that are uh
that have been challenged and
I've gotten to read just amazing
things like my by Maya Angelou,
um, I've gotten to read, well, I
had already read, but I was
really surprised that bless me,
Ultima was challenged.
So that's the kind of books,
bless me Ultimo was a book that
I read in college, but I gave it
to my children to read when they
were in 6th grade, um, that's
the kind of book, but the books
that tend to be banned or they
challenge them as uh.
Well, and Frank was, was banned,
uh, the Diary of Anne Frank was
banned, and I couldn't figure it
out why somebody would want to
ban that, and I think it's
because she referred to me for
menstrual periods, maybe. I
don't know, but that's the kind
of book that those the kinds of
books that have actually been on
these 4000 unique titles, um, I,
I actually wrote down, I think
she said tricks. I want to read
that book now, um, I think it's
really important.
That those books be protected
and I want to also turn it over
to my expert who has more
specific information about
what's been banned in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Senator. Um.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, um, thank
you for the question. It lets us
talk about collection
development, which is something
librarians really love.
Um
So
policies like this protect.
The community and the library,
and they protect all books
across all ideological
spectrums. Um, one book that
gets challenged fairly often,
although it doesn't tend to make
the news at the moment is the
Bible.
Um
At
And, you know, people, you know,
there's violence in it, and
there'll be a challenge process
and everybody talks about it and
then usually people realize that
even if they don't want their
kid to read it. It's they're not
the parent of every kid and it
stays. So libraries, we care so
much about making sure that the
books in our libraries are the
best books for the kids and our
communities. We read reviews,
school library journal, what
grades is this reviewed for? We
try really hard not to.
make decisions as ourselves as
individuals but for the
community.
And then we have these
processes, the first step of
which is always, if, if a parent
doesn't want their kid to read a
book cause it's not right for
them.
School librarians absolutely
respect that. Like, we want to
hear from parents. Oh, like
Ah
Yeah.
I could talk about that all day,
but
It's
To give a structure.
So we can, as communities have a
non acrimonious process for
figuring out.
What books should stay in the
library.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, uh, on the other end of
the spectrum of.
What types of materials should
be banned.
I will, uh,
I would, I just pornography, I
think, but I will turn it over
to the librarian has more
expertise.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
One of the reasons we have
collection development
procedural directives is we're
trying really hard to just
Make sure everything is
appropriate from the get-go, um.
And there are, there have been
Supreme Court cases about where
like the lines are and
everything, uh, legally
speaking. So,
Um
You know, 50 Shades of Grey
would never be in an elementary
school library.
For high school library, um.
like the, you know, there are
books, there are also books that
wouldn't be in a library because
they're for grown-ups and
they're boring for kids like.
You wouldn't put a book about
wine tasting in a middle school
library.
Because
There, it doesn't have anything.
Gray in it, but it's entirely
irrelevant to their lives.
And, and Mr. Chair, I'd like to
read from um the leading Supreme
Court case on this issue. It's
island trees School District,
uh, Picco by Pico versus Picco
by Pico.
It said local school boards may
not remove books from school
libraries simply because they
dislike the ideas containing
those books and seek by the
removal to prescribe what shall
be orthodox in politics,
nationalism, religion, or other
matters of opinion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, uh.
I'm, I wanna
Listen to the rest of the
comments and the debates, but.
Uh
At this moment I, I
I'm stand in opposition to it,
but I want to listen to the rest
of. Thank you.
Other questionen Ramos.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
I wanted to see.
What, what do you think about
our suicide rates in our school
district.
Uh, Mr. Chair, they're very
disturbing. I'm not sure what
that has to do with the bill,
but of course they're very
disturbing. This is what it has
to do with the bill.
a book that is in the Las Cruces
schools.
Assassination Classroom Volume
One.
Assassination Classroom Volume
2.
Look at what they're putting out
there for our kids to read, and
we wonder why our suicide rates
and, and these kids are thinking
about suicide.
There's 20 volumes.
Of the assassination classroom.
When
OK, we look back, I look back to
a comment you just made a while
ago about pornography.
That you would want pornography
in our schools.
go. There's your 50 Shades of
Grey.
Blankets by Craig Thompson.
They explained to our kids how
to have sex.
Explaining to our kids how to
have sex between a woman and a
woman, Mr. Chaps, please. Thank
you.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, this apparent
in a school.
Could
See that material was available
and follow this process and get
it removed.
My point is, and that's what is
beautiful about this bill. It
allows for a process that is
best practice to have materials
that a parent finds
objectionable removed.
Mr. Chair, senator.
I just feel that they shouldn't
be in our schools at all.
You know, if parents want to
want to teach these kids, these
kids, these type of things at
home, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Then that's fine, but they do
not belong in our schools. They
should have the opportunity to
even see this type of
Of material in our libraries.
Not only that, Mr. Chair,
Senator, what's a, what's a
liability for a school and a
librarian if a kid goes and
commits suicide and they find
out that they had a book from
your school.
teaching him how to commit
suicide.
What's the liability on that,
man, Mr. Chair Mr. Chair.
I, and I apologize for
interrupting, um, Mr. Chair, I
have never seen a case against a
a library, any library for any.
activities that are undertaken
because of what is what they
review, um, and sometimes you
wonder what people see on the
internet and all kinds of
things, um, but I've never seen
such a case.
Mr. Chair, Senator, that, that's
true. They can't see it on the
internet.
But parents have the right to
lock him out of some other
information on the internet.
They go to school every day.
Madam, I'm Mister Chair, Madam
Senator. They go to school every
day.
And they go to libraries, what,
3 times a week?
You know, I don't know how many
times they go to the library or
what they, what, what uh what's
mandatory.
But
For them to be able to
Look
At this, this type of books.
In the day and and uh not only
that, but parents aren't with
them every single day.
Parents aren't gonna know
exactly what they're checking
out of the library.
Do, do you all send as a
librarian, Mr. Chair, you all
send notes home on what uh kids
are checking out from your
library.
Uh
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, parents absolutely
get to know what their kids are
checking out. It is incredibly
common for school librarians to
have conversations, typically
about what parents are
comfortable with their kids
reading because they want it to
be, they don't, nobody ever
wants like a kid to feel like.
You know,
They're sticking out, so they
quietly go like, you know, it's
better if my kid reads these
books and then the librarian
works with them. Parents have
that right for their kids. It's
just a question of having a
process to all parents are
making those decisions for their
own children.
So Mister Chair, Senator, if you
have 750 kids in a high school,
or a junior high, you're able to
keep track of every book that
they're um checking out and
taking home and, and talking to
their parents about that book.
Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, we have,
um, like our checkout software,
you can put like a little note
in it.
It says like, remember.
If a kid, when a kid is going to
check out a book.
So Mr. Cherry and Senator, is
this sent to the parent?
Um, I mean, is this
Note that you're talking about
sent to the parents and let them
know, but
Note that you're talking about
sent to the parents and let them
know,
but,
uh, Senator, um,
Typically, parents will reach
out to the librarian.
Librarians, you know it.
back to school night every
opportunity we. we try really
hard to.
say, Hey parents, be involved
with your kid's reading life,
you know, we, we want it to be a
partnership.
Senator, what percentage of the
parents actually contact you and
ask you about what the, what
books are being looked at if
there's 1000 kids in your
school.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't have
those exact numbers we could get
some kind of estimate. It is, I
can tell you that.
across the state, um, and across
the country, even still, um,
speaking as a librarian, it is
much, much, much more common for
librarians to have a combs, calm
collaborative conversation with
parent about how, you know,
their kid is scared of clowns,
so can we not read clown books
for a little bit, then to get a
formal challenge.
Mr. Chair, I hope they're scared
of some of these books that are
being put into our schools.
Oh
Where digital electronic books
and your education leader stores
or retained.
In your library.
And and do does every kid have
access to them?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
e-books and libraries are
typically managed through, um,
Library ebook platforms?
Um
Because of the licensing.
Like if you're, you might have
used overdrive at the public
library, that's one of them. Mr.
Chair.
Senator, so what are the
policies that are to be included
in the process of checking out
these books.
Especially knowing that some of
these books that I just
explained earlier are in those
libraries.
And
We should probably
Knowing
Which kids are wanting to check
these books out.
Mr. Chart, this bill doesn't,
doesn't deal with the issue of
parents asking librarians not to
um
Let their children see books,
librarians always accommodate
parents' requests. This bill is
about removing books from the
library. So be it this line of
questioning is really not
relevant to the bill, Mr. Chair.
OK, so what process are you
going to be using if a parent
comes to you and says, Can you
please remove this out of your
library.
Mr.
Um, thanks. Well, thank you for
that question because it it is
laid out that the local um
The public school library, um,
will go through a process only
if the resource has been
reviewed in accordance with the
reconsideration policy and
subsection 3,
lays out that policy and it just
says it, it does not dictate how
each district may do it, but it
says that each local school
board and charter school
governing body shall establish
and submit to the department for
approval written policies, and
this is what you're talking
about for the acquisition,
retention, display, and use of
library resources that comply
with the provisions of Section
4 and then a written policy, um,
shall a written policy for the
reconsideration must comply with
this.
And the written policy
established by the school board.
It just lays out must comply
with the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution or
Article 2 Section 17 of the
Constitution of New Mexico
concerning freedom of speech,
whichever is more protective of
speech, and it also must protect
against harassment and
discrimination, particularly
regarding a protected class
based on disability, race,
creed, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity,
gender expression, whatever. So
this policy has to be
constitutional and that's really
to me one
the most important aspects of
this bill because when
Parents are trying to stop the
entire school district from
reading a beautiful book like
Bless Me Ultima.
That's not right. With that
parent, if that parent somehow
thinks bless me, Ultima is
problematic. They should say, I
don't want my child to read this
book.
Um, and, and that's, that's what
this process is important. Each
school district can outline
whatever process is appropriate
for their school district and
that is what this bill
accomplishes, lays out best
practices.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I hear
you referring to bless me
withtiba over and over. But how
about the assassination books.
How about all boys aren't blue.
How about blankets by Craig
Thompson.
Outbound Empire storms by Sarah
J Mays, you know.
I showed the book a while ago
with a bunch of tabs.
And the only tabs that I put on
this.
Reference book
We suicide books because that
really concerns the heck out of
me. Anytime I hear a child is at
home thinking about suicide.
Where's it coming from?
And what percentage Mr. Chair,
is coming from these types of
books in the library, Mr. Chair,
Senator.
Mr. Chair, pursuant to this
statute, whatever policy that
the school board sets out would
be a process that a parent could
seek to have that book removed,
and there would be a local
discussion, and my guess is
certainly if there was a school
having problems with suicide,
they would want to review that,
but it would be up to, it's not
up to me, it's up or anyone
else. It's up to the local
school board.
So Mr. Chair, Senator, but with
this bill.
We allow these to be in our
schools, correct, Mr. T?
And
Um
Mr. Chair, this bill doesn't
have anything to do with what's
already in the schools now. This
bill is about removing material
that is there now.
So, Mr. Chair center, who
approves the books that are
there now?
Uh, Mr. Chairs, uh, senator.
School librarians, um, we read
reviews, librarians read
reviews. We have collection
development policies, typically,
so the community can see how
we're making our decisions. So
you, we use a bunch of different
sources to read like about the
books, where, what grades do
school library journal recommend
this book for. And because we
want the library to be for all
kids, right? So.
You know, if I was just thinking
about as me, I would never put
Goosebumps books in any library
every anywhere because I think
they're
Really scary. Um, school library
Journal disagrees with me. I'm
like, they're fine for 3rd
graders, they're children's
books. But we all have our own,
and that's a very lighthearted,
not a serious example, um.
But
It, it's real. People, parents
have different views on what
they want their kids to learn
and what they want their kids to
read. And we, we respect that,
that, that is something that we
honor, but when you're trying to
have a library for all of the
kids with their different
parents and their different
views, you need to have all of
those books, so parents can have
the right for their child to
have access to the books that
are gonna work for each kid.
No further questions, Mr. Tur.
Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions.
3
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I'm
I'm not gonna use the props,
although I wish I could.
Um, I, I guess I started off
when I looked at this, uh, and
The title Protection of school
library and Materials Act.
Um
And I started thinking to
myself, why aren't we
protecting?
Kids
we protecting parents.
I
And I think Senator Boone.
As the uh original question,
what exactly are we protected?
So maybe you can help me out
with that. Let's
I think he asked specifically
what materials.
Are we trying to protect.
this bill.
Thank you. Um, thank you. That
is a really good question. I
wish they had named it the
protection of school librarians
Act because that was my goal,
but you don't have control over
what they title your bill, um.
The, the material that we're
trying to protect is the
material that is protected by
freedom of speech.
Under the New Mexico
Constitution and the United
States Constitution, and that's,
that is basically what we're
trying to protect.
Mr. Jeff
OK, thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair.
So let's go through the
The uh
Bill as it's written.
And page 2, you talked about the
written policy. It says the
written policies for the
acquisition, retention, display,
and use of library resources.
That comply with the provisions
Section 4 of this.
So essentially what you're
saying is that there um there is
a group of folks who write
policies and say this is, these
are the materials that we are
allowed to acquire.
And in that policymaking our
parents.
part of that process.
Mr. Chair, that would be up to
the school board, but I would
expect that would be a really
odd school board that would not
include parents.
Thank you for that.
Um
It's not clear to me that that's
true.
It says also that in B says a
written policy for the
reconsideration of a library.
Uh, must also comply with
section 5 of this bill.
So when you went back, so I go
to section 4, which talks about
the acquisition, retention,
display and use, and you're
saying that the written policies
must adhere to.
our First Amendment rights,
which I would think that's
standard material for all of us.
This is America. Yeah, we all
have First Amendments.
So I, I don't understand why
you're invoking the New Mexico
Constitution in this particular
bill.
Um
So, because that's, it applies
to everybody here.
including parents.
And then on the second section,
we talk about protecting against
harassment and discrimination.
So I think this is the core of
the bill.
I think what you're asking here
is that you want to protect.
Um, librarians.
from harassment, discrimination,
is that correct? That is that
the intent of section B of
Part B of Section 4.
no, this, um,
The part protecting the
librarians is on page.
Um, 5 of the bill, a library
staff member shall not be
subject to termination,
demotion, discipline, or
retaliation for refusing to
remove a library resource before
that library resource has been
reviewed in accordance with the
applicable reconsideration
policy or for making decisions
at the library staff member
believes in good faith or in
accordance with that policy.
So this just gives the librarian
guidance and also protection,
um, protect against harassment
and discrimination is um
Sometimes these
Um
Situationss get a little hot.
And um it is expected that the
policy would lay out a process
that is calm, and that includes
um protections of, of people,
um.
I think that some books are um
Attacked as being like.
Perhaps uh.
Not consistent with
American values.
And um,
I, I, I think of the kite. I
remember there were a few books
that have been um
OK, a book called Fry bread.
Thank you, and I haven't read
that, and I have to put on my
list. Why don't, uh, I'll turn
that over to my librarian.
Oh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, fried bread is a
super charming picture book that
everybody should read about um.
Fried bread and eating it as a
family and community, but it has
been challenged other places and
without policies like this, it
is the kind of book that if
somebody just doesn't.
Doesn't like reading about
families that aren't exactly
like theirs, it could just get
pulled and none of the other
parents would have a say.
Thank you. Uh, I don't know if
that answered my question. Um,
Well, to just take that further,
fried bread, um, I haven't read
the book, but I'm guessing it's
about indigenous children, uh,
perhaps Navajo, I'm not sure,
um, and if somebody were racist
or had anti
Navajo uh feelings or whatever
they might hate that book and
that what you want is a process,
it didn't allow people to spew.
Racist commentary.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Car.
Um
It seems like when I'm hearing
here though is.
You're saying there is going to
be a process by which a book can
be reviewed and removed.
Yes, yes, Mr. Chair.
So
Can a librarian be removed for
adding a resource that hasn't
been reviewed.
Mr. Chair, that's why there is a
policy and this protects the
library and if they comply with
the policy.
That, that didn't answer my
question. So can a librarian be
removed for adding a resource
that hasn't been reviewed.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
I'm not an expert, but school
librarian, I mean, I am an
expert on some things, but
school librarians are employees
of their school districts, so.
They would need to comply with
the collection development
procedural directive which the
community would have a part in
like these are the things we
want in our libraries, and they
would need to comply with that
as an employee and then um
definitely not an employment
lawyer and then I, I'm assuming
it would be up to like the
employer and how all of that.
Um, that's way beyond my.
Scope as a librarian, but we all
follow our employer's policies.
And Mr. Chair, this bill is
about allowing people who will
comply with the policies to be
protected.
Thank you for that. I understand
that, Mr. Chair.
Um
There, there are a lot of
concerns that I know parents
have with regards to the
materials that they're finding
in our library.
And I think a lot of parents
feel as if that uh
The materials that they do not
want their kids to see and
materials that they did not want
their kids to be exposed to.
And
They felt like because most
times parents are too working
couples.
Uh, typically, both of them, uh,
have their own.
Day to day activities to deal
with.
And in some sense they are
leaving.
Children in the hands of fools.
To raise them, hopefully
properly.
And
Most, most people have certain
values that they want to instill
in their kids.
And so when the school system
goes against what those values
are, they feel like
They have a
obligation
to voice that opinion, saying
this is not how I want my.
Child rape.
So the, the question is here is,
How do these parents
Because they're both working.
How are they going to be aware
of some things that maybe taught
to their kids that they don't.
Don't have the ability to maybe
find out until much later.
As a senator, uh, Ramos
mentioned earlier.
kids reading about suicide.
Maybe there's a problem at home.
Um, maybe there's a problem at
the school.
And this child is now being
influenced by this book. Hey,
it's OK. Here's how you do it.
Similarly, and, and again my
care has asked me not to use
prop.
Um
This is a book about 95 explicit
books in Las Cruces public
schools. I'm sure some of you
have seen that.
There's material in here that
would disturb me even as a
college student.
And I certainly don't want this
being in our public schools.
And I think this is, these are
the kinds of things. I mean,
we're talking about 95 different
books. These are the kinds of
things that parents have are
objecting to.
And
What you're saying here is
you're almost putting together a
And I have no problem with
protecting librarians. I
understand some of these things
can get very, very
You did?
said,
And
Librarians shouldn't be the
targeted faction I think that
this whole school system
targeted.
Because I don't believe any of
these materials should be in
schools period.
You want to learn about sex, you
can't find it at home.
Um,
I don't think it's be taught the
1st, 2nd, 3rd graders.
And I would be upset as a parent
if my, my kids were exposed to.
Graphic, pornographic
cartoon-like material. So it's
cartoon-like to get their
attention.
within the material in there is
very, very good.
And so
I'm trying to wed.
wanting them getting exposed to
this with what you're attempting
to do on this bill.
So help me, help me to
understand why we should accept
this bill.
Mr. President, that, um, I
haven't seen what you're talking
about, but it looks, it sounds
like that is um
Good material for a parent to to
bring to the
But through this policy to bring
to the attention of the school
board, and if they comply with
the policy, sounds like those
books should be removed. I don't
know what you're talking about.
I remember people, uh, Catcher
in the Rye was a book that has
been banned, and I think it's a
beautiful book, um.
Those don't look like, like
helpful beautiful books, but
it's not for me to decide or for
you to decide it under this
bill, it's up to the school
board to decide.
I agree with that. I think that
it should be up to the school
board, but I also think
parental uh impact or Pinto
influence should be.
He parted that and it's not
clear to me even though you see
this, parents are involved in
some of these decisions are
critically that that's actually
a true state.
Um
try the oh I got some other
questions.
I'll come back and see if
there's any, I'll come back
here. Give me some few more
minutes.
other
S
Thank you, Mister Chair. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this.
Just want to confirm, I mean,
we've seen this in Albuquerque
where
Outside groups, they even
brought a pastor to come.
Dictate what is taught in our.
I think North Carolina.
Um, is that part of why this
Bill is coming forward and I say
that to say,
Just want to confirm
Because some of these books have
been banned because of whether
the author.
Or the content
Really dealing with race.
color, sex sexual oriented.
Right?
And some, for some reason, some
of these books are being penned.
For these specific reason,
correct?
Yes, Mr. Chair, you're correct.
Well, I'm hearing the comments
and people are talking about
these books, I think.
I didn't see what's in the props
or what's there. I think it's
concerning for everyone.
But I think you're actually
laying out a process.
corrected.
process where parents can
actually go to the school board.
They, this book is not
acceptable.
Not supporting this bill
actually.
News what folks are talking
about, what the issue is.
So, I'll just leave it there. I
will, I will be supporting the
bill. I have somewhere coming
from the house, but actually
like your bill a little better.
to it
Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee.
The 2nd time you get like 1 or 2
minutes, one question.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh,
this, this won't take long, uh.
Back when I was in the, or back
in the 90s when I was on the
school board, my local school,
um, and chairman of the board,
so I, I knew pretty well what
was going on. We had a book
committee.
And that of parents that that
would.
Work with the superintendent to
select the books that were gonna
be put in our school library.
And uh
As, as that would happen, uh,
there was always a list of a
waiting list of parents want to
get on that book committee
because they wanted to have a
choice in what their kids got to
read, does that not happen
anymore or is it solely the
responsibility of the school
librarian.
Um, at different school boards
have different policies, um, and
so this would provide that each
of the school board policies be
written, be clear to the, be
clear to the.
Parents about what they're
supposed to do, um, it sounds
like that policy, if that was
written, you know, if that was
written policy and people knew,
and it sounds like they knew
since they were on the waiting
list, so that sounds great.
Mr. Chair.
Senator, thank you.
Thank you.
Quickly, please.
Mr. Chair, I senator, just 11
more question. Once it goes once
a book goes through a process.
And it's they're trying to
remove it with uh through their
school board, who has the final
say so on.
Whether it's going to be removed
or it's gonna stay.
The school board Mr. Mr. Chair
under this policy.
Yeah, so it isn't PED Mr. Care.
No
No, Mister Char it's, the school
board.
OK, that's the only question I
have. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
when we do pass on Senate
Education Committee substitute
for a Senate Bill 552.
We have motion for a table that
takes precedent if you'll call
the roll, please.
Sinder Boone.
yourself.
Sender Figueroa.
Noted table
Hickey.
Innova
Not a table.
Ramos,
Thornton.
Yes, the table, tender Pope. No.
In their souls. No.
So the tale motion fails, uh, we
are back. We have a motion for a
do pass.
The 2nd on the DuP pass.
and seconded, you'll call the
roll, please.
Tender boom.
And
Figueroa, yes.
Hickey.
dollars
Yes.
And Ramos? No.
Senator Thornton.
Now
Senator Pope
Sinner soul, yes, you have a do
pass on a 43 vote.
Thank you, Mr.
Of the committee.
Um, and for people coming in,
you know, again, fluid time. I
got a note that.
Senate bill.
That
Like where takes the mothers and
young children support services
is
518. I'm sorry, that passed out
so I couldn't 518 is not gonna
be heard. The sponsor has asked
that not to be heard.
Uh, we just had Senate bill.
I52 it help if I put my glasses
on, uh, we're gonna go to Senate
Joint Memorial 3, the higher edd
bilingual ed.
That and degrees, uh, but
brothers HB 365 as amended, the
public education commission
staff is not going to be heard
today.
So Senate Joint Memorial 3
bilingual education faculties
and.
I'm saying all that without the
mic on. Sorry, everybody.
That Drake Moore Memorial 3.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
We are happy to be here today,
uh, bringing forward Senate
Memorial 3.
As you all know, New Mexico is
one of the most linguistically
diverse states in the nation.
Yeah, our education system has
not fully embraced and supported
bilingual and multicultural
learning. Senate joint Memorial
is a bold step toward equity and
justice for bilingual and
multilingual students by
addressing the severe shortage
of of bilingual educators
expanding faculty by expanding
faculty at our universities.
Our students' languages and
cultures are assets to be
celebrated, not barriers to
overcome.
The memorial will help ensure
that higher education
institutions and bilingual
education, invest in bilingual
education and train the next
generation of bilingual leaders.
More than 1/3 of New Mexico
residents speak a language other
than English in their home.
Our classrooms should reflect
and support that reality. The
data is clear.
17% of students are English
language learners, nearly 1 in
5.
10% of students speak in
indigenous language at home.
12% of students are from
immigrant families.
Yet we don't have enough
bilingual teachers to provide
the education that these
students deserve.
Research confirms what we all
know. Bilingual education
improves academic performance,
literacy, and graduation rates
and support students'
identities.
New Mexico's facing a critic, a
critical shortage of bilingual
educators, as we all know,
making it impossible to fully
implement bilingual education
programs. The shortage also
hurts indigenous language
preservation as we lack the
trained educators to teach
native languages in schools and
tribal communities. By expanding
bilingual faculty in our higher
ed institutions, we can build a
sustainable pipeline by by and
of bilingual teachers who will
serve our future generations.
And Mr. Chairman, members,
I am proud to be joined by my
co-sponsor, Senator Angel
Charlie, and I will pass it over
to her before introducing our
expert witnesses.
Good morning, chair. Good
morning, committee. It's great
to be here with you. Uh, Senate
Joint Memorial 3 calls on our
higher education institutions to
work with bilingual education,
the faculty at UNM and MSU NMHU
and uh western New Mexico State
University. To establish a joint
bilingual education degree
across these institutions.
It requests increased
scholarships for students
pursuing bilingual education
degrees and and fun funding to
expand bilingual faculty and
state universities.
It asks that students who earn
the state seal of bilingualism
and by literacy receive college
credit for their language
proficiency, and lastly, it also
urges our PED department to
fully address fund and support
the linguistic rights of
bilingual students under the New
Mexico Constitution.
The bilingual multicultural act.
And federal and state court
decisions like the Yazi Martinez
versus New Mexico case.
It's time for this memorial.
It's time for us to move in this
direction. It just makes sense
and we are happy to answer any
questions that you might have,
but I'll hand it back over to
Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Uh, Mr. Chairman,
I'd like to also introduce our
expert witness, Doctor Elizabeth
Valenzuela. She's the chair at
the Department of Teacher
Education at New Mexico
Highlands University and the
executive director of the New
Mexico Association of Bilingual
Education.
Yes, please go ahead.
Good morning, um, Mr. Chair and
committee members, uh, thank you
for allowing me to speak on
behalf on uh some of my
colleagues that we've been
working for the past, um, at
least since I've been a New
Mexico Highlands last 5 years
and really putting forth um a
Degree that would really be able
to support all those um
elementary education students
that want to become bilingual
teachers in our public schools.
And so um this work has been, as
I said,
For more than, than um 5 years,
but since I've been on the, on
the, um, with the HED uh English
language learner teacher prep,
um.
Program working with um Doctor
Sims and at the head of it
because you and Emma is the one
that receives the funding to be
able to do the work or has
recent funding to be able to do
some of this work for the last 9
years and so I'm here um to
answer any questions you may
have. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, we'll
yield.
Thank you. Out to the audience,
just a quick show of hands,
those in support.
in opposition.
Online
On the supports of the
supporters would like to come
up.
have up to 2 minutes.
heal, and I'm the executive
director of Transform Education
in Mexico, and we stand in
strong support of this memorial.
Um, one important factor I think
is um helpful for context is
that currently for a teacher to
become a bilingual educator,
they have to uh take a full
course load of courses and then
also do about 30 hours of
additional coursework to be
bilingual endorsed and this uh
pathway of courses will
eliminate that extra step, and I
feel like that's really um
It's, it's incredibly important
as we address this teacher
shortage. And so I thank you for
uh entertaining this memorial
and look forward to a due pass.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino, and I
represent the publics of Taos
and Akima and also the center on
law and poverty, and we are in
full support of the joint
resolution before you.
Well, New Mexico is certainly
considered one of the uh most
linguistically diverse states in
the country, uh, that
distinction may not last beyond
the next generation, I believe.
Uh, especially in tribal
communities, um.
Uh, the Ama language, my
language, uh, is considered one
of the most ancient and distinct
languages spoken in America, but
it's also a language in crisis,
um.
And that's very concerning.
And it's people to say this, but
it's the reality, my Pueblo,
that every time a fluent
alchemist speaker passes the gap
between those who understand and
speak Yakima.
And those who don't go deeper
and wider, and it's truly
concerning because without our
language, we don't have a
culture, and without our
culture,
You know, we don't have that
distinction of being uh a unique
people, a unique pueblo people.
And so with this uh memorial or
excuse me, joint resolution
before you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, we're
hoping that this will help
protect and preserve.
Our language, my language from
extinction.
And also urged higher education
institutions to invest in
bilingual education degree
granting programs, uh, not only
to teach and train the next
generation of bilingual
teachers, but also indigenous
language teachers and for those
reasons, Mr. Chairman, we stand
in full support. We ask the
committee to support this joint
resolution as well. Thank you.
Thank you. One more.
Good morning. My name is
Patricia Trujil and I'm the the
deputy cabinet secretary of the
Higher Education Department and
we stand in technical support of
this memorial, uh, where HED is
outlined as supporting, you
know, especially the
conversations about bringing a
multiple institutions together
to think about how we create a
joint, um, degree program that
would help us also set an
important precedent um for
getting institutions to
collaborate with one another for
these types of initiatives where
some institutions
don't have the resources to have
a full bilingual education
department on their own, uh, we
would be able to bring the
forces of all of the different
institutions together, and this
is a conversation we've been
having informally and so I'm
thankful to the sponsors for
bringing this forward to make
us, put us in a position to have
the formal conversation about
it. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in support.
We went online and support.
He went in the room in
opposition.
We have one online in
opposition.
Peterson. Yes, can you hear me?
Can you hear me?
Yes, please go ahead.
OK.
I would like to use my First
Amendment right to regress my
grievance with this committee.
On the last bill, it was heard
on Monday and you allowed
supporting comments. This is not
we are on a different bill now.
Thank you.
Questions from the committee.
Thor.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Just a couple of quick
questions, actually I think
just.
Good idea,
um.
I'm just curious, this is for
elementary only, elementary,
multi.
Bilingual multicultural
education, is that correct?
Yes, senator. So what's the
normal pathway for someone just
to get an elementary education
degree for in the universe.
What's that normal? What do they
have to take to
To to get a normal education
degree without the multilingual.
So it's the coursework for the
degree in elementary education.
So those courses consist of all
the methods courses, so teaching
elementary schools, science and
social studies and teaching
elementary school mathematics,
different universities have
other requirements like we at
Mexico Highlands have teaching
English as a second language,
teaching multicultural education
and technology courses, and then
some of the failed experience
courses.
So this
Memorials would encourage that,
the standard education, but now
you're gonna be doing it in the
language.
Of the particular folks, whether
it be Hispanic.
Native American
Um
So
That seems like a lot of extra
work.
It seems like that they should
get maybe a master's degree to,
to get that to go through both
of them, uh.
I, I, I think this is a great
idea, um, it seems like
So right now we have no schools
in New Mexico that do this.
So, Mr. Chair and committee
members, Senator, so, uh, right
now, students who want to be
bilingual educators or want to
be bilingual teachers have to
take the step to major in
elementary education and then at
the minor in in bilingual land
and so little consists of an
additional um 24 to 30 credits
depending on the university. So
this degree, what would, what
would this, what this degree
would do is to be able to bring
those courses that are required
for the minor and.
make sure like the teaching of
the elementary school, um, math
and science, um, you know,
social studies, all that would
be through a bilingual um
pedagogical, um, you know, lens.
So we would still be teaching
all the courses required for
teachers as per, you know,
what's in statute, but, um, we
would, it would be uh bilingual.
Thank you. Wish you luck. Thank
you very much. I may add, uh,
Senator and chairman, um.
I agree with the fact that you,
you, you noted that it would, it
sounds difficult and complex,
but I think the memorial is
addressing a much deeper issue,
which is that lack of of folks
in these doctoral programs and
bilingual education, um, and
including pathways for folks who
are.
Perhaps English language
learners to whom this would not
be as complicated. I'm an
English language learner, I
learned English when I was 6
years old.
And this is an opportunity to
ensure that we open and expand
pathways to cultural competence
for our communities, for our
students, um,
And remind them.
to remind them that language is
power and that our culture
cultural values are standing
strong and New Mexico is, I
think a clear depiction of that.
Senator, Senator Pope.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass the
Senate Joint Memorial 3.
Thank you, Senator and, and I'll
second that, but I have a
question or two, and I think my
questions were very similar to,
to Senator Thornton having been
the academic advisor at New
Mexico State, the College of
Education and at the time we
required students to have 132
credit hours to get all of the
requirements that we as
legislators, I wasn't here at
the time, but put in there.
And there were very few
electives. The electives were
kind of witch.
Uh, which communications course
were you going to take, but you
had to take one.
Type of thing.
We now in higher education have
moved to where we're trying to
get all degrees to 120 credit
hours.
And the plot, if we can do
everything in a bilingual
format.
But I worry about the
practicality of getting all of
the other requirements we
require of teachers.
In the 120 credit hours
substantially less, almost a
some.
effectively a semester less than
what we used to do and still get
all of the requirements. We've
had some other bills in here
where we're trying to up the
requirements in mathematics and
in, in other places where we see
a shortage.
How are we and this may be a
question more for higher ed, but
how are we going to do that?
And, and kind of a little aside,
you know, as I was going through
New Mexico State and arts and
sciences, we are required to
have past 4th semester of a
language.
And there one a different way of
doing that is you could pass any
course that was taught entirely
in that language.
And I'm like, let's see, I'm
pretty good in science. I wonder
if I could pass a science class
just knowing enough of the
science that's taught in another
language, but you know, how, how
are we gonna get all of the
requirements in 120 credit
hours.
Meeting all of the
The other things with this.
Mr. Chair, um, committee
members, thank you for that
question. So, that is the work
that we've been doing as a
collective from, you know, the
professors from the university
is named in the memorial and so
one of the things that we're
also um the memorials asking is
that those students that
graduate with the the still
bilingualism biliteracy, be
allotted those 6 credits that
they need to take in a language
other than English. Um, we also
have looked at each.
of the universities in terms of
the major and then the
requirements for the bachelor's.
So to make sure that we comply
with the 120 credits that are
required right now of um a
bachelor of Arts. So we, we have
the, the framework and so now
what we're um looking is to work
with HED and of course also uh
Pen to make sure that we're uh
compliance with all the
requirements.
Thank you, and, and I wish you
well because, you know, I, many
times had to get very creative
with some students on how we're
going to, they would transfer
from a different college where
they'd had some credits that
didn't count for this and how to
get everything in and that's
when we were up at 130, 32
credits, I think it was, if I
may add, also, I believe the the
experts have been working on
this for 9 years already. So I
think that goes to also say that
this is not new to them and
they've been trying to
strategize.
on how to address the issue as
well. OK, and you know the, I
always thought it was
interesting, education, where
it's probably the most
important, was one of the few
colleges that didn't have a
second language requirement.
Part of that is there was no
space to put it in, but you
know, I, I wish you well on it,
uh, but I think that's gonna be
the big challenge is to get all
of the other requirements that
are in statute for teacher prep.
Course or programs.
In the 120 with the extra
bilingual and the student
teaching and all the other.
Requirements that are already
there.
We have a motion for a new pass
and the second, if you'll call
the roll, please.
Tinder boomin cell.
Figueroa.
Sender Hickey.
Senator Nova, yes.
Senator Ramos
Senator Thornton, yes.
Sinder Pope.
Yes. Senator Soltz, yes.
You have a do pass on a 5.
Uh, 50 with 4 absent or excused.
could ask you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, let's see, we are now.
Me substitute House Bill 54
defibrillators in every high
school is.
Representative Herndon, welcome
to Senate Education Committee.
Then the next bill will be House
Bill 64 and then Senate Memorial
22.
Whenever you're ready,
Representative.
Thank you, madam, uh, madam. I,
I'm sorry.
I've been in too many uh
committee meetings today. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. It's a
pleasure to be here to present
to you, um,
House education.
To the House Bill 54 and Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, we do have an a, a,
an amendment.
OK, um,
The amendment.
Sure, Mr. Chair, I move.
The amendment. 231828.3.
For discussion purposes.
OK, so please explain the
amendment and how it fits with
what the bill does, if you
would. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chair, I have an expert with me
today. I'm gonna let him explain
the menu, uh, I mean the
amendment, and would you please
introduce yourself.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, my name is More Sita
of the American Heart
Association. Basically the, the
amendment, you know, streamlines
some of the language that might
be confusing, and, and the
intent of this bill is to have,
you know, AEDs.
And
Cardiac emergency response plans
and
All high schools.
In the first year. That's uh
You know
fiscal year 2026 and 207.
And the following here would be,
you know, all schools, including
the charter schools, and that
would be in the fiscal year
20728.
Uh, as, as you remember this
committee has approved.
Senate Bill 494, that was the
appropriation bill for AEDs in
schools, so this, uh, bill.
Requires having a cardiac
emergency response plans in all
schools and, and that's, it's
it's flexible.
The schools can decide how they
want to do.
point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK. Everybody understands the
amendment.
And if I could kind of summarize
it delays by a year, the
implementation in elementary
schools and some of the other
schools is the main point or the
main piece of it, yeah, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, that's true because
it gives, you know, the
Education department do the
procurement and the training in
all the schools so that that
should.
That's the reason.
Thank you.
OK. Questions on the amendment.
Any questions on the amendment?
is there a moment of emotion,
Mister Chair, I move.
you pass on the amendment for
House education.
Of
Thank you, seconded by Senator
Boone, is there any opposition
to the amendment.
No opposition. Your bill is now
amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Anything else on Mr. Chair, the
big, the big issue before you
today is that um
how education committee
substitute house Bill 54 would
add the definition of automated
external defibrillator or AED to
the emergency medication in
Schools Act, which would require
schools in New Mexico to install
an AED on the school premises.
So that's the summary of what is
happening here, and thank you,
Mr. Chair.
OK, thank you. Out to the
audience, those in support.
He went in opposition.
And what not online and
supporter opposition, so
questions from the committee.
Center
Senator Tor. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Just curiosity, do we have a lot
of cardiac arrest going on in,
in our schools.
If so, what's the percentage or
how many per year?
Curious.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Thornton, I, I can get those
numbers, but you know, uh,
there, there are a lot of.
It
You know, usually middle school
and high school kids.
You have cases like, you know,
there's one case recently in
Albuquerque.
It was a charter school and one
of the, one of the students, you
know, had a sudden cardiac
arrest.
And luckily, you know, the staff
was trained and AEDs and they
were able to.
students.
But I, I, I can get you those
details.
Thank you, Mr. I would like
that. I think that he sort of
important to know that.
Um
I was kind of looking at the
physical impact report that
says, uh, this would cause a
little over a million dollars.
Or is that correct? Or maybe you
can help me out. What, what
would be the cost to
the entire school system to have
one of these units in every
school.
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, Thornton, I
think, you know, the AEDs range
from 1200 basic.
2
2200.
Basic is to treat, you know,
adults and, and the, the more
advances closer kids, uh, I
think the appropriation bill
like Senate Bill 494 allocates
450,000 for the next 3 years. So
the phase one public schools,
there are about 1118.
Uh, public schools, not charter
high schools, uh, sorry, 118
high schools.
There are public high schools.
So
You know, the, we, we believe,
like, you know, the first
installment of 150,000.
should cover that
And then we have 300,000 coming,
you know, in here 2 and 3.
And, you know, we, we plan to
come back next year and get more
appropriation, but this will set
the process.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
I, I thought
You came here earlier in another
bill where we were looking at
about 100.
Uh, prototyping this process for
the training. Is that correct?
That bill came through this this
committee earlier. Uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator Thornton, yes,
that, that was Senate Bill 494.
the compost was carrying it, and
it propriates, you know,
training and AED.
you know, for
And this is different how this
particular bill.
it, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
Senator Thornton, this is
different because
Just installing AEDs, you know,
it's, it's, it's a good step.
But if you don't have a
Are emergency response plan.
You know, who's responsible for
maintaining it, who was trained
in CPR, you know, who can, you
know, come to the rescue of
somebody who has, you know,
cardiac arrest. So, I mean,
there's a plan that sets up
every school has, so they can
implement that plan when
But it's needed. So that, that's
the difference because uh you
you must have.
You know, the cardiac emergency
response plan and who is the
responsible?
This gives schools the
flexibility, they, they can
incorporate it into their, you
know, uh, safety plans, medical
plans, but they, they will
decide who would be.
Uh, send it, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Senator
Thornton, the biggest difference
between the two, the bill that
you heard in Senate Bill 490
basically set out the plan for
the uh making sure that
Schools would have a plan for
implementing an AED. We actually
are bringing the AEDs, so we're
there being uh combined
together. Senator Campos has
signed on to this bill. We've
signed on to that one. So
together we will have a plan and
the defibrillator and they had
34 students if you want to know
who have been uh
Uh, needing an AED 34? Yes.
Thank you.
I saved as having these
available.
It's important.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have.
Thank you. Other question book,
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
house education, a substitute
for House Bill 54 as a.
motion and seconded any other
discussion?
Not if you'll call the roll,
please.
Cinder Boone.
I
Figaro.
Senator Hickey.
Yes. Senator Nova.
Yes, and Ramos, yes, Senator
Thornton.
Yes.
Pope, yes, cinder salts, yes,
you have a unanimous due past 7
with 2 excused.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, please, before I go,
I want to introduce my
co-sponsor here who represented
to bearra Grova.
Very nice having you
representative, and
Show us some love when we're
over in education over on the
other side.
Yes.
Um, and so next we have House
Bill 64, expand post-secondary
tuition eligibility, uh, I think
Senator Naba is going to
To sit and help with that bill
and again reminding people HB
365, we are not going to hear
today. It has been rolled over,
um, and then send a memorial 22
K12 Water Conservation. I will
see, I think we'll probably get
to it.
So please go ahead. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair. Um, before I
start, I just want to say that
um I may need to leave because
I've got another bill in another
committee, so, but there's
enough folks here to cover as
you can see, um, Mr. Chair, um,
this is HB 64 and apps that
would expand the scope of the
state's non-discrimination
statute.
HB 64 would demand the state's
non-discrimination and tuition
equity law passed in 2005 to
allow adult immigration workers
and taxpayers' access to
in-state tuition and financial
aid for credit and non-red
non-credit training programs at
community colleges.
New Mexico's current tuition
equity law for young immigrants
known as Dreamers, relies on
middle or high school
attendance.
For one year for eligibility.
This bill would extend
eligibility to immigrant and
Mexicans who have attended adult
education programs in New Mexico
for a year.
Worked in the state and filed in
Mexico income tax.
Returns for at least 2 years.
Or it would also extend
eligibility to young New
Mexicans who are applying for
special immigrant juvenile
status.
These new criteria align with
the state's existing residency
requirements for tuition
benefits.
Ultimately this is a workforce
development bill.
Many immigrant New Mexican
workers inspired to jobs in
healthcare age back, welding
broadband, and other skilled
trades, but because they are
currently excluded excluded from
reduced tuition rates and
tuition support, the cost of
credit and non-credit career and
technical education.
And certificate programs remains
a significant barrier.
HB 64 removes the key financial
obstacle and provides
hardworking New Mexicans with a
fair chance to gain the skills
they need to fill jobs in high
demand industries.
This bill is a win-win.
It will help these New Mexicans.
To get better jobs and it would
have happened in Mexico will and
it will help New Mexico fill
them.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I want to
introduce um the co-sponsors on
this bill, Representative
Yanitarola.
Um, and I think she wants to say
a few words.
Go ahead
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee, um, um, I was very
impressed with this, the
presentation of this building in
in our committee, uh, we have
people who were working and
paying taxes for more than 20
years who helped our
scholarship, who helped us in
state tuition and they cannot
access in state tuition. So, um,
I think this is very important
to uh support people who want to
work in the, to be uh active
members of the workforce. I
myself was not qualified for his
tuition.
when I was new in the in the
country, so um this is something
that I think is is important
and, and just for our community.
Um, Mr. Chair and also Senator
Nava is sitting in for Senator
Trujillo and then we'll
introduce our expert witnesses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, uh, Representative,
uh, Mr. Chairman and members,
uh, this is not a bill that I am
on. I am sitting in for Senator
Trujillo, but ironically, I know
quite a lot about this subject
because I was in high school in
2005 and I, that's when I
started advocating for Senate
Bill 582, which allowed
undocumented students access to
the lottery scholarship, so I
know the importance of access
and I applaud the effort uh to
move this forward, as you all
know, we, we in New Mexico have
a large workforce.
Problem
There are currently 55 available
workers for every 100 open jobs
and there are currently 65,000
available jobs in New Mexico and
not enough residents of working
age to fill them. So I am very
proud to sit here with you all,
um, to expand access to a need
for New Mexico. This is a
workforce development bill, and
that's how I see it, and that's
why I am proud to sit here with
you all. Thank you.
Anything else, yeah, I'm sorry,
um, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, I'd
like for my, uh, expert
witnesses to introduce
themselves and they do have a
short, some short statements to
make.
Hi, Mr. Chair, members of the
kidittee. My name is Gabriela
Ivania Guzman, and I'm the staff
attorney at Samos Pueblo Nido.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marcera Diaz with
Somos Pablo Nido. Can you hear
me? And I do have a statement.
Do you want me to
um.
In 2005, the legislature
expanded as uh Senator Nava
already mentioned uh educational
opportunities for New Mexico
Dreamers, enabling hundreds if
not thousands to enter critical
fields like healthcare and
education. And for the past 3
years, Somos has worked to
ensure immigrant and low wage
workers can access workforce
development programs in high
demand industries. Uh, we've
advocated for increased funding
for adult education as a key
pathway to better jobs. However,
a major barrier.
Remains. Uh, many in our
communities cannot access in
state tuition or financial aid,
including last year's growth
funded tuition support for
non-credit, career and technical
education programs, and this is
because they currently do not
qualify under that 2005 law. Uh,
federal law indeed allows states
to provide in-state tuition and
financial aid to undocumented
immigrant taxpayers, but there
are restrictions. The benefit
must be explicitly authorized by
statute and immigrants.
not lawfully present in the US,
I shall not be eligible on the
basis of residency. And so, uh,
we need to, so, so we're adding
some criteria to the current law
that has been in place for 20
years. Uh, our current law for
dreamers relies on middle school
or high school attendance for
one year rather than residency
and what HB 64 seeks to do is
expand this by allowing
eligibility for those who
attended an adult education
program for at least a year or
have earned income and filed
their state taxes for at least.
2 consecutive years, and this
aligns with the state's existing
residency requirements for
tuition benefits. Many of our
members aspired to careers in
healthcare, HVAC welding,
broadband, uh, technology and
installation and other skilled
trades, uh, but the high cost of
credit programs remains a
barrier. Additionally, many
immigrants without Social
Security numbers are in the
process of obtaining lawful
permanent residency process that
can take a few years, um.
And in the meantime, they need
to access training programs to
become either self-employed
workers, independent
contractors, or small business
owners.
HB 64 removes the key financial
obstacle and provides
hardworking New Mexicans with a
fair chance to gain the skills
they need and enter these really
critical fields or to actually
provide uh skills to the fields
that they're already in, uh,
such as the oil and gas sector.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. With that,
we stand for questions.
Thank you out to the audience
first just to show hands those
in support.
And in opposition and online, I
think we have 2 win support if
some would like to come up, uh,
we do, we argue on the floor at
11, so I don't know that we've
got time for everybody to speak,
but if if you would like to come
up and speak and I believe we do
have a, a translator available.
If needed
When needed.
Immunity. My name is Ermila
Sotelo, and I'm a member of
Somos Pueblo Nido.
A worker and immigrant rights
organization which organize um
in 8 different counties, 7 of
them being rural, including Lee
and Eddie County.
I live in Artesia, New Mexico
for 21 years, and I come from a,
an oil and gas family. My
husband and my two sons work in
the field.
We make up over 30% of the state
budget.
It is our families who are the
backbone of this economy.
We have oil and gas workers to
thank for the state surplus. It
is time the state invest in our
families.
I am here in support of HB 64
because we, oil and gas families
want the opportunity to get
certified and climb up the
ladder.
At our work sites in
stateituition will make it just
a little easier to work on our
way up.
I ask that you invest in our
communities as we have invested
in the state we want to see our
money come back into our
communities.
With in-state tu tuition, I will
be able to go back to school and
get a better paying job.
My husband and my sons will be
able to scale up and climb the
ladder.
My husband and my sons are
interested in certificates in
plumbing,
welding
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Yes, sir.
Bueno dias,
Jorge Rodriguezisao
Bueno dias, Jorge Rodriguezisa
and lie a persona
incapacia
Gris are a
sing embargoes financierto
Gris are a
sing embargoes financier.
a.
Glasses and have the
interpreter, please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, madam uh good
morning, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Jorge Rodriguez, and I
am a member of Somosum Polo
Nido, it's just this
organization for workers and
immigrants that organizes in 8
counties, 7 of them being rural.
I have lived in Lee County for a
year and I lived with my wife
and daughter. I have truly
enjoyed living here, and we have
built a home as I work as a
fitness instructor, primarily
helping people who have become
disabled and suffer from
obesity. I would like to return
to school and continue my
education so that I can grow in
my field.
However, currently, the prices
are very high for me, the cost
is almost double, and I don't
qualify for financial aid within
state tuition, my school fees
would be cut by more than half.
I could continue studying and
grow in my health work, uh,
health work field. If we can
continue advancing in our
studies, we will continue to
advance as a community. Thank
you. I ask that you vote yes on
HB 64.
Yes, sir.
One of the years
Buenos Airas
every billion or intros taxes
is.
He's like infant and Ikeleton
says, but I am porno.
Kiriankemola mosque cambi
estania studar paraseria perro
de Nuevo as a nose or residente
Line a uro social
queso resident teleia delante
la mascara.
Lugano and gracias.
Lessons.
Uh, for the interpretation. Good
morning, Mr. President and
members of the committee. Hello,
my name is Ramon Dorado. I am a
member of El Centro de Gualai
Derechos and have lived in
Albuquerque for more than 28
years. I own a maintenance
business, work from dawn to
dusk, pay my taxes, and
contribute to the economy of
this country. I earned my GED,
studied at CNM, and obtained my
CDC back then. I struggled a lot
because they told me I was in a
resident just because I didn't
have a Social Security number.
They wanted me to pay tuition as
a foreign student. We fought for
change and eventually they
recognized that we were indeed
state residents.
Today I want to continue my
education and obtain my plumbing
certification, but once again
they refused to recognize me as
a resident. They say that I need
a social security number or
proof of legal residency. All I
want is to
can provide a better future for
my family. Life is becoming more
expensive and difficult, and
with what I currently earn, it's
not enough to move forward. That
is why I, I ask that you vote in
favor of HB 64. Thank you.
Thank you. Yes, ma'am.
is Ruby.
OK
testimony the gas Santana
socadora Madre migrantees
classes in organizations.
A peer Mexico Medi
A peer Mexico Medicare.
industri construction gracias.
Uh, good morning. This was Ruby
reading Olga Santana's, uh,
public comment. My name, uh,
good afternoon, good morning,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Olga
Santana. I am a proud educator
and immigrant mother of 4
daughters and a member of El
Centro derechos. I have had the
opportunity to attend various
classes through different
organizations and community
spaces such as churches.
However, everything changed when
I wanted to take classes at CNM
as the cost of tuition was too
high, which became an obstacle
to my desire to continue my
professional development and
obtain a diploma. This would
have given me a better
opportunity for a well-paying
job. Despite having lived in the
state of New Mexico for nearly
10 years, I was told that I was
not eligible for in-state
tuition. In other words, because
of my immigration status, I did
not qualify to pay the same rate
as a New Mexico resident. As a
result, I was also ineligible to
apply for financial aid, even
though I am a worker who
fulfills my tax obligations. The
vast majority of us workers need
to work full-time jobs and in
many cases even more than one
job due to a high cost of
living, this creates a barrier
to continuing our workforce
development.
development, especially in high
demand industries such as
childcare, home care,
construction, and other trades.
Today I ask that you vote in
favor of HB 64. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. I'm
Andres Esquivel. I'm the
campaign manager with the New
Mexico Dream Team. I'm speaking
in support of HB 64.
Because it will give people like
my parents a better opportunity
to continue their education. As
an immigrant student myself, I
went to APS schools in UNM and I
am grateful for the previous
legislation that allows for
students like myself to receive
in-state tuition and the lottery
scholarship. Thanks to this help
and other financial aid, I was
able to graduate with my
bachelor's in political science
in 2020.
I remember in my early childhood
shortly after my family migrated
to the US. My dad was taking
English classes at TBI, what is
now CNN, and, and having to end
early because he could not
afford anymore. My family has
been living in the US for 24
years. We paid our taxes and,
and my folks like my parents
and, and many others in the
immigrant community deserve
access to in-state tuition.
Thank you, Mister Chair, and I
urge the committee for a due
pass of HB 64.
Thank you.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Arturo
Castillo and I'm the director of
equity and culture at
Conservation Boatrs New Mexico.
supports this legislation
because expanding eligibility to
in-state tuition and financial
aid will result in giving New
Mexicans more economic choice
when deciding the kinds of
careers they want to pursue.
Let's create new pathways for
them to step into the renewable
energy, outdoor recreation and
other jobs of the future.
Affordable and accessible
workforce training and
educational careers are critical
for diversifying our workforce
and current um and house Bill 64
will give currently excluded New
Mexicans that opportunity. New
Mexicans and their families have
identified this as a want and a
need, connecting
Everyday New Mexicans to their
political power to protect our
air, land and water requires
equal opportunities to pursue
education and employment,
especially as we continue to
pursue just transition
opportunities for all New
Mexicans.
We must advocate for all of our
people to have access to the
education, training and
information that equips them to
take on participation in our
government and economy. Thank
you.
Thank you.
no one else in the room. I think
we have 2 online, uh, Rebecca
Sherry.
Good morning. My name is Rebecca
Sherry and I work with
integrated education and
training or IET programs for our
adult education students. I have
been in English as a second
language instructor in CNN's
early childhood education, IET
for 9 years. I want to speak in
strong support of HB 64 and
especially for the provision
that allows students to attend a
year of adult education classes
to access in-state tuition. My
comments reflect my experience
as an instructor, and I'm not
speaking on behalf of CNL. I
would like to say a little more
about the students.
in our communities who will
benefit from HB 64. This bill
will allow our immigrant
learners a pathway to access
affordable higher education. The
students who want to participate
in an IET are some of our most
highly motivated learners who
have identified a career goal
and a path to reach that goal.
These immigrants are individuals
who are fully present and
engaged in our communities,
often for a decade or longer
before they apply to the IET
program. They are parenting,
working, shopping, and paying
groceryceipts, taxes, and owning
or renting homes where they
contribute property taxes to our
prostate. These are also
learners who have made the
decision to pursue training and
higher education for jobs which
are in high demand in New
Mexico, such as bilingual
teaching and health care. But
for some of these motivated and
hardworking members of our
communities, the classification
of non-resident for tuition
purposes can significantly stall
or even end their career goals.
At CNM nonresident tuition is 5
times the cost of resident
tuition, and every semester that
presents an insurmountable
barrier for some learners. By
offering immigrant students to
show
years' worth of commitment and
progress in the adult education
program, the opportunity to
access resident tuition in New
Mexico, more learners will be
able to use their talents and
grow their skills to benefit our
state's economy. Thank you.
Thank you. And Vanessa Hawker
will be our last supporter.
Good morning, Chairman Souls,
members of Senate Education
Committee. First, my apologies
for being unable to be there in
person. Uh, I have to pick up my
nephew from school, but I wanted
to let you know, I am the
executive director for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, and we stand in strong
support of House Bill 64, as
you've heard from the testimony
provided today, this bill would
provide an opportunity to
individuals who live and work in
our
communities who have been paying
taxes in our communities to
receive additional training,
access to in-state financial
aid, in-state tuition, and this
training can lead to better jobs
for them in their communities.
Thank you.
Thank you, and I don't believe
any opposition in the room or
online.
OK. Questions from the
committee.
Pope, Mr. Chair, I move do pass
on House Bill 6.
We have a motion for a due pass.
Senator result
Please go ahead.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
As represented, I don't know
which one I'm supposed to
address here, OK?
Either one, OK.
Oh, I'll start with
Representative Chavis and
anybody else can chime in that
wants to, OK?
Mr. Chairman and
Representatives.
I'm seeing on page 2 under C
that is new material. Talk to me
about this for a grant of
special immigrant juvenile
status.
I'd like to know more about
that.
Mr. Chair, Senator I, Special
immigrant juvenile visa is a
humanitarian visa available to
immigrants under the age of 21
who have experienced either
neglect, abuse, and
reunification was one of the
parents is not likely or
possible.
Um, until recently applying for
um SIJS or special immigrant
juvenile status, um, and
receiving approval notice uh on
the application would occur in a
matter of months, usually 6
months, and we've seen recently
that that wait time has
increased significantly. And so
while these young people are
waiting to hear from USCIS about
their visa application. We want
to get them engaged with the
education.
process, whether it's at a
community college, adult
education, especially if they're
on the older side of um
adolescence, 1819, 20 before
they turned 21, they can become
engaged with um education and
workforce development programs.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I did.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Ezel, my
name is Gabriella Ibanez Guzman
and the staff attorney at Somos.
Thank you very much for that.
Guzman, you said that it's taken
6 months or longer for them to
receive approval of the status
there, is that correct?
Mr. Chair sounded reel, yes.
So Madame Chair or Mister Chair,
I'm so sorry. I think so. I
think you're right.
Mr. Chairman, whenever I'm
hearing that, uh,
Taking up 6 months.
Will these special immigrant
juvenile, what the status of
these special immigrant
juveniles.
With the process taking over 6
months to get done.
Would they be in the meantime
being able to make application
and go ahead and receive.
uh
Special scholarships to be able
to go to a secondary school.
That is the, um, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair, the Senate result, that
is the intent of this bill.
But Mr. Chairman, if they're
making application.
what
And they are denied what happens
then if they've already received
a scholarship.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator I, the
acceptance rate for SIJS for
special immigrant juvenile
status is very high. It's just
a, it can take the application
can take a couple of months up
to and even exceeding a year.
Hm
OK, but Mr. Chairman,
And members, any, any one of
y'all um.
Over here in your new material
on page 2.
First off, you're saying that
anybody.
As to this a positive secondary
school cannot deny admission to
anybody.
Regardless of their
Status
And they have to have attended.
Secondary educational institute
institution in New Mexico.
Second one is attended adult
basic education courses
recognized.
By the higher ed.
Uh, in the immediate 2 years.
earned income.
Taxes have been filed, the
income tax has been filed in the
state of New Mexico.
But we're talking about students
here and you're saying this is
Basically, the part C of it, I'm
getting really confused here
because Part C of this bill and
it's all new language.
Your your expert witness said
that this is effective for
students.
Under 21 years of age that might
have been.
Faced with the hardship of the
neglect or abuse.
And
I'm getting real confused over
what we're trying to do here if
they cannot get along with a
parent, who are they living
with? How will they have
completed uh basic adult
education or filed an income tax
report or
Attended a secondary school for
at least one year.
So I, I'm very confused over
that. I'd like some
clarification, please.
I was going to say.
of
habits are sometimes hard to
break, aren't they?
Um, it's Bob, um, we, we are
talking a different aspects of
the bill so we can have students
who are um friend Chavez
actually she's a, a guardian of
one of the students who qualify
for this bill for this um.
Lisa,
but we also have people and in
the testimony of Mr. Chair and
Senator, we heard um people who
have been working here and
paying taxes
and get that for
more than 20 years, I can not
even access in state tuition and
that's actually what is this is
asking is to be considered is um
part of the working force of the
state and students in the state
to be able to access the
situation or are the
opportunities to continue there.
studies here in the state.
Mr. She.
I understand, Mr. Chairman.
And Representative Gurola about
the older adults that do attend
the basic education courses, are
they?
Are there scholarships available
for those classes.
Go ahead
That is true.
Senator,
Chairman souls, Senator,
members of the committee.
There, if it's, it's if if they
attend at least when you're of
adult education courses or uh
pay their
Fi their pets in New Mexico pit
for at least 2 consecutive
years.
They will have been living here,
probably most likely for, for at
least a year. That's the first
section of the bill, and they
would be able to then access
in-state or reduced tuition
rates and
Other tuition support that may
be available to them.
In community college courses,
for instance, in non-credit
courses, for instance, in
workforce development, training
that is provided by community
colleges, they would then have
access to those.
either scholarships or tuition
support that was provided by
some of the funding, yeah. And
so the scholarships, the tuition
support, the reduced tuition
rates would go into effect once
they meet the requirements, not
just of this bill, but any of
the other requirements of the
those particular scholarships.
So they would also have to meet
the requirements of those other
scholarships. OK, thank you very
much for that, Mister Chairman,
and whoever wants to answer this
question, I'm not gonna.
And a particular
Y'all are doing a good job
splitting it up between each of
you.
And then we're talking about the
first part of your bill.
And it starts on page 1B going
on down following 12, and 3,
there's 3 steps there.
Oh
But these particular
Adults, because that's what they
would be, they would be adults.
Whenever they filed their income
taxes, are they required to have
a social security number.
Mr. Senator, uh, not
necessarily.
They have an IT number ID
number.
And I'd like to know more about
that particular number you.
About this
Representative.
Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator I, and
I-10 is an individual tax
identification number, that
number you must apply for
directly with the IRS and
currently in New Mexico, there's
about 15,000 I-10 filers, uh,
according to TRD.
My goodness, a lot.
And Mr. Chairman, I guess my
next question is,
Because there is a filing with
IRS with their eye tenses
instead of a social security
number.
Are these people because they
are paying taxes.
Because they are probably
working in our particular area,
do they have immunity from.
Being deported
Mr. Senator, no they don't.
process
Some of them are in process and
I can give you my example when I
came here, my 1st 5 years, I
have a visa.
And, and was allowed to be here
and work, but I was not uh
consider the still in Mexico.
So, um, I had a number, uh, be
well.
They could have paid taxes if I
was working in that specific
area, but I was not wise
qualifying for a situation or
any of that scholarships or
funding in this.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, what I'm
hearing from Representative
Grola is.
That as long as these people are
filing, they do have status
through the the ITM process of
it.
There's over 15,000 in the state
right now.
Are these people
in in line to go through the
immigration part of it.
could be, Mr. Senator, uh, we
don't know some of them are and
some of them are not.
And Mr. Chairman, I am assuming
representative that you don't
have any idea how many have made
application and how many?
No, we don't, Mr. Chair.
OK, well, that's, that's kind of
concerning because I do
understand.
The want of certain immigrants
that are coming into our
country.
They want to have a better life.
Obviously, United States is a
pretty good pick.
But the other side of that is
whenever we're talking about
immigration.
Our public schools are going to
have the secondary,
post-secondary schools shall not
deny admission to anybody.
Regardless of the students'
immigration status. So I, I know
that y'all are here
representing.
The Latino population.
But we also have people coming
into our state that are not of
the Hispanic, and there are some
of them.
that are here to do harm to our
country. Would you agree with
that?
uh
Mr. uh Mr. Sheri.
Lisa, we are, we are advocating
for people who is er working for
the benefit of our state or
paying taxes, and we actually
benefit from them. We, uh,
people who go and get uh
situation
Lisa, we are, we are advocating
for people who is er working for
the benefit of our state or
paying taxes, and we actually
benefit from them. We, uh,
people who go and get uh tuition
scholarships are benefiting from
the taxes that our community is
paying and we just want to have
a fair for everybody who is
contributing to this, to these
funds and this um opportunities
to be for everyone who is
actually helping the other part
of the community
this year.
Mr. Chairman, I think there
might be a little, where can you
tell me where this bill is going
to be going next if it is passed
out of this committee.
Mr. She, uh, Senator, uh, Senate
Judiciary.
It's
OK. Very much for that.
Mr. Chairman, I do have more
questions on this.
Um
of
I'm reading some of the numbers
that on all the analysis,
there's one that says the
Independent Community Colleges
estimate that.
Uh, it'd be
He would apply to no more than.
200 students, is that correct?
Is that what I'm hearing?
Is that correct,
Mr. Senator, yeah, we, we hope
so.
And Mr. Chairman,
Representative, but this prevent
any
Right now
Citizen
Of the state from being able to
attain a scholarship,
we don't see that.
How do you know you wouldn't,
Mister Chairman. That's kind,
that's your speculation as far
as I'm concerned.
German souls, Senator, members
of the committee. This is uh
expanding the current
eligibility for people in our
state who would be able to
access these reduced tuition
rates or some of these
scholarships or tuition
supports, and it would not in
any way. There's nothing in this
bill that would
or impact the ability of
US citizens or lawful permanent
residents, uh, to be able to
access their scholarships.
Everything would remain the same
for those individuals.
OK, so Mr. Chairman.
Representatives.
The speculation part of it still
stands here, but there would be
the.
The
of some of these students though
to go to the forefront to get
some of these scholarships or
state funded financial aid,
isn't that correct, especially
whenever I'm hearing that this
particular section.
See in
On page 2 of your bill.
Whenever I'm told that these are
students under 21.
That have
Experience some sort of hardship
that we don't know where they're
living because their parents
might not be.
In tune with because her parents
might have neglected or abused
him. That's where I'm going with
this.
So
They might
Because of the need that is
there, they would probably move
on up the scale, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair, Senator Isel, um,
within the language, the
proposed language of subsection
C when we're talking about
special immigrant juvenile
status 2 years ago this body
approved the state law of
special immigrant juvenile
classification Act, which is in
chapter 40, and so these young
people must go through the state
process, uh, to be able to apply
for SIJS. They are, um, living
in New Mexico.
are domiciled here.
And so they are uh New Mexicans,
senator.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I beg to
differ with you.
Uh
That is not the way the federal
law sees it.
As far as I've unless everything
has changed overnight and who
knows.
But, uh, if even though they
might be domiciled here, that
does not make them citizens stay
in New Mexico isn't that
correct?
Because they have not attained
their citizenship.
Even though this act has and I
the special immigrant juvenile
Classification Act. I, I am
familiar with that.
But that does not mean that they
are automatically citizens.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, they are
not US citizens, they are on
track on the path to become um
First, they will become the, the
visa will be approved and then
they will be eligible to apply
for LPR status and then they'll
be able to apply to become a US
citizen, but for purposes of
this.
Bill, they must go through the
process that's outlined in
chapter 40. And so that means
they are New Mexico residents.
They are domiciled here and
that's the key word there, Mr.
Chairman. There is a big
difference between residents and
citizens.
So are we going to ensure that
these young people and I don't,
I'm not trying to dash their
drinks. I'm really not going to.
But I just want to make sure
that they are on track for
getting their citizenship.
How are we going to make sure
that that is the case.
Mr. Chairman, that is a
question.
Mr. She as senator, maybe we can
work on that and you can help us
on that too.
Mr. Chairman, I've got plenty on
my plate right now, OK?
I've cut way plenty on my plate.
I've been through a flood. I've
been through a drought. I'm
trying to make ends meet. We had
a tractor blow up on us the
other day, so yeah, I've got my
hands full right now, just
trying to
stay afloat, so, uh, I, I'd like
to know what you young ladies up
here are planning to do to get
me those numbers on how many of
these people that might be
applying for these scholarships
are on the road to getting
things in order for them to
become citizens.
Mr. Senator, um, we, uh, the,
the, these kids, the students
are on track and we are
educating them through our
system, so we want them to
continue being educated to the
system, join the workforce, and
we
have a research number saying
that um go with the training
with appropriate training with a
proper education, these students
are gonna become citizens who
are gonna be paying even higher
taxes than a basic um education
will, uh, so that's, uh,
actually will be improving our
our our taxi, tax revenues
support this actually
initiatives so uh the students
are on track and we don't wanna
wait, I mean, 10 years when they
actually, they are legally here
and they could take.
them up to 10 years to become a
citizen.
And um at that point, they are
already providing and being a a
workforce for the state.
OK, thank you very much for that
response there.
Mr. Chairman, I'm assuming each
one of y'all have the analysis
like we've gotten.
And on the analysis from the New
Mexico Independent Community
College.
It is stating under significant
issues, the last one, that
there's between 25,000 and
75,000 New Mexico residents who
are here with that
documentation.
I guess my concern is.
I want these people to.
Get on the ball and get their
citizenship.
I know they're paying taxes.
I know that they do have this
special IT number. I do get
that.
But the concern is
The way things are changing in
our world today.
They'd better be on track
getting that citizenship done.
That's
Just my thoughts on this, but
that is what it's stating here
in the significant issue right
there.
Um
Will hire it have to come up
with any special rules or
regulations regarding.
These applicants, Mr. Chairman
and representatives and
senators.
Uh, Mr. Sheriff, Senator, we
have uh
the director for ID and the
finance.
Director of Financial Aid.
Heather Romero of HED.
Uh, good morning, uh,
Representative and uh excuse me,
Senator, Chairman, um, souls,
the New Mexico Education
Department is would be
promulgated to um implement
rules if this particular
legislation would be um passed.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, which
brings up a follow-up question
on that. Tell me what you would
have to do.
To for these people to be able
to make application in order to
be awarded.
Or to be allowed into the
schools through a grant even Mr.
Chairman and Senator, so the
current process under this
particular legislation is
individuals who fall under this
particular um uh being uh in New
Mexico for one year and I
attended a postsecondary
educational institution or
secondary, these institutions
what are these individuals would
apply to our registrar's office
at an institution, they would be
accepted in state resident
tuition, and then at that point.
point the financial aid office
would then determine um the
eligibility for state financial
aid on our end, we would have to
promulgate rule based on this
legislation, um, expanding the
eligibility requirements that is
currently already in place.
Thank you very much for that
response. I am.
There and there is going to be a
difference in the determination
of this Mr. Chairman.
Because
If this is a person that is
going to
has attended 2 years of basic
education or to uh uh two
semesters of the adult basic
education.
Or paid income tax for the
preceding 2 years, that is going
to be another.
Requirement that a higher ed is
going to have to look into. Is
that correct?
And is, is there going to be
cooperation between higher ed
and the IRS to determine if the
If the uh
Income tax has been paid, isn't
that correct? And is that going
to require more manpower.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, so
the higher education
institutions would be accepting
this particular documentation.
Um, so yes, expanding the
eligibility requirements, um,
would require additional
documentation to be provided um
to the higher education
institutions, uh, we would
essentially work with the higher
education institutions across
the state to train and um ensure
that the interpretation of the
regulations is um followed.
OK.
As far as Mr. Chairman.
And representative and senator.
With your status being involved
with higher education.
How do you see, is this going to
make a difference?
And financial aid that might be
going to Citizens versus might
be going to.
The,
uh.
special immigrant juveniles.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, as an
immigrant speaking, I, I want to
make sure that I clarify that
financial aid, FAFSA.
immigrants, if you are
undocumented, you do not qualify
for FAFSA, just so that we have
that on the table as well, um,
and then if our expert wants to
add any additional information.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, so
the scholarships, as you know,
the legislative lottery
scholarship, the Opportunity
scholarship, that is applied to
all New Mexico residents across
the board. There are some state
scholarships that you must apply
for based on need, um, so once
that funding is actually an
appropriation, um, they would,
um, it, it's a first come, first
serve basis.
Thank you very much for that,
Mr. Chairman. I guess that leads
me to my next question.
Center and representative.
Expert
Higher in
Are there other states that are
doing this as well?
Senator, uh, Chairman Sos
Senator so there are over.
25 states that provide reduced
tuition rates and some
scholarships, uh, and, and which
is in state tuition, but so
basically reduced tuition rates.
To folks who qualify for various
under certain criteria, for
instance, uh, attendance at a
middle school or high school.
And that includes New Mexico. So
All we're doing is amending and
creating additional criteria,
uh, to add to the criteria that
we have been on New Mexico's
books for 20 years.
Almost to the day.
That bill was originally passed
into 2020.
That she that she go up on this,
Mr. Chairman.
What was the boat?
Oh, the vote.
What I can say, uh, chairing
songs and
the
result was that in 2005 when we
initially expanded, uh, reduced
tuition rates and uh and back
then the lottery scholarship to
young people who have since been
able to take advantage of this
and many did adjust status and
many did uh become DACA
recipients or lawful permanent
residents and US citizens,
uh, like.
Someone at this table, uh, it
was, it was a bipartisan vote,
both the House and the Senate.
Thank you very much for that.
I'm just.
Turned it a little bit, that's
OK.
Uh
There's all sorts of analysis
here.
Mr. Chairman, as
As all of y'all will know, I
know that y'all have done a lot
of work on this.
Some of the other questions I
have.
Also include uh
Did these people have to be a
married Mr. Tim.
He's uh
Younger students.
Do they have to be single?
Because I'm reading that they
are there.
The SIJS, an individual must be
under 21 years of age, be
unmarried.
be in the United States and
undocumented.
Have been subject to state
juvenile court proceedings
related to abuse, neglect,
abandonment, or a similar basis
under state law.
And being able to return to
their home country due to
neglect, abuse, or a bed.
That's, that's the requirements,
Mr. Chair, Senator, you are
correct. OK.
So I'm assuming that.
How are you going to be able to
check the status of a person
being unmarried.
Be able to
Yes.
Mr. Chair, Senator Yo.
That all must be proven.
According to.
Uh, special immigrant juvenile
Classification Act, the state
law that was passed two years
ago.
And you must submit all of that
evidence.
To a district court judge.
Or a juvenile judge.
And that will be uh certified by
The judge and by the court, and
that is the documentation that
you sent where the applicant
sends to USCIS to prove that
they qualify.
OK, Mr. Chairman, where I'm
coming with this, that is one
more step on these people being
able to gain status towards
their citizenship.
OK. Um,
Whenever we're talking about
abandonment, Mr. Chairman.
And like,
Beautiful young lady said.
But there are apologize for
that.
Some sort of harassment.
And I don't mean that, OK.
Mr. Chairman, many years ago
there was.
An incident that happened in
Artesia, New Mexico, the lady
that got up and spoke up, he was
living there.
A lot of these people were that
were coming over here from
Ares south of Mexico.
They were coming in, but they
were also sending in their
children by themselves, and some
of these children were.
12 years old and younger.
They traveled that far unocular.
Alone
And they were housed there at
the Federal law enforcement
training center.
And it was heartbreaking because
I did uh.
sure that facility once a week,
see what was going on with this
little. I wanted to make sure
that they were OK. I wanted to
make sure that they were fed,
that they were cared for, that
they were not being abused in
any way.
But where I'm going with this,
with that.
be applicable to these young
people.
As far as the definition of
abandonment.
Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Senator, if they are
able to submit.
Enough evidence that they
qualify for SIJS to a district
court judge than that.
Then they would qualify.
Mr. Chairman
The legal definition of
abandonment in New Mexico is the
parent guardian or custodian of
a child.
Intentionally leaving or
abandoning the child under
circumstances whereby the child
may suffer neglect.
Children were neglected.
So that is the definition of it
right there. That's abandonment
right there.
If we
did that to our children, we
would be thrown out the sun.
We really would be a need be, I
mean, I'm not taking up for
anybody that
abandons her children.
Mr. Chairman.
And, and I know that these
numbers do change quite a bit,
Mr. Chairman.
Uh
According to the New Mexico
immigrant Law Center in there
were 202 special immigrant
juvenile status cases awaiting
judgment. Can you tell me what
the holdup is on these? Is it
just the judge's dockets are way
too full to be hearing these
cases.
Senator, I, I think with this
particular legislation is they
have to be under that already
and so whether ones are pending
or not, you know, doesn't
really, uh, isn't really
relevant to this legislation.
OK.
Mr. Chairman
Representative and Senator, what
if they, uh,
What if the Secretary of
Homeland Security uh.
I refusing.
An application for one of these
special immigrant juveniles.
What happens here
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, um.
This is, this be at least not,
uh, it doesn't talk about that
he says it's the kids, students
who are in the process who are
working in this, uh, if that
happened, I guess it would have
to go for different process but
the bill is just trying to
expand with is able to uh to to
get an education for are already
living in New Mexico and are
able to receive an education
that's where the bill is if that
happens, I guess we're talking a
different situation here.
Mr. Chairman, where I'm getting
at with these.
But these juvenile still be
eligible for the benefits that
you're trying to get done in
your bill
Mr. Chair and the Senator is
But these juvenile still be
eligible for the benefits that
you're trying to get done in
your bill
Mr. Chair and the Senator,
there is a list of requirements,
um, if they are in one of these
categories they will.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman,
Representative and senators.
Are we, uh
Is this really gonna solve the
problem?
The reason I'm going down this
particular
path right now
Solving a problem.
Are these, especially the
younger people.
Are they going to
Can we
Insure the rest of population.
Of our state, the citizens of
our state.
Are they going to be satisfied
that we are going to do this for
these people.
have
That especially
These undocumented people, the
older ones and the younger ones
as well.
That they are going to be
working towards receiving their
status as citizens.
So that's my concern. I know I'm
gonna be hit with that whenever
I get home.
So that, that is a concern, but.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, I, I
As a member of the community, I
believe everybody wants to get
to that path, uh, again, um, our
bill is trying to make um the
community who is already
working, who is already here,
we have the opportunities and
actually contribute to our
workforce in a better way, um, I
would doubt that anyone who is
in this list doesn't want to do
it, but again, the bill is not
about that, um, as a necdotal
experience from my personal
experience, I would say yes.
Everybody wants to do it, but
again, the bill is um wanted to
be able to have all the
resources to be a more active
and, and contributing member of
the community.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, I agree with
you. I agree with you.
Mr. Chairman, many, many years
ago.
In the past century, y'all
understand what I'm talking
about right here.
century ago, OK?
White, but anyway, whenever the
bracero program was in effect, I
don't, I may be way too young to
understand what the bracero
program was.
Uh, these men would come over
and work.
They wanted a better life for
their family. I know that my
parents, I'm gonna say.
98% of the farmers out in the
area where I grew up helped
these men get their families
over here, help them get legal
and everything.
I wish we still had that probe.
I really do.
These people did want a better
life. They did want a better
life for their children and
their grandchildren.
I get it.
The different areas, these
people wanted to come over and
work.
There's a big difference there.
Those people wanting to come
over to work or those people
that are wanting to come into,
I'm not just saying from Mexico.
Don't get me wrong, folks, don't
start send me hate mail, but
we've got people that are coming
in.
To milk the system. I'll just
put it that way.
To get the benefits.
And I have a problem with that.
I'm tired of working. I don't
know about the rest of y'all,
but, uh.
partisan is right now for me to
make a living.
People are coming in here doing
it the legal way and wanting to
work. I don't have a problem
with.
But if they're coming in here
just to receive that handout,
there is a problem. I don't mind
giving a hand up. I never have.
I always will.
That handout is getting harder
and harder for me to.
get done.
Mr. Chairman, I'm going to stop
right there before I get in too
deep.
have a
I'm really conflicted over this
bill.
I'm not sure how I'm gonna vote
on this spill.
Thank you very much for
presenting it.
Mr. Turman, Senator, thank you
very much. Um, if I may add,
Thank you for bringing up the
bracero program. My grandfather
was a bracero. Both of them
were, um, and I just wanna thank
you for uh for bringing that up,
uh, Senator, because this bill
is a contrast, uh, in terms of
what it's expanding the access
to, and I can tell you that the
folks that will benefit are
folks that are just like those
braceros back in the day that
wanted to work and contribute to
our communities. You're talking
about people like my father,
like my mother.
And the irony of me sitting as a
senator is, is it beyond ironic,
but because I came in and
through the 2005 sort of uh um
legislation, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I know the impact that
it makes to our communities, and
I know that our communities live
and contribute across the state
and I respect um.
Your, uh, lens coming here in
terms of prioritizing folks who
want to contribute because I am
on the same page as an
immigrant, ma'am. I, Mr.
Chairman, we are here to
contribute and to work hard and
to ensure that we are creating
better lives for our families,
and that is the purpose of this
bill at its core. I am sitting
here before you because of the
passenger to the 2005 law, and
this essentially is just a mild
expansion.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
um, that will really just
support New Mexico communities.
I understand the concerns about
immigration status, but at the
state level, we don't have
authority over adjusting that,
and I would hope that you are
all able to see the
contributions of these
individuals into our state, and
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
add, I appreciate what you just
said about your folks and
everything and growing up all
the bracero program was going
on. I was a minor.
OK, I was a minority. There was
a.
Going through Cotton school, I
think there were 24 kids in my
class.
And I was one of 4 that.
And I hate, I hate hearing this.
I have color of my skin too, so
I'm tired of hearing a person of
color. I do have color in here.
You don't know my genetic
makeup.
I guess I'd just be called a
green guy. Is that correct?
That's what I was called growing
up. We didn't know there was a
difference between any of us
because that's not the way we
were raised. We were all human
beings, and that's the way we
need to.
Look at each other.
So I hope everybody out there
understands where I'm coming
from. We are all human beings.
There's no difference in us
anyway, we just have different
ideas and different opinions.
Mr. Tara, thank you very much.
We do have a due pass and a
second, if you'll take the roll,
please.
Inbo
cell
Sinda Figueroa.
Yes.
Hickey. Yes. Senator Nova.
Yes, ma'am.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton
Senator Pope, yes, and explained
my vote.
Senator Souls.
Yes, yes, and you have a due
pass on a 5.
The 0 with 4 excused.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I No,
no, no. No clapping clapping.
Just wanted to comment on this.
Thanks to I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward.
I always get a little tingy on
the comments that are made about
these people.
This is our community.
These are people that own
businesses. These are people
that are
Providing important
Workforce to our community,
providing tax dollars.
So this is the right thing to
do.
Um, we already know that a lot
of federal benefits they don't
qualify for.
qualified for.
So that rhetoric out there that
people are juicing the system or
taking, it's just not true.
we have to stop that rider.
Um, as far as folks gathering,
getting citizenship.
I think we all want that, but we
all know this system is broken,
folks did have a path that was
legitimate that they could do
it, they would do it. So thank
you for doing that. We also have
the fears of Homeland Security
we can't control that.
Let's take care of our community
and our people. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um,
So we can get this done quickly
but everybody can't stay seated,
I think we're gonna do a real
quick do pass on the memorial.
So, uh, Senator Gonzalez, Senate
Memorial 22 K12 Water
Conservation curriculum.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
I'll be very quick and uh uh
just in a very, very short term.
To this is so.
Being an educator, you know, I,
I understand and I realize how
important it is.
But if you want change, you have
to come through education.
And uh last fall I had a water
symposium I have over 200
members and one of the things
that kept coming up is, you
know, we need to work with our
young people that they
understand what we have, the
value we have, the asset we have
in New Mexico is water and this
is what he would do.
12.
Mr. Cherry move a due pass and
sent a 22, we don't have a
quorum where Senator Nava.
You needed her back in here. I
tried to get everyone to stay
still.
Yeah
Able to appoint voting members.
Right.
There we go. OK.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mr. Cherry moved a do pass the
Senate Memorial 22.
Seconded by Senator Hickey, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Cinder boot.
And
Sander Figueroa.
Sender Hickey
said no, yes, Senor Ramos.
Senator Thornton, Senator Pope.
Yes. And souls, yes, so you have
a new pass on your memorial, Mr.
Chairman and members, thank you.
I want to thank everybody who
came today who spoke, takes lots
of courage being here. I
appreciate it. Uh, we are
adjourned until 9 o'clock on
Wednesday.
Friday, Friday, Friday we're
losing our days like.
