Updating people Senate bill two
eighty nine that the Sanchez
request has been delayed until
Monday now further down the
business Senate bill three
thirty five are you robotics has
been
after that we put on hold by the
concert a couple of things for
people if you're new to the
Senate Education Committee what
we go to public comment the
limit people to two minutes we
have to make sure that you keep
that in mind don't go over that
I turn that over to our web.
Operator and she does a very
good job but she's very polite
but she does cut people off with
two minutes when your time is up
so why make sure that you don't
let that happen.
Committee is there anything in
particular many one on the
committee we need to discuss as
we get started.
We have a floor session we will
be having on stopping at eleven
twenty today so while wherever
we are will issue we it is
appropriate we will stop and not
do another bill if we're in the
middle of the bill will just
move it on to Monday when we
come back looking forward to
Monday we look at some of the
bill that we may have our first
house bill that will you're on
on Monday as well as we try to
get some of those bills moving
with that I think our first
order of business up today is
Senate memorial one task force
to promote outdoor classrooms
welcome to Senate education
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's an
honor to be here today with you
and with the wild friends
program all the students from
the wild friends I'm really
proud to be here with these hard
working and dedicated students
that my son was also able to
participate in the wild friends
program so I'm so excited to be
able to sponsor this legislation
is Senate memorial one and what
Senate memorial one does is it
will just stab wish it's
requesting that establishment of
a task force to promote the use
of outdoor classrooms in New
Mexico schools and requesting
that the governor declare an
outdoor learning day and twenty
twenty one and I have my expert
witnesses with me this morning
J. K. Garrett could be some are
Garcia Madisyn Darby David
Frankie and Mike Hanna white.
And the her and their front
students from all across New
Mexico and the purpose of this
memorial of course it's just
establish a task force that will
make recommendations about how
to expand and improve the
outdoor classrooms in New Mexico
and it also requests that the
governor declared outdoor
recreation our outdoor classroom
state that can be accomplished
using existing resources and as
a school psychologist I know
that research indicates that
being outside in nature promotes
emotional and physical well
being and with that I would like
to turn it over to my first
expert witness J. Skerrett from
Grady menace supposed schools
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you if you will please.
Hello Mister chair and members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak on
behalf of Santa mile one my name
is Jessica and I in the eighth
grade at Grady schools what does
Senate only one ask for Senator
my one ask for a task force to
recommend actions of being an
outdoor classroom for school and
ask for the government decline
after learning day the task
force will bring state agencies
out there educators and you all
together to talk about how New
Mexico can an outdoor classes in
our school in my opinion this is
my last at to come and for kids
to come outside and learn about
doctors well having fun actors
why do I think you guys should
support this legislation I think
you should support this
legislation because what friends
while what truly help students
out where eager to learn about
the outdoors or even do stuff
afters another reason why I
think you should buy this
legislation because kids also
always get stuck in their houses
nothing could do slide play
video games and if you support
Senate mile one and they'll
gather houses explanatory as
well also learning about the
Oscars thank you.
Thank you Dave Senator who's
next.
Mr chairman I have Punit how do
you see month Garcia next.
If you will please.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak on behalf
of Senate memorial line my name
is Casey Mercier and I and and
the great eight at pre schools.
Hi Representative well friends
who helped draft this memorial
what are other states doing
states across the country are
using outdoor classrooms with
great success and New Mexico
should to for example Arizona
Colorado and Maine have used
outdoor classrooms to reopen
schools during the pandemic and
of course outdoor classrooms
will have a lot of benefits
beyond the pandemic to.
I feel like other questions
would be a successful thing
because it could get kids out of
the house and make them want to
learn more being outside instead
of being stuck inside of a
building and they could get the
exercise and right that they
need thank you.
Thank you Senator how do we have
next Mr Chairman Madison Darby
it's next.
Please.
The presentation for us.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Madison very and I
gave here to call that
intermediate school.
thank you for allowing me to
speak on behalf of the Senate
that Senate memorial fund.
The memorial does not cost any
money we're just asking that you
give us a task force to help us
with the other costs we will be
using existing resources with
these task forces
studies have shown that the
other classrooms can reduce
stress obesity and can help you
with your sleep function.
The other classes are important
because it boasts with focus and
we focus you're more likely to
get better grades in school
thank you.
Thank you and I love the
swimming turtle in your
background there.
Senator do we have more.
Yes Mr chairman we have David
Frankie next.
There are
many.
Script Mr chair members of the
committee.
My name is David Frankie I'm in
the eighth grade attended the
Albuquerque handling cat and me.
Students are important because
they provide you safe soulful.
Thank you read a little bit of
technical difficulties I think
we lost some of your audio.
Senator are there are others.
And aren't Mr Chairman my last
expert witness is McKenna
whites.
Thank.
Monistat.
In Las Cruces New Mexico.
We started to record.
You should support while because
intended that attitude that
making me want.
Thank you.
And respond thanks.
Thank you that's my hometown Los
crucis so it's good to see
people out the weather down
there.
Cold cold cold up here in Santa
Fe yes.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm not
sure sue George wanted to speak
she's been involved with filed
friends for quite a while give
me a thumbs up sue would you
like to speak.
Okay Mr Chairman my last expert
witnesses to George.
Thank you Sir.
Actually all I would like it Mr
chair members of the committee
all I would like to say is that
the students have said it very
well and I'm very proud of them
thank you.
Thank you I have to say on the
Education Committee almost
always we would have some group
of students coming in but we
were here I.
And it's it's up I missed that I
mean that's hard what we're up
here we're trying to do
everything zoom is we don't
actually get to have all of the
students in the room with us
what we're actually doing our
our meetings and and I think
that's part of what we messed.
I see lots of the pictures going
on and off if we lost the need
or that my on my end.
Right here you okay
Okay I am Mr chair okay I all
the pictures a blinked off on my
side and everybody's coming back
on so that will will proceed at
this point Senator is there
anything else that you wanted to
say we will go out to comments
from the public we can go to Mr
chairman we can go to comments
from the public thank you Mr
chairman thank you mark tell if
you'll take us through that
these.
First we'll be hearing from us
opposition Mr Joel Davis did you
want to make a statement.
Is there any other members of
the public who wish to make a
statement that was in opposition
of Senate memorial but what.
Okay we will hear from support
we have
miss Eileen Everitt miss every
available.
Yes good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am I
lean over at executive director
of environmental education of
New Mexico since the nineties we
at E. N. M. have supported
outdoor environmental education
by providing New Mexicans
opportunities for collaboration
communication and professional
development.
Currently we support outdoor and
environmental education
organizations right now over a
hundred and fifty across New
Mexico that serve over two
hundred thousand of our New
Mexican kids annually with
outdoor environmental learning
we also work with seventeen
amazing fellows across the
state.
I would like to take a moment to
acknowledge the incredible
expert witnesses here today as
well as the many students across
New Mexico who have drafted
Senate memorial one with ongoing
support from wild friends.
In twenty twenty environmental
education of New Mexico hosted
over twenty five community
events to support educators
teachers parents program
managers and others to share
their challenges and successes
during the COVID crisis
including through the use about
our classrooms along with our
broad community we drafted
outdoor learning guidance last
fall that was adopted by the
Public Education Department as
part of school reentry for the
school year we even launched
outdoor learning and M. dot org
as a place that provides
resources and supports for
parents families teachers and
school administrators to support
outdoor learning including
outdoor classrooms and that's up
and available right now.
The inter agency task force
named in this.
What a better time and we at the
NM are ready to support the task
force and find ways to connect
with and learn from those across
the state who already have great
expertise on outdoor classrooms
that are already implementing
outdoor classrooms across the
strait the state right now.
We strongly encourage your
support for Senate memorial one
and thank you for the
opportunity to provide this this
Madam.
Thank you Mr ivory we wanna hear
from Camillus the woman.
Go ahead Camilla.
Thank you hi my name is Camilla
I woman I'm the director of the
Rio Grande chapter of the Sierra
Club and we in our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
stand in strong support of SM
one I want to thank the wild
friends for standing up for
outdoor education and I thought
it might be fun for people to
see an example here's my son
getting on his pre school bus
aren't where they go to the bus
get two days a week on Tuesdays
and Fridays and our outdoors all
day learning from nature having
an experience that's different
from the average classroom where
they interacted with the natural
world learn how to solve
problems learn about because in
effect and in the Sierra club's
own research and outdoor
education we've seen science
grades go up we've seen behavior
improves and we think every kid
has the right to learn outdoors
so thank you for the opportunity
and also for your vote yes on as
someone thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Patrick
Nolan.
Mr Nolan are you available.
One more time for Mr Patrick
Nolan.
Okay we will move on to
Elizabeth and she Elizabeth are
you available.
And thank you.
Thank you all so much for the
opportunity to speak to today my
name is Elizabeth and keening
from last in your food center in
southern New Mexico our
education program has been
working with schools in southern
New Mexico develop school
gardens an outdoor learning
spaces are since two thousand
eleven and currently support
over thirty school gardens in
our region are primarily working
with the last process and
Gadsden district.
Rear we offer trainings to over
a hundred allied teachers in our
region who often use their own
time and weekends to come to
workshops and learn about no
court right school gardens and
outdoor learning into their
everyday learning practices and
I'm use their own time to
participate in this growing
community
Further outdoor education in our
region.
New Mexico the.
learning and the desire to move
it forward is very much already
here and you just wanted to come
and make a brief statement and
support of Santa Maria one I'm
really past forces members unity
to I get some more statewide
efforts and to to further this
and all of our different regions
so one ship today and has been
discussing the support that work
of wild friends and more
resources and and that support
towards at preparing outdoor
learning in southern New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you so you have we will
now we will now hear from
heather Bassett thank you
heather.
Good morning thank you Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is heather Bassett I'm
with Albuquerque public schools
and so I want to thank the
sponsor for this bill and I
wanted to just say thank you and
and that and really Christopher
the student voices today you
guys all did a great job of
expressing what's happening in
your communities I'm really
proud of you for being here
today we have a lot of students
who share your sentiment in
Albuquerque public schools on
the arms community gardens we
have a C. Indian not natural
history center for fifth grade
science field trips and so I
think the task force is a great
idea to bring everybody together
costs the state and start making
some collaborative really
dedicated approach just outdoor
money thank you all very much.
Thank you Mr.
We will now hear from miss Tasia
young miss young are you
available.
One more time firmest he's a
young.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
support Senator mori Bill one
okay go ahead Liz Christy to
foyer I see there.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Christy
deployed and the director of New
Mexico state parks and I stand
in support of this memorial we
have thirty five parks across
the state and we have a strong
outdoor classroom program and we
are one of the eight on the task
force listed in this memorial
and we stand and support and are
very interested in connecting
are used to our our parks and
our our beautiful outdoor places
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you Christy are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate memorial the one.
Thank you very much this
concludes public statement at
this time.
Thank you back to you Senator
Hemphill anything that you'd
like to comment on before we go
to questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess
the last thing I'd like to state
it's just as a school
psychologist I work with
children with emotional and
behavioral challenges and I know
that in all of the years that I
worked as a school psychologist
the number one request from
students as they want to go
outside and when they're outside
they just seem to be able to be
better at self regulation and
better at solving social
conflict and often they we can
have a student who is absolutely
dysregulated throwing chairs
tipping over tasks and the
minute we go outside they calm
down they're able to regroup and
I think that with the pandemic
our number one priority really
should be addressing social
emotional needs of the students
as they transition back into in
person learning in the schools
and teachers as well and we can
accomplish that by increasing
our time outside and it's
healthy for all of us so thank
you Mr chairman and we stand for
questions from the committee.
Thank you senator and I first
have hand up I. T. Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee
Senator thank you for bringing
this bill forward our system
only four are there any
restrictions right now that keep
them from going outside.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator for the question there
aren't necessarily restrictions
that keep students from being
outside but this would create a
task force to help share ideas
and resources to help encourage
more teachers from being out
taking their students outside in
a more organized and stop away
and I think the most important
part of this is just to be able
to have this task force to
discuss ways to really maximize
students time outside and
connect to the community and
make that a focus in every every
school thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
And maybe I should what is that
little bit better because I
don't think the kids can
actually just get up and walk
out of the classroom but with
supervision I don't think the
whoever supervising the children
at the time are not restricted
from taking the children outside
of Mr some kind of
dangerous implication of my
correct Mr chair Senator.
Mister chairman Senator hi
actually I would like to see if
one of my expert witnesses would
like to respond to that since
they're the ones actually in the
schools they don't they'll have
a better idea of what that looks
like thank you Mr chairman I'm
looking to see if anyone raises
their hand and.
Senator you might just call on
one of them they're they're all
students are used to being on
June classrooms and probably
used to teachers calling on them
that thank you Mr chair and
senator but that being a teacher
and it's having the access and
one of the things personally was
that classroom were not built in
the past some sense and I'll
take for example too high to
high school and some of the
other schools on the reservation
that they were built to keep
people out it was an about being
in the outdoors in unlike some
schools and smaller schools that
I was able to teach and having
large windows in teachers and
the person at ministration
sometimes with feel that they're
being distracted by bringing the
indoors are having a view of the
outdoors in their but on the
cultural view I believe that is
something that should have been
incorporated into the
infrastructure of the building
so especially in education
instead of them looking like
jails
That it looks more like a school
and more inviting.
And as a teacher I think that
was a thing I took on personally
to have those teachable moments
outside in the bar environment
and take the kids outside to
actually see the screen so they
would invest see all the things
that were in there but we use
those teachable moments with the
water towers with the solar
powered walking signings that
flashing School sorry for speed
limits all the safety features
and everything that the court
right into the school.
So that the children see the
value in the environment they
are in but I think that's a
local
Future that's your purse you
know you're every vitamins
different in order for you to
incorporated in but also it's up
to it didn't Vigil classrooms
and up to the teachers because
you will have students that
might not at here disciplinary
our behavior
as far safety protocols when
you're right walking just
walking around there and when it
came to assessments I believe
that was one of the necessary
things before you gonna sit down
for three our assessment that
the the children were able to go
out and we did take a walk and
Have those things.
Which we're at you know the
evidence is there but I don't
find it necessary to kind of put
resources to it are in that
manner I think it's a local
thing and what the
administration within the
schools that they incorporated
the feasibility within it then
having to mandated through the
open schools thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Neville and your expert
witnesses I always love it
whenever we.
Your directly from our
constituency in our customers
and a lot of ways I just wanted
to make mention how I echo I do
believe that this is incredibly
important
I sometimes feel like I need to
get up and get out of this round
building out from you know we're
underground in just four hundred
year old building with poor
ventilation.
And you know my colleagues are
driving me nuts just like maybe
your classmates are driving you
nuts and I'm gonna get up and
walk around the building and
it's exactly because of the
length of my legs two hundred
eighty nine steps for me and I
try to get twelve thousand steps
a day and all those things so I
just love what you're up to I
did want to ask Mister chairman
Senator put it in bill one year
experts have you been made aware
of something called by at the
auto which is in the southern
part of Bernalillo county are
you familiar with our the auto
is anybody familiar with part of
the.
I don't so I see a bunch of
wealth is is anyone on the call
and as the experts from
Bernalillo county or you all
from Grant County.
Senator I think there's some
from Grady which is in the east
side of the state there some
from the Los crucis area
I think there was one in
Bernalillo county area.
Well I encourage you Mr chairman
and senator quite a compelling
and experts I highly recommend
that you look into something
called by the oral it is a
wildlife refuge that is in an
urban area it's about seven
hundred acres I was able to find
one point four million dollars
in my very first session with
about twenty seven other
legislators to to make this
possible for New Mexico.
This particular
Installment will become a
federal installation if you will
it's going to be called by the
auto and it's again seven
hundred acres it's about a
thirty minute drive from fifty
percent of the population of New
Mexico and I would love for you
all to become part of that
facility if you're at all
interested and that that be part
of your programming Senator
career goal is to get this
program further engaged in our
state.
but the one question that I did
have this is where what is the
specific teaching component
while the students and while the
team is outside in the open
outdoors.
I know they'll probably learn in
the classroom but what are they
what is their specific
programming and and goals for
when they're outside.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
for the question that's a great
question and I think that's
really the the heart of what the
task force the purpose of the
task force is to come together
with different agencies and
experts at along with the wild
friends the students from the
wild friends to to talk about
how to do that what kind of
program how to.
create the curriculum that would
be most helpful in each
community.
I suggest putting his hand up
when that question was asked J.
C. are you able to.
The bill within on that
yes Mr chairman members
committee I think that when you
ask.
But they will there will be
learning and teaching us when
we're out there probably about
the environment we were doing
prototypes we were learning
about playa lakes and health
plan lakes can save water in
them and a different type of
stuff like that.
We appreciate it Mr chairman and
senator Clemente field and went
into the experts and thank you
Mr Garrett what I love about the
by product of what you're
proposing here is that we need
this sort of a trained
individual always and so I think
this is going to encourage some
of these young folks to to want
to take that up as a career also
and and be able to help us
maintain our our intended
protection and care for our
outdoor settings and this and
that so and I also just wanted
it's in the middle of my
district and I always like to
highlight by the it's it is one
of probably it's the first urban
wildlife refuge in the entire
country by the way and it's
right here in New Mexico and I
highly recommend that you learn
more about it and you become
part of it we do have a friend
so by the auto and I'm sure they
would love some volunteers and
some people to help them with
all the work that they do thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator critical.
That are Kernan I have you up
next.
Thank you Mr chair and up thank
you for bringing the memorial I
just have one question often
times I know that many of us
realize that Morial sometimes
lead to legislation the
following year that I just wanna
make sure we're not on a road to
a mandatory
Legislation down the road that
would impact what are schools
can decide for themselves
because I do think I know while
friends I think they have a I
believe I have a a program
implemented which is in my
district and certainly I've met
with them over the years when
children were allowed to come up
to the session but I just think
that you I'm always very
protective of our local decision
making and want to make sure
that districts have the ability
at the end of the day after the
memorial and then sometimes the
next year we come with
legislation to up at mandate
something else of that is not
your intent in my correct.
Senator thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator for bringing out
that concern it's a valid
concern it's a good point and I
have no intention of bringing
forward any legislation that
would create any mandates thank
you for your your.
Thank you very much and and I
certainly agree with you that
children that have an
opportunity to experience the
out outdoors certainly can make
a huge difference in the lives
of some of these ghettos they do
have behavioral issues in
particular in and that not even
that just the experience of
getting them outside and
learning something new I don't
have a problem at all with that
I think this is a good step in
that direction just wanna be
really cautious about coming
circling back around and
requiring some sort mandate
based on the task force in their
work look forward to hearing
what they come up with thank
you.
Are there any other questions
from the committee at this
point.
And I just had a very quick kind
of question comment as a high
school teacher in high school
math teacher every semester we
go out once or twice and do
things like using triangles
measure how pod like Paul was or
shooting rockets and how use
triangulation in order I'll call
it was for figure out the area
of the building and have to go
out and actually measure it and
I don't know we were always the
most productive that date but I
think it helped productivity of
the entire class other times but
we could sometimes go out when
the weather was nice and do real
life education outside of and
another story when I was in
elementary principal is one of
my first grade teachers and she
had all the kids go out bird
watching what they and they date
of ocular is out of toilet paper
to the kids all of the holder
binoculars up like this you see
any of the for it was beautiful
to watch for the kids loved it
and learn that they can go out
and find things in nature to to
look at it to see and understand
so I think it's a great memorial
certainly appreciate the
students being here with us
today I really miss that in this
session where we're doing it all
virtually is that we don't get
to have students actually come
into our committee and see what
we do is legislators because in
a manner that's almost an
outdoor classroom to when you're
outside looking at other other
kinds of things you get out of
the normal box that we have
classrooms typically and see the
world in a better way so with
that I pleasure the committee
please.
Yes Mr.
Senator Kernan thank you.
Second by Senator Padilla
million would you call the roll
please.
Senator sold I'm sorry but
Senator Hickey had his hand up.
For a while.
I
so sorry I think that was up and
then when I look back it was
down I thought you might have
had your question answer please
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman I
disappeared for a little while
got frozen out and tell in Santa
Fe.
Don't always work so well and
thank you Center helpful for
bringing this bill
going over to the medical
behavioral health side
Getting an appreciation for the
outdoors is one of the best
prevention measures against aces
and so this this in some ways I
don't think will lead to
additional costs I think if we
can use this and and focus to
some degree and how to really
have an appreciation we will see
significantly fewer aces and us
are significantly less
unnecessary costs as a result of
the case itself thank you for
bringing it forward and I look
forward to celebrating it every
year thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Hickey I think
we had a motion and a second so
very are you call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Just.
Senator souls yes we have a due
pass.
Legislation to Senator you have
a do pass on that memorial one
for the task force to promote
outdoor learning good job good
work that out.
Get outside and thank you
members of the committee okay
great.
Thank you our next order of
business and for the public we
just had to do pass instead of
four oh one the task force to
promote outdoor classrooms I
will next have Senate Joint
Memorial one as amended to fund
the bureau of Indian education
center so followed by Senate
bill three oh seven daily school
bus driver salaries by Senator
Campos what reminded committee
we do have a stop at eleven
twenty today we're about about
nine thirty so we're moving
along okay Senator Pinto if you
will please thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee US Senate Joint
Memorial one once amend if we do
have a friendly amendment
To the bill I believe it has
been sent to the committee my
Chalakudy verify.
Yes I put it on the screen now
Senator.
So this ammendment it was made
junction to the other men met
the first amendment so we're
taking that amendment often
again replacing it with some
broader language
the strike the Senate rules
committee amendment one and on
page three line to after the
COVID struck the remainder of
the line struggling stream for
in their entirety and struggling
I through governors and insert
the Lou there of the tribal
leadership of all twenty three
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos in New Mexico and this
amendment was doing jointly with
the input of the Indian Affairs
Department.
And the.
Where it stands I don't know if
there's any debate on the men's.
Senator souls you're muted.
Thank you mark hello I mean we
all have this is we do this
daily better to be muted when
you're saying things you don't
want them to be unmuted
Are we need someone please to
move the amendment.
The event myself can
Senator yes so motion the
amendment.
And I said Mr chair that are
both second to give them that we
are on the amendment is thirty
discussion on the amendment.
I think getting heather jumping
out of my only comment is
Senator I think this is a great
amend that this makes everything
inclusive it doesn't go through
and have to list all of the.
The different groups that that
fit within that and I think that
your bill want to be inclusive
not exclusive and so this
certainly covers that.
In the hands and so
We have a motion and a second
area would you please call the
roll for the amendment.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
My bad yes.
Senator Kernan.
Stepped away Senator Neville
yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator poke S. and Senator
soul yes and we have a amended
bill.
Senator your bill is amended and
now we're back on the maybe
memorial thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Senate Joint Memorial
one twice amended.
Is a joint memorial that had
been introduced in the last
session ended we just ran out of
time in it that held up on the
floor it passed both committees
and it is a memorial after
requesting for the federal
government to do board funding
for the higher ed so that when
there is a government shut down
or it Lou of that at the higher
end will still have their
funding in which most of the the
I. E. schools except high that
higher it are already in that
situation so this is just
expanding it to include the
higher education.
You.
You have an expert or anything
Senator I did I don't know
terrible again did get through
I was texting age thank you was
on standby but that he is on the
reservation so there might be
some is that.
Okay well we'll we'll kick we
don't have in mind if there any
at technical questions for
things
part of you'll take is out if
there's any testimony from the
public.
This time I don't have anyone
listed to make statements in
opposition of Senate Joint
Memorial one of crystal's on did
you want to go ahead.
Not in a position but is support
if okay.
I'm.
Welcome back to you are there
any other members of the public
that are in the meeting at this
time who wish to make statements
in opposition to Senate Joint
Memorial bill one.
Okay moving on we will now hear
from the supporters I have a
rose Graham rose are you
available.
One more time for miss rose
Graham.
He and Mr Gerald Begay are you
available Sir.
Okay moving on we will hear from
Mr Burciaga ano go ahead Chris.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on transposon of the
register lobbyist for the mac
college we support this piece of
legislation we hope through this
former expression of the
Legislative desire we hope that
the this body supports this bill
and formally senses that
correction and and we we look
for to see what comes that from
from this so we appreciate the
sponsor bring this before this
committee thank you.
Thank you Chris we will now hear
from Mr Joel Davis go ahead
Joel.
Thank you a good morning
chairman members of the
committee my name is Joel Davis
Representative the Fort Sill
Apache tribe the sole successors
in interest to the chair called
warm springs Apache from
southwestern New Mexico.
Four so Apache tribe is about
fifty will ride scholarships a
year as part of funds received
from the B. I. A. many of those
students go to New Mexico
schools we've had lawyers
doctors nurses and others
graduate Representative loading
these funds would go a long way
in helping us increase those
types of scholarships for tribal
less than a hundred people
that's a that's a big pool for
the tribe they focus on
education and we really want to
thank the sponsor for making
sure that all the tribes and and
publishers are included in this
bill and and that was inclusive
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Davis are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
Senate Joint Memorial one.
One more time we are taking
statements of support.
Thank you very much this
concludes public statement at
this time.
Thank you mark hello back here
Senator any comments we'll go to
questions from the committee.
Rose Graham is the director of
the Navajo Nation scholarship
office so that was.
The like I said they're on the
reservation so it's probably
technical difficulties there
thank you.
Okay I will move the questions
from the committee is anyone on
the committee have questions for
Senator Padilla.
I'm not seeing any hands go up
all my life I'm happy to take
questions Mr chairman but I
think those would be percent
provincial.
All.
Representative at the at I was
looking right at her name and I
the wrong thank you madam I now
live so apologize to both of
you.
Thank you I don't see any any
questions from committee members
coming up
You like to make a motion.
We have a motion for a new path
thank prison Senator.
From Senator Pinto.
Okay center for the of the
second Marianna's you'll call
the roll please.
Then your Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
The pope.
I'm senator Paul.
Yes.
Senator salsa yes.
We have a due pass
that would give us on Senate
Joint Memorial one as amended.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
You and for the public we have
had Senate memorial one task
force to promote outdoor
classrooms received if you
passed Senate Joint Memorial one
asked twice amended and the
bureau of Indian education has
passed Senate education we are
now going to move the Senate
bill three oh seven today in the
school bus driver salaries with
Senator Campos and then on deck
is Senate Bill B. thirty dropout
prevention programs with Senator
of the our water remind the
public we do will have a stop at
eleven twenty and whether we're
in the middle of the bill or not
at that
if you will please Senator
Campos welcome to Senate
education thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
here with you.
And then Lee of course the order
in terms of how you want to
handle this presentation to your
discretion but in essence Senate
bill three oh seven requires
school districts in state
charter schools that have to pay
a school bus drivers a hundred
and fifty dollars per day for
each of the the drivers and the
date and the work that they do
perform during that the driving
services the bill further
requires fed to ensure
transportation distribution
payments are properly allocated
to pay drivers the salary range
and require schools based school
bus contractors the appropriate
gross receipts tax on payments
for contracts services beyond
school bus driver salaries and
the Mr chair there is an
amendment by
I believe that it would be
important to possibly hear from
my expert witness today.
before we consider the amendment
because I believe that will help
to bring some context to the
amendment as we move forward but
again like I said I'll leave
that to your discretion but my
experts today is Mr Richter hill
who has over forty years of
experience in the field of by
striving he was raised in this
area he knows the
ups and downs of the industry
itself in in moving forward just
a few other things because I've
been school bus driver for over
forty years myself in and
transporting young people we've
seen these bus routes so one way
going anywhere from ninety six
miles in the Gallup area all the
way to our in some of the
smaller areas of forty to forty
five miles one way so.
In being either a bus driver or
an attendee of helping with the
the services in bus
transportation it's incumbent
for us to continue to keep in
mind are these individuals lose
a full day at times
just by waiting let's say for
example if it's a field trip
it's a to and from trip
they're getting paid one way but
in reality the other half of the
day is waiting or in other cases
where bus drivers need to pick
up let's say for example part
time jobs but if there is a bus
break down of the need to go and
pick up students during the day
they need to abruptly leave for
other part time jobs so it
It does create some some issues
so four of course these bus
drivers but Mister chair if I
may for context of purposes
allow my experts to make a
statement and then from there if
you feel comfortable with move
on to the to the amendment and I
think that would give us a
better perspective of what the
amendment that would do.
Thank you yes that I think that
would be fine if we don't wanna
be doing amendment that we don't
understand the need purpose
within that certainly if you're
expert would like to the to make
a short presentation thank you
very much Mr chair and members
of the committee at this time I
defer to Mister Rick Vigil.
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and thank you
Center couples for bringing this
bill up for us all over twenty
six hundred drivers in New
Mexico
like Mr that center couples are
saying this is is very important
he's bringing his up right up a
couple of years and what we need
is already same as some of the
drivers we we drive thirty forty
miles for a bus pick it up then
we gotta go back to the route go
back and when we actually and I
know.
Some of us can say well that's
part of the job going for the
bus I understand that but when
you have to come back home or go
to another job and and do you
work there but then if they call
you because right of center
compensate for a bus breakdown
or a bus of a school disposable
you the principal or the
director to let you know that
there's a pipe propionyl heating
you've got to go do it well the
building is that your other job
gets upset because they're
saying well which job you got to
pay it you understand when there
is a bus driver or do you want
to stay here of whatever job
it's it's at so you know the
school bus driving has become
more and more intensive and I
know all of you I don't have
written a school bus but as
Senator memorial one.
But to promote more outdoors we
need bus drivers to take all
these kids outdoors I love data
center St forty years myself my
god well over fifty years in the
family we're a family of
seventeen R. so this is part of
it's been in the party business
in a rural area called the
department of New Mexico my wife
that's a family if you want to
come in the family you have to
become a bus driver as in rural
areas it's a little hard to find
bus drivers are not you can.
But I am also in this yeah I'm.
R. so now it's not as easy test
to become a bus driver to go to
a motor vehicle impact that you
can drive now you gotta ask not
only for the schools as you all
well know your Education
Committee are you gonna get a
background check a past physical
better pass a mental and you
know to to be a school bus
driver it's actually.
If you really see it it becomes
a three week two four we are.
What school bus driver in
today's world so that's why
Senator Campos has brought this
bill that because it's very
important to all of us bus
drivers into you the legislature
as a whole and Education
Committee all for your support
this bill is this is a bill that
school bus drivers are becoming
distinct and we need to bring
them up to part for all the
qualifications that we need and
the experience that we have to
transport your your precious
cargo in our precious cargo to
school every day to and from and
to achieve its thank you Sir and
Mr chair.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much Mr hello
members of the committee
sure if I may then I'll present
the the amendment.
Yes Sir if you would I think
that would be important before
we go out the public comment
certainly before for our
question so tell us what the
amendment does present thank you
very much Mr chairman of the
Senate Education Committee in
essence what the amendment does
is it adds the word anymore and
also adds attendance.
in other words individuals that
are for the oversight and
support to the bus drivers when
they're transporting our most
precious individuals along with
that in essence what it does is
it indicates that the minimum to
be paid to bus drivers is a
hundred fifty dollars per day
and the minimum to be paid to
attendance is a hundred dollars
for day in essence Mister chair
members of the Senate Education
Committee that's what the
amendment does.
Okay we have a member of the
management board discussion
purposes.
Mr Chairman.
The amendment for discussion
purposes only.
Thank you Senator Padilla
From the committee any questions
comments about we are on the
amendment.
Your can you repeat the part
about attendance.
Read that part again to me yes
thank you very much Mr chair and
Senator Kernan in essence what
is added it would be attendance
in other words the individuals
that would be the supervisors on
the bus and the minimum to be
paid to those individuals would
be a hundred dollars per day.
Thank you Mr chair I I thought
you said eight hundred thank
you.
Thank you the other committee
members with questions.
The question Senator how many
school buses how often do they
have an account out of the what
is the percentage of drivers
that are driving so low and how
many have an attendant on the
box for just give me some scale
as to what we're looking at
here.
So Mister chair members of the
committee over the years we have
seen the majority of bus drivers
operate without attendance but
it is becoming more and more
important particularly with
cameras on buses as well as
attendance to offer that
supervision I don't have the
percentages but if I may I'd
like to defer to Mister they
held for a very quick
estimation because we don't have
the analytical as when it comes
to those percentages but if I
may just quickly defer to Mister
Vigil yes Mr may help.
Mr bill are you still there able
to.
Sorry I think you are muted by
the my microphone I apologize
for that Mr chairman committee
members and Senator Campos that
basically comes down to IEPs at
every school site R. so I don't
have a night and I apologize I I
just I should have asked you for
that that's a very good question
but basically it and my routes
what they do is they send myself
and my driver for an IP and if
it is that the child needs of an
attendant then they will assign
an attendant to the to that
particular bus route.
So it's not in the ten percent.
Thank you and Senator list of
the hill yeah what is the
current paper attendance on
buses.
Yes that that averages I think
from the minimum wage to ten
dollars an hour and averages it
in different school districts
it's different so I don't have
that.
Particular information but in in
my school district I think it's
ten dollars an hour.
At in all the I'm sorry.
So go ahead if you add another
yeah so I'm sorry Mr so
basically the only pay him for
the hour or hour and a half that
they're in the bus they don't
pay them the rest so if it's a
three hour they pay and thirty
dollars a day.
So Mr Kirk uh Senator.
Is the attendant paid by the
company or the districts
transportation or they paid by
the special education
department.
Mr chair Osterman and ask Mr
health also says that in essence
the resources to come through
path to the district for those
that are being paid by the I. E.
P. R. O. but when it comes to
the actual pay for the driver
and the attendance of those
amounts are adjusted and paid
for by the district and the
rationale for the amendment is
that some districts to pay up to
about fourteen dollars an hour
however one of the big issues is
that they're quite a few of the
drivers in attendance that are
paid below
minimum wage and so and not
minimum wage as for
the seven twenty five for our
but minimum wage in terms of the
amounts that are being paid that
below ten dollars an hour.
And I think what I'm trying to
understand Senator is are the
attendance do they have other
duties as special education
is during the day or are they
only contracted through the bust
Department for time on the bus.
So with that the to the best of
my knowledge there only
contracted
as aids however there are some
that do apply for other
positions to work in the
cafeteria to our help to conduct
other services like a custodial
services so what they do is they
do with that package together
the unfortunate aspect of it is
even at that when it averages
out for the day it doesn't come
to to the amount of the HSA
should be paid so with a lot of
people including myself over the
years when I was doing the
transporting of young people
I would be paid for
an hour two hours in and often
times I would have wait time
that I wasn't compensated for
and within that that could be
eight hours in some cases when I
had overnight trips
there was a lot of weight time
even beyond that that
there was a compensation.
Okay Senator Brandt I think that
you've got some questions or.
Thank you Mr Stewart had to jump
up and shut my door was get loud
in the outer office.
So.
This gentleman I think your last
question about whether or not
the attendance work elsewhere
really depends from district to
district
and it depends on whether to
contract district or third
operating and house and a lot of
districts have actually gone to
operating their bus services in
house and so I think on those
districts you're probably gonna
have several that are working
somewhere else within the school
district for the rest of the day
and so I think it just really
depends
on what district are in I don't
think there's anything in rule
or law although I think for
practicality purposes for most
districts it's hard to hire
someone for three hours a day.
And so they're they're having to
find other rules for them to
fill just to get them to come to
work for.
And if that helps.
And I think that was a little
bit that I was trying to get
that is yeah and I did get a
text message from our analyst at
some of them are employed as
special education the As through
the rest of the day so they're
working with the same kids that
they may be working as
attendance on the buses
which.
Use the budget this as to are
they but the tendons are they
special education the As
and and I suspect that the model
is all over the place Senator is
that accurate order Mr chairman
that's you're you're right on
point and and that's been part
of the big issue because that
school districts struggle to
find bus drivers and and it's
within the school district has
Senator Brandt has pointed out
in dealing directly with an
individual who seeks
qualifications either to be a
driver or intend and then from
there they find that they're not
able to continue with that level
of employment so within the
school district they try to
provide additional work and then
from there when the full package
if you will is a particular the
state today
for some it does work especially
those that will be the attendant
for a particular student for the
entire day however that doesn't
apply across the board and so
the indication is to help our
bus drivers are if you will our
school districts to recruit and
to retain our bus drivers in
attendance all we're saying in
this particular measure is at
least pay the minimum of a
hundred fifty per day for
drivers and a hundred dollars
for day four of the attendance
again the the struggle and the
problem still continues within
our districts as to how we
recruit and retain people in
these positions.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you any other questions on
the amendment of the committee.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos for building
support members of the committee
So salary verses I know that
we're saying take out daily the
salary and insert daily minimum
salaries.
why why was that necessary
under.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course Senator Pinto again
because there are some districts
who have really asked if you
will the recruiting effort and
so in some of those cases the
minimum salary is about if you
will the hundred fifty per day
for a driver.
The unfortunate aspect of it is
the majority of our districts
are not at that level and so the
intent then is to take out if
you will the salaries include or
improve.
And include anymore so that's
the intent of adding anymore so
that the threshold in order for
us to ensure that all bus
drivers are paid a hundred fifty
per day as as a minimum and the
tendons a hundred dollars for
the as the minimum thank you Mr
chair thank Senator Pinto.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
Senator Campos.
Is this.
L..
Compared to the the the minimum
wage increases that we're having
are that are being implemented.
So.
Mr chair and Senator Pinto it's
a very good point because right
now we don't have the
Analytical analysis to indicate
across the board with our
districts.
Exactly how much is being paid
and how much would be needed in
terms of working with the
minimum wage and with that
gradually increases going to be
let's say over the next four or
five years and in terms of that
context
all the data is is not available
and there might be some of the
experts that are in attention to
this bill today that may want to
also add information but again
there definitely is a disparity
in terms of the amount being
paid to bus drivers and
attendants thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I understand the
issues especially for the rural
districts and what we.
We have bus drivers probably all
the way over the mountains is to
drive the bus but I think the
approach of this and the issues
that are ending from our bus
straight is the opportunity for
them to expand their rules and
who actually determines the
duties and
job responsibilities within the
schools when they signed those
contracts.
That we probably need to create
an opportunity where those are
expanded so that they can
increase their
Hey are have that value within
the schools that they can do
something through the whole
eight hours of the day and not
have to jump from one occupation
to another and say oh well we're
gonna pay you to do this and and
the site able to do something
else and in one of my.
Many administrative.
One of the administrators I
worked under.
He was actually less stripper
to.
He took on that role but I think
there was some lack of training
there that because.
Some issue there but I also
think there also needs to be a
study are a oversight of the
supervision for bus drivers
especially when you have a
blessed with sixty kids and I
think that's why we do try to
levy eight that are decrease the
liability part for having
attended on the bus.
Which but it causes ****.
So there are several things they
think that especially trying to
manage kids in the different
ages
that it is an issue we're going
to see it your little
differently to because of the
pandemic and the schools being
shut down and how we're trying
to all the schools harmless but
yet our kids are being a little
more harm than that
In include you know in some
sense I wish we could.
The kids harmless of what's
happening now.
I don't know if we'll be able to
fully recover in the rural areas
as far as having a bus drivers
or those occupations
Kids I think they're gonna have
to be expanded thank you senator
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you we are on the
amendment I don't see other
hands up if would someone like
to make a motion on the
amendment.
The amendment for approval.
A motion for it I presume that
that you pass on the amendment
Senator.
Yes Sir.
Thank you we have a motion for a
do pass on the amendment from
Santo but is there a second.
Thank you Mr chair thank you bye
Senator pope may I ask you
please call the roll on the
amendment.
Your branch no ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Neville yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pulp.
Yes.
Back to Senator Pinto.
Yes.
And center sucks excuse me
senator souls.
Yes.
Campos you have a to pass on the
amendment we are now back on the
main bill.
I don't think we have gone out
is there anything else of.
Senator Campos on the field we
go out to the the public.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate Education
Committee yes there is on
October the fourteenth twenty
nineteen.
The first initial District Court
issued a final judgment and
order on the consolidated
Martinez versus New Mexico
announced aggressive New Mexico
education sufficiency lawsuit in
essence the indication there of
course there seems to be lack of
sufficiency and resources
necessary who are here for at
risk students and that students
are more minority populations
and again the issue becomes how
are we going to adequately
supervised Sir Senator
interviews indicated
continue to provide if you will
the necessary adjustments and
education sure that every child
not only receives that education
but is allowed to.
And said they would be
transported
from their bus stops from there
regions it will grant to their
on to that particular schools of
education thank you Mr chair.
Mark hello if you would please
take us through public input.
Absolutely.
First we'll be hearing from Mr
Mathew call Mr Paul go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee we appreciate the the
Sanchez intent that this bill
and they bring a compelling case
forward for paying school bus
drivers more what we're
concerned about is where the
funding will come from to pay
for this in looking at the FIR I
think there is that there isn't
a lot of great data on how much
we're paying for school bus
drivers in the fact that some
school districts and charter
schools already receive less
money than they need to find
their transportation services
concerns us not knowing that the
sponsor is is on the Senate
finance committee and has been
for some time maybe there's a
plan for that we're hoping
that's part of this discussion
today so thank you.
Thank you Mr Paul are there any
other members of the public that
wish to speak in opposition of
Senate bill three of seven.
Mr balls on ice your hand up did
you want to speak in opposition.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee on transposon on
the register lobbyist Alaska's
public schools intervention
public schools we share the same
concerns that my colleague Matt
Paul shared previously on just
to get an idea on numbers
at this moment we Rio Rancho
Public School sticks about one
point two with one point seven
million dollars out of the
Parisian all to cover the
shortfall in transportation and
that's a lot of money right so I
know there is a lot of pieces of
legislation out there on the
other chamber as well the simple
recessions happen about hold
harmless but again joining what
my colleague Matt Paul said
perhaps I don't know if Senator
Campos being a member Senate
finance committee they already
negotiations of of something
happening there where would take
care of that gap in New sure we
want out of a drivers to get
paid more money and get paid for
what the great work that they
do.
It is something that they can
consideration especially right
now during this pandemic times
on with the school districts
having a bill that doesn't
happen appropriation touch to it
thank you so much Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr rose on are there
any other members of the public
that wish to speak in opposition
for Senate bill three oh seven.
Please raise your hand at this
time.
Okay miss heather Bassett I see
you there with your hand up go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thanks to the
sponsor and I'm heather Bassett
from Albuquerque public schools
and we appreciate our customers
of course and unfortunately have
to voice opposition to this bill
we do compensate on hourly not a
daily rate and the daily rate
may have the effect of reducing
the hourly rate for our
customers who seek and want part
time employment so this
legislation will definitely
affect our operations and our
process and on the principle
local control and I'll keep
public schools must propose.
Thank you heather are there any
other members of the public that
wish to speak in opposition.
Again these are statements of
opposition for Senate bill three
of seven Mr Stan rounds go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we respect the
sponsoring this is an incredibly
important issue we're bringing
forward but to frame it to we
need to know the data which we
can't seem to find in any of our
analytics that are there well we
do not have a common
appropriation for this and for
those reasons we simply had
camped go to budget or go to
support with this particular
matter we've asked the committee
to continue the research on this
we need to resolve the issue the
minimum wage question let me
just find that for a minute if
bus drivers were to receive the.
Posed the eventually proposed
fifteen dollars per hour they
would have to drive ten hours a
day for a hundred fifty dollar
day right and so I think we need
to consider how those
calculations go final comment Mr
chairman members the committee
the locally we need to make
those decisions especially for
the for those for the aids on
the bus many of them are Sir
rather services and I think we
need to refine our process so
that we can indeed figure out
how to get where we need to be
please don't hear that this
minimizes those individuals this
is not meant to do that but I
think this requires further
study thank you all.
Thank you Mr rounds will not go
to Mr joke you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Jogi in with the
New Mexico school boards
association.
We support the intent of this
bill school bus drivers are
amongst those of and school
employees are paid the least in
our school districts and they do
provide an important service
however this bill is in conflict
with two of our guiding
principles one is the local
decision making in terms of
salaries and those kinds of
things and second at this point
it appears to be an unfunded
mandate so without the
additional funds that we we need
to implement this it would be
impossible to to support the the
bill in its entirety
I do think there are other
questions as well in terms of
gross receipts in gross receipts
taxes the the daily rate weather
than the hourly rate and what
else what employees can do if
they're if they've already paid
been paid a daily rate and and
do other services so I think all
these need to be worked out I
would the compliment the senator
and hope that he would use his
influence and and the Senate
finance committee to possibly
come up with an appropriation in
a dollar amount for this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr yes there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition.
Thank you very much we will now
move on to statements of
support.
We will be hearing from.
Ms Elizabeth and she now never
mind she was on the previous one
Mr John Dreyer's go ahead.
Thank you I chairman and members
of the committee my name is John
direction with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and we are here to
support Senate bill three of
seven and it's amendment and
this bill does a couple
important things and I I wanted
to kind of drop parallel to the
work that the legislature has
done to raise minimum salaries
for educational assistance over
the year and we kind of you this
bill in the same way and I think
instead of looking at this as an
issue of potentially impacting
current salaries this really
raises all boats and that effort
is really critical I think the
other part of this bill that is
really critical it is in that
amendment and and inclusion of
attendance so often we find that
buses may not be adequately
staffed with the attendance for
students who need them so we see
this as a way for promoting
longevity of employment by
educators working in
transportation field and workers
in our school districts really
need to know that they're gonna
have a consistent tolerant that
they're going to have that
consistent employment and we
feel that this bill contemplates
those those two really important
question so we do thank the
senator for bring it we think
for the amendment and we do urge
consideration of support for
this measure thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to make comments in support of
Senate bill three of seven
please raise your hand at this
time put the camera on with
their camera and I'll try to
catch you.
And that concludes all of our
public statements for Senate
bill three oh seven thank you.
Thank you mark tell it's always
nice when you move us to that so
smoothly Senator before we go to
questions in the committee I
would like to go back to the
sponsored see if you have any
short remarks based on my the
public input.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much members of
the committee and to all those
that spoke to express those
concerns and this is one of the
primary reasons for this
particular measure because as we
go forward what we do that E. R.
unfunded mandates in education
and that's the rationale as we
move forward.
The other issue is how are we
going to be funding issues
dealing directly with education
and so as we do move forward
there are quite a few measures
that would work to support if
you will more resources going
into education but that may take
longer than a couple years down
the road so going back to the
assessment and how we can move
forward
Yes if you will the Senate
finance committee.
I would anticipate in this is
going to be part of the role
that I've been working to
ascertain and that is the bigger
picture.
To deal directly with the issues
that are affecting New Mexico
for all of our students and.
Even though are we want to
ensure that there is local
economy and being part of a
education as an administrator is
not risk instructors a counselor
in one of the things that I did
find over the twenty seven and a
half years for being there is
that we perform multitude of
tasks everything is indicated
from driving of us and I did
that many times without the
tendons.
To taking care of our children
when it comes to athletics to
focus on academic record to
ensure that as we move forward
we're seeing and addressing all
the issues sorry I'm people have
placement not only in
postsecondary institutions but
if they chose the world work if
they were able to do so.
The unfortunate aspect in all of
this this very.
So the intent of this measure is
to bring to light that we do
laugh lot of the evidence based
data analytics the other part of
it is as we all come together
and I really applaud people like
Senator Padilla who worked to
holistically bring us together
when it comes to some of the
issues that are directly
affecting us today and part of
that is the full communication
spectrum for our children.
We have significant issues and
closing Mr chair members of the
Senate Education Committee I
leave you with this.
This.
Part of our lives truly is
changing and it's changing very
quickly I would hope to be one
of the individuals to join with
the individuals who spoke today
both the opponents and
proponents.
To move forward to try to find
not only the fiscal
accountability and the re.
Used to.
Assist our school districts
throughout the state.
More importantly to have a long
term plan in terms of how we're
gonna be moving from last in a
lot of the good areas to first
as we move forward those areas
and we can only do that by
working together and that's part
of the purpose of this bill that
is brought before you today
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much members of the Senate
Education Committee thank you
for allowing me an opportunity
to offer comments after public.
Thank you senator comments or
questions from the committee as
senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman
First off the Mister chairman
Senator does the.
There's a school bus driver have
to have a CDL license.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much Seneal yes
it's a CDL class B. license and
if I could I just briefly like
to defer to Mister Vigil to
express again
the training and privative that
that they go back to that place.
And senator I think we have that
removed earlier presentations
thank you for are you yes the
answer is yes it's a CDL class
B. and then every two years we
need to ensure that we do have
our physicals that are are kept
up to date thank you understand
that I just wanted to point that
out my daughter in law was of
school Leicestershire's also
drove oil field trucks for well
she's she her dad was a in the
business so she grew up heard
some pretty big machines on the
road to.
I knew she had to have a CDL
license to drive the school bus
there for a period of time which
is in nursing school
My one way ride on the school
bus when I was a kid was about
thirty five miles most of you
know secretary witty he was one
of our neighbors Secretary witty
was closer to fifty miles one
way mostly dirt roads and the
bus driver when they got to
Moriarity screen basically had
to kill the state as too far to
go back home and so that's why I
was in favor of the amendment
but a minimum and there I know
that doesn't apply to most of
the school bus drivers out there
most of the drive around town
pick a few kids but they still
have to have the requirements of
the CDL licensing the
requirements of the training and
and all of things like that so I
felt that a minimum was
reasonable a CDL driver.
Can the and far far more than a
hundred fifty dollars a day if
they're driving a.
The heavy duty truck of some
kind somewhere else
so I felt that that was a
reasonable.
Number to put out there and I
think that
My experiences with my first
school bus driver that was an
old panel wagon that to refer
down on the side and bounced
down the spare tire rolling up
and down the aisle was a was a
far cry from what what's would
be allowed nowadays would come
along ways but we've come a long
ways because we know safety is
important and training is
important and we would require
the CDO we require as you
mentioned physicals and all
kinds of other standards of
these guys have to do that so
kinda like what we're house
require of a all kinds of
professionals and minimum is
reasonable I support the bill I
I'm not sure it's balanced so it
out of the
when we have the people who
drive for an hour a day versus
people who drive for four hours
a day but I think that to we
need to do something to try to
make this a more reasonable
situation because I'm schools
have trouble filling these
positions with that alternate
you know back to you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
thought the server built gonna
talk about going back with a
wagon or something there for a
minute.
On the.
I still have a good school.
Yeah I remember the stories my
dad would tell about the all for
the kids get on the back of a
horse riding to school everyday
of course was up hill both ways
Mr chairman but Mister chairman
Senator I do have a few
questions for you
one is well Mister you brought
this bill I believe that was it
two years ago was it just last
year Mr chair I believe it was
last year I have had versions of
something similar over the
years.
Mr chairman Senator
did you ask LFC which is the
legislative education study
committee for those who are new
did you ask them to look at this
Issue and and study it.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator Brandon the
course with the LFC and other
groups particularly that and
hello FC
I have not directed them either
through memorial
if you will pass or through a
bill to to look at of the
analytics and again that's and
one of the areas that it's been
a weakness in my opinion in our
system because there are so many
short you need to address but
I've been told over the years
and this is part of the
employment times I then Morial's
to ask for the these types of
studies and other times I
haven't been in this case I have
not.
Mr Chairman have you gone to
anyone on the L. E. S. C.
and asked that it be put on the
schedule because you don't have
to run a memorial for the LFC to
get on their schedule.
Mr chair Senator Brandt you're
correct no not gone directly to
them to address the analytics in
my opinion as I go forward I
need the evidence based
information and the R. F. R.
that we have with this bill not
does give you that reference and
the.
The evidence fees to take.
Mister chairman Senator I've got
to give our pulled up here and I
will tell you it is so broad
that I don't think you can take
any information from.
They that religious know.
It looks like they have no idea.
What it would actually cost is
that the way you see that FIR
survivals thank you very much Mr
chairman Senator Brandt that's
exactly the point I'm getting
to an over the year is going way
back in I believe senator
Neville is one that's what we
call as I work dissertation part
of the way that I bring forth
concepts is not just to talk
about it but to our create if
you will the opportunity to
provide the evidence and with
this FIR it does show me that
we're making we do not have of
appropriate to data and data and
data analytics in order to deal
with this and many other issues
that are relevant to education
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator Mr chairman
for sheet that I guess I'm just
confused because you brought
this bill so many years
that now you're saying we need
to study it so it's it's
confusing me
as to why now all the sudden we
need to study it we didn't need
to the last four five six years
that you've been bringing this
bill so that's confusing to me
and you're asking us to put
something in law.
that we haven't got the
information to put in law.
And I'm pretty sure two years
ago when you brought this bill
you said we need to study it
and so I'm confused.
So Mister chairman Senator
Brandt if I may.
The point of getting to is that
in that would bring the
legislation to the forefront.
We see and there is a prime
example not only with testimony
but with evidence evidence based
pieces.
What we need to do to go
forward.
Within that that also gives the
analytics to those analysts and
departments to address issues
that.
Propped or.
What I'm indicating now is that
through this process.
We brought or I brought a
similar measure.
Before the Senate Education
Committee and within that.
To the state we haven't had the
full analytics are provided.
What I'm indicating is now is an
opportune time for us because if
you will of the consolidated
claims that have been made
through Martinez Yazzie Ozzie
Martinez so that we can not only
analyze this forward and has
been that is been brought
forward as well by the testimony
that in moving forward
we need to see what the
probation with the what the
issues are that we can address
but that's what I would use this
measure for.
But again in no way was I
indicating but now it's time to
study it the time has passed but
we do need to study.
Thank you Mr chairman center I'm
now completely confused so I
appreciate that maybe it's just
me not tracking well with what
you're trying to to get across
are you wanting us to actually
pass this bill as an unfunded
mandate to our schools or are
you wanting us to make sure it's
on LFC schedule next year to
study.
So Mr chair Senator Brandt.
First of all I would hope that
the bill would pass secondly in
terms of talking about an
unfunded mandate.
Within the resources that go to
the SCG both to the counselor
here if you will the lower line
costs for education I would hope
that
the school districts because
we're not taking away if you
will on their economy but the
indication is here what this
would cost here are the minimums
we would hope that would happen
so that's the purpose of the
bill so I hope the bill would
pass at the same time Mister
chairman Senator Brandt because
of your input and what you
brought four I would really like
to take this step into L. E. S.
C. to have this as an issue that
would.
The study during the intra.
But you.
Quests and hope the bill would
pass secondly I would hopefully
a season would undertake this as
part of the full picture in
terms of how we're going to deal
with transportation for our
students.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
Center I appreciate that however
operational fund shouldn't have
to be used to provide
transportation those are
separate funds it's actually the
state's responsibility to
provide transportation dollars
not the districts and my
districts already spending over
million dollars a year out of
their operational basically out
of their classrooms because the
state hasn't been funding it and
now you're asking us to increase
the cost.
To my district without providing
any resources to do that which
means more money will come out
of the classroom.
To pay for to and from
transportation.
I I do think it's an issue and I
agree with you two years ago and
I was really actually surprised
that it hadn't been brought to
the LFC to look at because I
thought that's what we're gonna
do two years ago but the request
number K.
and so I'm confused about why we
want to put this on the backs of
our districts without providing
funding for districts to do it I
absolutely understand your
desire to Health bus drivers
paid.
A decent wage and I think it
Daly right might be the right
way to go for some the problem
with putting in law though is we
actually do have some drivers
the only want to do it part time
and so you know if you have a
driver the only wants to work
for five hours a day you're
gonna lose some drivers by
saying you have to have a
minimum because I guarantee you
if the district has to pay a
hundred fifty dollars a day for
their drivers those drivers are
working an eight hour shift.
They may not be driving an eight
hour shift but they're gonna be
working an eight hour shift
there is going to be clean and
the buses doing maintenance on
the buses are working within the
school somewhere they're gonna
be working in our shift we're
gonna pay in that which is
eighteen seventy five an hour
which as senator Neville said
they have a CDL they can make a
lot more that we lose a lot of
drivers to go by Dr buses for
Albuquerque you know for their
city buses because they pay
better and it's full time so I I
get the issue I just don't
understand why we want to do
another unfunded mandate to our
districts
when we have no idea what it's
going to cost and we're already
asking districts take money out
of their educational budget to
provide to and from its
transportation said that goes
with our attendance no most of
the attendants are at least in
my district maybe not yours I
don't know most of the
attendance that are on the buses
do work within the school
district and that's part of
their sign so there are paid
mostly their full time
employees.
I don't know what exactly their
rate
I don't know the you know the
dollar amount that they're paid
for our but it's probably about
the same as the astute.
And so I don't think there's as
big of an issue on attendance as
there is the drivers it's
something I told you two years
ago it's something we need to
look at but then we never asked
for it to be looked at and so I
cannot support an unfunded
mandate I will not support
unfunded mandates our districts
I I asked that that you request
that L. E. S. C. or the finance
committee which you serve on
actually does a study to find
out what the cost would be not
just for this book for
transportation because we
haven't and funding it fully and
it is the state's responsibility
not the districts thank you Mr
chairman person.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator and I think Senator
Brandt covered quite a bit of
what I'm.
Considering just just for those
that don't understand in the
analysis it talks about how
funding for transportation falls
under categorical it's not part
of the SCG it's not part of the
love the money it's a separate
line that kind of in the middle
and basically there are three
formulas that are used to
distribute funds for
transportation depending on the
type of school you are charter
school.
And.
There's never enough money in
that line item I do that I think
that's where you need to start
we need to make sure that that
line item is funded at the level
that it needs to be.
I want to follow up on how
districts do transportation some
of them contract with best
companies other still within the
district and so that makes it
really difficult I know in my
district because that contract
it's never quite enough money in
either the contractor leases out
are the district has to use
operating dollars for so it's an
issue that definitely needs to
be studied and I certainly agree
that we have to be very careful
about adding unfunded mandates
to our districts at this point
we really need to consider all
the things that we're required
to do that to the lawsuit to
make sure this dollars get to
the classroom and that's where
we can make the difference I
support paying bus drivers what.
That's how we that is that is
commensurate with the work that
they did and so I'm not opposed
to taking a look at what we're
paying that we certainly want to
be very careful going forward
about putting this on the backs
of our districts at this time so
that's it thank you very much.
Thank you any other members of
the committee.
But I have a couple of questions
and and comments that also I
don't see other hands going up.
So.
What what number of districts
contractor bus services as
opposed to doing it in house.
Mr chairman I I don't have that
number possibly Mr Vigil would
have that number as he deals
with the
public schools charter schools
and some of the contracted
routes if I can just defer to a
ill there though or is the head
of transportation director with
us.
Mr chairman and Center couples
there's there's right now about
eight hundred contractors eight
hundred buses so individually I
don't have a specific number two
to reach district but there's
contractors that have more than
two buses or two buses and then
there's contractors that have
like Albuquerque and Las Cruces
that have a hundred fifty in
more buses that are contractors.
So that they're still
contractors out there but
they're they're they're also
becoming dangerous species
they're they're leaving the in.
Senator some of the analysis
that we have indicates that
because of
costs and other things that this
would cost between eighty four
million and a hundred eleven
million dollars in order to
implement and yet there's no.
no money attached to it.
Mmhm you indicated that money is
you would expect to come out of
the SCG that that districts
would.
Where would the money come from.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of what I've indicated is
through the school budgets are
and as we take the SCG we know
that that level that really
doesn't take care of all of our
needs and education when we get
into the categorical so we deal
with transportation that doesn't
take care of the needs of
transportation when we go to our
cash balances at times school
districts have to use some of
those resources to make it
through the school year so what
I'm indicating as that there are
quite a few unfunded mandates in
education in terms of the
resources and it goes back to
the ambiguity of the amount that
would be needed we do not have
the data analytics it gives us
not within range but pointedly
how much is actually needed when
it comes to our transportation
so the point I'm making is.
We need to raise the minimum or
have the minimum rates for our
our bus drivers in attendance
the purpose of this bill the
other issues are are are quite a
few that really need to be
addressed not only by Eliott C.
that also by the LFC and by our
finance committees.
Thank you senator and yeah
whether of their numbers are
accurate I mean I've found
several FIR on that are grossly
inaccurate we often think of
them as coming down from on high
and you're not to be challenged
but they they're written by
people that have some cases
limited information again this
one indicates eighty four
million hundred ten million even
if it was twenty million there's
no appropriation.
With that you know and so.
You agree it would be
irresponsible of us to pass a
bill that would have even a
twenty million dollar fiscal
impact with the expectation that
the districts would have to come
up with that out of the SCG so
Mister chairman members of the
Senate Education Committee to
each and everyone of you when it
does come to the unfunded
mandate I feel the same way
however whenever we start
talking about minimum wage in
terms of what we're going to be
paying bus drivers in attendance
of the issue does need to be
raised and now as we deal with
this through the analysis are
there are going to be those
ranges that are brought forward
so I I continue to go and feel
the same way that you all do but
in order to bring forth the
enormity of the issue.
I could offer an amendment
indicate
we're gonna look for twenty
million dollars just like with
the dams and I'm not trying to
make any comparison of where we
need to three at two hundred
fifty million again the point
that I'm getting to is that it's
a serious issue and it needs to
be addressed and by raising or
if you will having a minimum on
the salary a two drivers and two
attendance this is one measure
and one way to try to go ahead
and do that.
And senator I think you're
you're correct I haven't heard
anybody indicate that they they
think that we should be paying
drivers less or or anything of
that sort the driver certainly
are valuable but yeah we got a
bill in front of us
for the districts that contract.
Are we in the state of New
Mexico are we able to mandate a
private company on how much they
pay.
So Mr chair and and it and to
our the question.
In the past we've done and and
it's the local economy because
they do enter into those
contracts no we do not mandate
so what they're going to be
paying their bus drivers and in
the real person that deals
directly with that has for for
many years as Mr Helpmann I
don't know if you'd like to just
here with we from him
how they handle those contracts.
With the help.
Yes so that's where we go into
negotiations with the
transportation director and
superintendent.
If you mandate that so the money
would come from the districts so
we would we would ask for that
money from the district to pay
our our local drivers yes that
our employees so as long as the
district but that in our.
In our contract for mandated to
put whatever they put in the
contract to pay our employees.
Okay so if I understand the
state wouldn't be mandating.
The private contractor but the
state would essentially be
mandating to the district that
you cannot enter into a contract
for private services that
doesn't require this my
understanding that correctly.
Right so so the state within the
money to the school district to
school district with ten down
with the contractors in making
sure the salary we get there
I'll give an example this this
past two years our school
districts as you're you're
you're gonna pay your driver's
seventeen eighteen dollars an
hour so the school district put
the money into our contract we
prepare drivers that for the
amount of hours it would drive.
The same amount of what the
school district drivers were
getting a contractors drivers
were day.
Okay does the state also mandate
of the fringe benefits I mean we
have somewhere around thirty
eight percent or public school
employees in the contract are
there then they mandated fringe
benefits and other things of the
contracted bus drivers.
And the often districts
contracted bus driver with
companies because it reduces
their cost those companies often
are able to reduce costs because
they pay less or they have lower
budget are we going to be
mandating in those contracts the
fringe benefits that a district
employee would be getting.
Not necessarily act I don't get
fringe benefits from the school
the only thing that I get is
there so security and their work
best cop in Medicaid that's the
only two things I get from my
district when I do my contract.
I don't get health insurance.
But those still approved
benefits that are being played
paid by the district yes Sir yes
Mr Chairman I'm sorry and and
again you know I'm certainly not
a lawyer but if we moved to a
minimum daily rate which is more
of a salary rather than hourly
typically if your lease my
experience while starts coming
in that this is a salaried
employee that has a right to
health insurance health care I
know there couple of bills that
are moving through to require
health care for hourly employees
in the state of New Mexico with
this fall under those same
requirements.
Mr Mr healthy.
No I I I would have to and I'll
be honest to you refer back to
my to add journey on that I
don't I don't have the answer so
I don't I don't want to say
publicly but I don't I
understand I'm not asking you to
speculate ordered to make
happening up certainly yes I
think these are important
questions as we move forward on
all of this that yeah that need
to be answered I mean it
sometimes legislation thing
simple of just pay the the bus
drivers under fifty dollars a
day but it's not so simple I
think there are lots of other
things that come up with that
look at see it there I don't see
any other hands up that at this
point Center if you'd like to.
They quit closing or will that
be with the request of the
committee of.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of the Senate Education
Committee
Press discussion can just go on
and on but I I don't want to
relate to the issues so that's
all I have at this time again I
just really respect the time of
the committee and as you can
tell there's quite a bit of
information that still needs to
be gathered and that more issues
that need to be addressed when
it comes to compensation or bus
drivers and for tenants thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members and Senator cation.
Thank you and and senator I have
already while we're talking text
that they deal with that we just
see that this is on our list of
things and and transportation
general because as interbrand
indicated and use district my
district some others seem to be
perpetually under water on
transportation where other
districts not we still haven't
completely figured out why or
what's going on and so it will
be a discussion that will have
the interim with LAFC.
I would raise eight.
Mr chairman I move to table.
We have a motion to table that's
not debatable table by Senator
Brandt Marianna if you will call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey no.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville.
vote no would like to explain
member.
Senator Padilla no.
Senator Pinto.
Ask.
Senator pope
And back to Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator souls.
Yes.
Have but.
The ability like to explain your
vote but we still don't have a
the mobile both by the the
committee that if you explain
our after we we try a secondary.
I'll wait to revoke later.
Thank you.
The table was not.
Ask
the committee please.
Would you pass please.
Have a motion for a new path
Senator Hickey thank you.
By Senator Padilla.
The end of your call the roll
please.
Brandt.
No Senator Hickey.
Yes explain.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville.
Yes actually member.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Sanders Sauls so.
It looks as though we have a tie
with the poor for we have one
more option team right right.
I make a motion for a direct.
Thank you bye Center for the
yes.
You probably have a memorized by
now if you'll call the roll
again.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan no.
Senator Neville.
Yes explain.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes and I like to explain.
Senator souls yes I think we
have an overactive Senator and
senator Neville these two
flights.
Mr chairman it in its current
form I probably wouldn't vote
for it on the floor of I would
hope that the senator would go
forth and try to modify it
hundred fifty flat rate doesn't
appeal to me I think it needs to
be somehow a very
But I also know that of school
bus drivers I've got like I said
I've got a daughter in law that
did it for a while I rode buses
a lot I think there needs to be
something done here and I'd like
to see some progress in the in
the in getting this resolved
I don't know exactly how it
needs to be maybe a higher
minimum wage for a for our for
drivers so that it's it's a
hundred and fifty percent and
fifty for others or whatever I
don't know what the number
should be but I would like the
Senator to work on it modify the
formulas
before you gets it all over the
floor but to I didn't want to
stop at this point just because
I think it's something that
needs to be result that's it Mr
chair thank you.
Thank you and I think Senator
hope that you know what to
explain.
I guess Mr chair some of the
same concerns I still think more
work needs to be done on this
bill we definitely need to
address the bus drivers in the
attendance but just the concerns
on how we're going to pay for it
we ran into this on on a
previous bill and I just don't
want to stop this from we for
but I just hope that more work
is done before this is the floor
thank you Mr thank you anyone
else you wanted to explain the
vote.
Yes Mr chair Senator Hickey
please thank you Sir.
The budget just like to bring a
little bit different perspective
to it and and why I am voting
yes on this and I agree there
are pieces that need to be
looked at but back in the day of
Medicaid we originally I go back
to the centennial care one and
one of the things that we were
not covering less transportation
and so many people that.
Sign up be able to get the
benefits of of Medicaid
this also is is kind of like.
Remote learning if we don't have
the broadband there the kids
can't learn and you know the the
school buses such being able to
get to the the kids to school
and we are going to do that is
so fundamental that it's it's
kind of one of the basics that
we have to it's almost like in
Basil's hierarchy is like Jareth
if you can't get there you know.
And I think we need to study
this and given the appropriate
priority and thank you for
allowing me Mr chair to explain
more about thank you Senator
Campos serving this fall thank.
Thank you Senator you do one.
With with kind of a Pat on the
back but not necessarily in the
doors of thank you Sir Mr
chairman and Education Committee
thank you all very much for your
time today to care.
Thank you we have about twenty
or twenty five minutes Center
for the if you think you're able
to do your bill on the dropout
prevention program in that hi
and records Mr chairman number
of yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman is so I I
bring this bill Senate bill
three thirty which is a dropout
prevention initiative that has
gone very well around the state
for a couple of years now I've
seen in my own district I know
that there were there is a
funding request here for two
hundred thousand dollars it will
continue to expand the program
and the programming we do have
I'm gonna explain the bill here
just a moment but with your
permission Mr Chairman I'm gonna
introduce to individuals that
there may be a third I apologize
if there is a we'll hear about
that here just a moment Cape
cobalt who is one of the expert
witnesses today she is one of
the
experts I have here today that's
directly involved in the program
Christine Moore is also with us
and she is is one of the other
folks that this administer this
program over the years since
it's been part of of of New
Mexico public schools and I
think that may be at but I'll
let the experts introduce anyone
else that they may have with
them Mr Chairman but just just
to give you some insight into
the the piece of legislation but
essentially it it does make it
two hundred thousand dollar
corporation to PED for for
dropout prevention programming
it provides specific criteria
dropout prevention programs that
that will include three specific
items one is to serve at risk
underserved and disadvantaged
populations identified through
an early warning system and I'll
talk about the early warning
system here just a moment the
second item that's required in
the in the programming is the
use of a trauma informed
approach much like the
And H. eight work Mr chairman
you been doing for so many years
that I've been more than happy
and proud to support you on and
help move forward the third item
that it requires to provide at
least one year follow up so
we're not just here here it is
you got it goodbye and good luck
but also you know follow up with
these individuals in the
students just to make sure that
there are remaining on the on
the path that they need to be on
it does include the periodic
request requirement periodic
reporting back to the PED
obviously because they're the
ones that would would would
grant the dollars to make the
work possible and then that will
reporting would make its way
back to the L. E. S. C. and into
either continue growing the
program or make it better what
have you that there is a that
the requirement of the
development of an early warning
system and I'm gonna ask the
experts to say I think of a lot
more about that Mr Chairman
because I would I'm sure we get
it wrong but I will tell you
that our graduation rates
You know that they've been sort
of all over the place and in
this particular programming
which I've seen at Rio Grande
High School in my district and
Senator Lopez Linda locus is
district and and a few others
It's really made a huge impact I
I I'm very active with your Mr
chairman members of this
committee with all high schools
in my district and and I do get
to meet a lot of the students
that are potentially you know
drop out that candidates and and
it's amazing to see them after
when when they get to the other
side of this this programming
and how wonderful it's gone for
them and how you know they're
just so proud of what they're
doing their families are fully
engaged in the in the they see
you know the wonderful future
for these these young young
people as they become young
adults so that's a that's my
introduction I'm gonna ask a
Kaypro what Mr chairman to say a
few words before we jump in any
public comments or questions I
just wanna remind senator we
have about twenty minutes yes
and so you all of that if we
don't get to it we will be
stopping at that point so if
people that short and I don't
know how many there are in the
public as well as comments and
questions from the committee so
you.
And I will ask the state and in
Christine to please limit their
comments to one to two minutes
please thank you.
Did CTE program right.
Please good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee and
Senator Padilla thank you for
the opportunity to speak to you
today my name is capable and
I've served as the state
director Jack a jobs for
America's graduates for thirteen
years for those of you who are
not familiar with Jack our
program is to school re
engagement strategy with a long
track record of results in New
Mexico and throughout the nation
we help students and at greatest
risk of dropping out to show up
reconnect and graduate from high
school ready for college career
and life and I come to you today
to talk about the critical need
for dropout prevention efforts
such as a gag in our state high
schools and to share our model
for helping students to reach
the finish line I'm I I was
going to talk a little bit but
as you know only seventy four
percent of New Mexico where
students graduate from high
school we know what they lag
behind
the state is trying to address
and find.
Equal opportunities for
economically disadvantaged
students and students of color
and jag does that I think that
jag
there many complex reasons why
students don't graduate and
there are many proposed
solutions to our to improve our
state's graduation rates and so
I think Jack is there is a
solution that is worthy of
consideration because we get
results we use of early warning
system to identify students most
at in need of the program we
serve students of color low
income students and underserved
student populations so I'm going
to go ahead and
Well I do want to say that is
that is an evidence based
approach and if we can identify
students at greater greatest
risk of dropping out early in
high school that we can
intervene to provide them with
comprehensive academic social
emotional support and we can get
them back on track to graduation
so with that said Jackie is an
intervention targeted at forty
five to sixty students and I'm
going to go ahead and ask
Christine more to share her it
experience with students at the
jag specialists.
Mr chair members of the
committee and senator Patty up
thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak to you
today I'm Christine more and
I've been the judge specialist
at Rio Grande High School in
Albuquerque's south valley for
eleven years you'll hear some
statistics but I have an
important one for you every year
approximately sixty five percent
of my students are first
generation graduates so they
have a little tradition of high
school graduation this year I
have a student who came to my
Google classroom five minutes
early every day so we could
discuss music which was his
passion and then he disappeared
for several weeks I called and
emailed and got nowhere with mom
who didn't see the problem but
then he returned and he told me
he was back because he missed
Jack and our connection in class
it was his motivation so he
began attending all of his
classes again and that's the
true value of jag it's student
success and now Jack students
were told by parents and friends
and even other educators that
they should settle are now
graduating from universities and
colleges and working for state
organizations in the medical
field in the solar in tech
industry we are passionate about
these young adults finding their
passion in life with the help of
the Jack model and other similar
programs so thank you so much
for the opportunity to share
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Christine and Kate and
Mr Chairman will go in whatever
direction you like to I know we
still have about maybe thirteen
or so minutes.
Senator so that your your expert
testimony thank yes they will go
how not Holly mark hello would
you take issue public comment.
Absolutely.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition of Senate bill three
three zero.
Mr Burciaga on I see with your
hand raised assist in
opposition.
Negative.
Okay is there anyone else who
would like to speak in
opposition of Senate bill three
three zero.
Okay moving on.
We will hear from Mr Chad Smith
Mister Smith are you available.
And it doesn't appear so are we
will now return to our re ray
Garcia I apologize if I
mispronounce turning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak
today my name is Valerie right
Garcia and I am chair of the
jobs for America's graduates of
New Mexico board of directors.
I'm also the owner of a public
relations firm and I work with
the employers and businesses all
across the state who are very
concerned about workforce
readiness
I'm especially with our kids who
are just getting out of high
school and that's actually how I
was introduced to Jack with some
clients who saw the value in
this program and really wanted
to engage with the students and
show them careerpathways.
when I first met some of the
students that have gone through
the jet program I was completely
impressed by the confidence
employees that they show
They're just amazing students
and it's was just evident to me
from the beginning of how
important Jack is in their life.
I'm also a graduate of Rio
Grande High School
and I would just school with a
lot of kids who didn't have the
opportunities that Jack affords
them and I can't help but think
how their lives would be
different if they had a program
like Jack back when we were in
high school.
Jack has proven results I'm.
Read our our graduation rates
for the last several years are
around ninety five percent in
our programs some programs are a
hundred percent you know on our
program it on duty Pueblo week
for the last several years we've
seen students graduate at a
hundred percent which I just
think it's remarkable and I
think we really need to look at
this thirty seconds these kinds
of programs as a state as we
deal with the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and how we serve the
students who do need some extra
help.
And so I would just ask that you
support at this legislation it
would help our organization grow
to more schools around the state
and to serve more students and
so just make a better future for
our state in general so thank
you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from eight
Delgado.
Eight are you available last
name Delgado.
I don't think she was able to
join us right now okay okay
thank you very much miss merry
par Sanchez are you available.
One more time is merry par
Sanchez.
Moving on Stephen this agency
Clinton and Mr chairman if I
could just mention so very par
Sanchez is the state president
of the NEA.
Skip just want to make mention
of it thank you she support.
Thank you senator.
I'm David later are you
available yes I am.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is David
lay some I'm the director of
career and technical education
for Rio Rancho public schools.
Thank you for let me speak in
support of us and build three
thirty I was.
Excuse me I was principle of
independence high school in Rio
Rancho
the alternative high school for
four years I.
That's where I first saw Jackie
come in and I've seen the
benefits of Jack first hand.
Jags jobs for America's
graduates a proven model if they
did a great job with our
students at independence high
school and I am support cream in
support of this bill three
thirty Senate bill three thirty
I think you'd be a great thing
to support our students at risk.
And thank you for letting me us
in this private support this
bill.
Thank you Mr leader.
We wanna hear from Carla Krueger
this quicker you available I am
thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Carla
cooler I am the president of
associated builders and
contractors we stand in support
of this legislation and we think
Senator Padilla for bringing
this forward ABC has one of the
largest multi trade
apprenticeship programs the
state and we've been working
with drop out prevention
programs and Jack for years
we've seen first hand the
dramatic difference these
programs have in schools I'm
they have very unique services
at their inclusive industry and
the introduce students to
pathways they wouldn't
traditionally get exposed to
these services are very
different than traditional
school counselors who honestly
are.
Over one to begin with we have a
high need for these types of
programs already but now as we
recover from our school closures
and quite honestly losing more
children than we can afford
there really isn't a more
important time to have these
types of programs in place to
help our most vulnerable high
school students so thank you for
your time we we stand and
support.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mr Robert bait.
Debate are you available I am
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's Robert
Beatty I'm the director of
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
a school that was founded twenty
years ago to support students
who had dropped out that are
returning or have been suspended
or expelled are quitting on
students and families is simply
not an option R. K. students
have benefited from the jag
program in the past although
we're not currently benefiting
from these funds are I'm I'm
here to thank the sponsor for.
In this legislation forward and
them in strong support of the
Jack program a particular we
around high school hi and thank
you for bringing for.
Thank you.
We will now hear from Mr crisp
autumnal go ahead Chris.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm Chris
balls on on the register
lobbyist for reduction public
schools you have heard or read a
personal experience by Mr David
left and Act sharing that with
the the members of the committee
so I just want to point out that
to the committee that this bill
does not the specifically
include Jack okay I know
everybody's talking about Jack
but you're talking about Jack
because is a proven model with
proven results that works with
students that identifies
academically at risk and I'll be
right to public school we have
been working with them for many
years Jack help students get
into the work force any support
them as the work towards
graduation so for this reason we
ask the committee to please this
is great great policy to pass
this piece of legislation and we
think this possible bring this
up thank you.
Thank you very much when I hear
from Mr Matthew call go ahead Mr
Paul.
Thank you mark you and and thank
you Mr chairman is Matt Paul on
the executive director of public
charter schools of New Mexico as
you heard from one particular
story from Mr Beattie about
fifteen percent of our charter
schools are focused on re
engaging used to help them be
successful and we're supportive
of any efforts that keep kids in
school or re engage them with
successful futures with through
their schooling so we think the
sponsor for brand we support the
bill.
Thank you Mr call are there any
other members of the public that
wish to make statements in
support heather Bassett I see
there go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and how their best
with Albuquerque public schools
we think a sponsor for the spell
and we obviously support on the
program is making a positive
impact at Rio Grande High School
and we have a couple other
schools interested in and
joining in the future thank you.
Thank you heather are there any
other members of the public wish
to make a statement in support
of Senate bill three hundred and
thirty please raise your hand at
this time or flickr Camaron.
Thank you very much that
concludes public statement for
Senate bill three hundred and
thirty.
Okay Senator Padilla any
comments for we go to questions
from the committee and committee
we're down to five minutes I
don't see how that gonna make it
through that Senator and so the
we might want to just hold
committee comments until our
next session.
Mr chairman I think with the
overwhelming support that you
just heard of I think it'll
resonate when we do come back
together again I'm more than
happy to do that thank you.
Let me see
about let's plan on doing that
is of bills will pick up with
committee comments when we come
back on Monday for the public we
did get a do pass on Feb four oh
one to pass on the Senate Joint
Memorial won just twice amended
Senate bill three oh seven has
moved with a no rack we're on
Senate bill three thirty we are
out of time today because of the
floor session that is scheduled
to begin in about fifteen
minutes one HR Committee gets
chance to stretch their legs and
and other
things they maybe get by either
whatever we will pick up kind of
extreme with Senate bill three
thirty on Monday of followed by
Senate bill three oh two Sedillo
Lopez we will see whether
Senator Lopez is ready with
Senate bill two eighty nine and
then now we've got a full slate
already so I will be adding much
to our calendar for Monday
Monday we will plan on starting
at nine o'clock I don't think we
have a floor session so we'll be
able to go to our pool twelve
o'clock on Monday any comments
questions concerns from the
committee therapist go I see
your hand up Mr chair I make a
motion to remove Senate bill one
thirty five from the table
having voted no on Senate bill
one thirty five we have a motion
for Senate bill one thirty five
I think that was Senator up.
Bill o'neill's.
So and I think that it what got
stocking Committee on a four
four and so Marian or is there a
second for the motion to remove
one thirty five from the table
thank you.
Second by Senator Padilla Merion
if you will call the roll on
removing Senate bill one thirty
five from the table to be on the
business for the committee on
Monday can you give me the title
I don't recall the title vote.
The opportunity scholarship.
Thank you.
Your brand.
On Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville.
The I'm sorry senator Neville
just say yes
yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes.
Antipope.
Yes Senator also yes Senate bill
one thirty five will be on our
order of business for Monday
everybody at.
I just wanted to thank my expert
witnesses I don't have a chance
to do that and thank all those
that commented on the that these
legislation we were discussing
thank you Mr.
Thank you anything else
committee.
If not we are adjourned till
nine o'clock on Monday thank you
all.
Thank you.
