Our research grants closing
funds
from Senator souls you're going
to receive Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman this
particular bill will team up a
couple of years ago I and the
Senate does it need to F. score
which is the state wide research
consortium of all of the the
higher education they need a
couple of times a year to just
talk about where normally U. N.
M. New Mexico state tax eastern
western we kind of all our out
friendly rivals on its score
everybody's on the same team
we're trying to promote research
at our higher education
universities they need the
research usually vice president
Abid University meets and
discusses research collaboration
on research many times research
projects maybe too large for a
single university or the
expertise of faculty at
different universities so it's a
very much a cooperative group
within the state of New Mexico
and in one of those meetings the
discussion was among the vice
president of research the times
that they have had to pool their
faculty from.
Thanks for grants because the
universities did not have the
money in their budget to me the.
And the doctor do so you may
need to help me but to meet the
it's not the in time the but
the.
The amount of money that the
university has to come up with
if they were to get the right to
tell their there you can apply
for this because if you get this
we can't come up with the in
kind or the matching amounts
that are required in this grant
and so New Mexico lost out on
major research grants and all of
the spin off that comes from
the undergraduate students who
work with the faculty members
and the research opportunities
that that provides for a
graduate student support to work
with the faculty member and then
all of the entrepreneurial the
happens the other kinds of
things that build capacity with
the New Mexico for small
businesses for just the
entrepreneurship of it.
We have to pass on those and so
we came up with the idea of that
the state have the research
closing funds essentially it was
money that it would be in higher
education.
Score would be the determining
agent when university supply for
it and if somebody has a large
grant of this sort the money
would essentially be pulled out
of the closing fund put in
escrow if you will and if the
Representative comes through for
that we member this covers those
matching funds
if it doesn't if they don't win
the grant then the money would
go back to be available for
other researchers it would be
under again this consortium of
universities and it also would
be working towards
collaboration among the various
universities this particular
proposal an idea has the support
of all three of the majority of
research universities in the
state it has the support of top
council of university presidents
all think that this would be a
good thing we are competing with
other states who have had this
type of a closing fund for years
if you look at the and let's not
try state but the the Golden
Triangle area down in North
Carolina with you can North
Carolina state they've got these
kinds of agreements to where
they're states.
The or assist with meeting those
matching funds that are required
for large requests New Mexico's
missing out because of it and I
can give you this it's likely to
for research at the university's
and at this point and Martel if
you will vote Dr Dan are these
are the chance or New Mexico
state to yes my experts.
Thank you senator cells and Mr
chairman members of the
committee and the Senator cells
thank you for the opportunity to
it to just a few words in behalf
of this SB forty four so I'm
chance for New Mexico State
University of Mike's my relevant
experience here is I also
chaired the national science
board which oversees the
National Science Foundation
pursuit arms under and both the
impact I I worked under both the
the bush administration and the
Obama administration four
science for
it's a this is actually a
Senator sold has suggested
especially for a programs like
M. score which is essentially
the same as that is is
established programs to
stimulate competitive research
and it is for epcor states New
Mexico is one of those that
allows essentially there to be
some government federal
government support for states
that are catching up in terms of
instrumentation terms research
in New Mexico is one of those
and as a Senator sold has
suggested many states impact
most states provide a closing
fund or something equivalent to
that to provide the matching
funds many of the under of
Representative and and and
challenge communities around the
country don't have to don't have
the big endowments in the big
opportunity to do the car share
so it's it's so it is a limiting
factor it's not for lack of good
ideas that some not sometimes in
New Mexico universities can't
compete is for lack of cost year
and so this would be a great
opportunity I think to do that I
want to stress the importance of
research for the purpose of
economic development so I think
it research continues to be an
engine for economic development
and you get a lot of spin offs
and you get a number of of the
of start up companies and you
get a lot more of a business
attracted into this into the
into the state as a consequence
of doing great research and
again that is something that we
can leverage the federal
government work with our with
our US state closing fund up I
also have experience in.
Colorado where we where they
actually did such a thing they
did this thing is called the
call out the Colorado consortium
for energy research and it was a
ten million dollar set aside
from the legislature for the
purpose of the research
universities to actually match
the the use that use the copy is
this money for costs here to
attract new funding after five
years of that program the
results were of very very
appealing eight to one carshare
attracted for every dollar
invested by the state of
Colorado eight dollars of
federal and private sector money
was brought into the state four
research efforts and I think
this one is also very similarly
built on that sort of model
where a dollar that that that
would be part of this fund would
be matched with another dollar
that we have to come up with on
our own and those two dollars
would then be leveraged for the
twenty percent twenty five
percent cost year that senators
suggests is necessary to to be
up to be competitive in those in
those states various grant
opportunities both within a
staff National Science
Foundation of course and then
all the other agencies that are
part of this which is in I. H.
NASA DO we DO do USDA EPA all
those agencies have these kind
of programs the I'll I'll so
also say the ethical problems
commanders it comes up next year
for for a five year renewal and
we need one million dollars cost
here to attract the twenty
million dollars that they have
and all that that's always been
an issue and we're going to need
that for next year so that's
something that we know is
already coming down the pike I
can tell you that there are a
number of programs and and now
we is one of the National
Alliance for water innovation
where the that the the.
Funds have already been one in a
project any and all you need
that was cost years so for every
dollar invested in the not we
program of four dollars of
federal money are already
available all we have to do is
show we have caution so there's
a a number of programs like that
that are really I think quite
ready to go in in at the last
one I'll talk about is the
department education graduate
assistants in and areas of
national need that is where our
research professors can make
proposals and now you get a
hundred fifty thousand dollar
grant which you need thirty
seven thousand dollars of cost
you and we are limited not by
the number of requests that back
that money's plentiful we are
limited by the amount of culture
that we have so I want to
strongly support this as a as a
real tool both for tracking
additional money into the into
the state and perhaps and for
supporting research in a way
that can actually help economic
development I'll stop there and
be ready for answer any
questions thank you.
Thank you and and Mr chair if I
might yeah this particular bill
has that appropriation on it at
ten million dollars I like to
call this this is what I
consider to be a semi recurring
fund
if there's money available this
is a place we could put money in
every year it budgets get really
tight this is a place where the
universities understand there is
that money to put more into next
year if this money gets depleted
and and they understand that
we've worked some years where
there's none of this but if
there is money available this is
a place where we can do real
economic growth and development
and again has lots of spin off
or entrepreneurs or small
businesses and other kinds of
things to help build our state
and using our strength of the
research universities the
national labs all of the other
kinds of a great innovators that
we have here to build the state
and with that I think would be
open for questions Mr chair.
Senator souls I will open up a
public comment for Senate bill
forty four do we have anyone in
opposition what will let folks
in opposition speak first.
At this time we don't have any
one in opposition for public
statement for the first of our
supporters we do have marks of
that track.
Great.
You can proceed more thank you
thank you Mr up chair so Center
pope and and chair souls just
I'm executive to the New Mexico
County university presidents and
we stand in support of house
Senate bill forty four it's a
great opportunity to match
private funded public funds and
the chance to mention apps court
we are of course state scored
does attend our annual hakham
conference every year reports to
us and Jackson and and we're
very fortunate in that score
State and but this is a great
opportunity to take private
dollars with public dollars and
and US and stretch those those
dollars to do a lot of great
economic development for the
state of Mexico and the Senator
the chair mention the triangle
North Carolina mostly that have
these types of funds and of
having a really also healthy
economic development portfolio
as well so with that we send
support thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Senator do we have
anyone else I would like to
speak on behalf of this bill.
We do have Chris Bolzano Chris
if you're available.
At this time it looks like he
hasn't during the meeting
Senator.
Do we have anyone else.
No that is our entire list for
public statement out for Senate
bill forty four.
All right thank you now I like
to open it up to the committee
and it looks like right now that
I have Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the presentation I think it
a wonderful idea that you've put
forth to allow our universities
to to get matching funds from
the state in maybe this is a I'm
not sure who should answer this
question but does the
universities and colleges
currently have funds with in the
the universities that they can
use for the same purpose I'm
without going out for taxpayer
dollars.
Mr chair I'd have the chance are
these to answer the could please
right.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Kernan Senator
souls I I think they there's a
different amount of of when to
call discretionary spending it
at the department you
institutions different
universities I know I can speak
for amendment issue typically
what we when we have the need to
have costs are like this there's
a couple ways you can get the
cost your one is to provide
income money which is not nearly
as attractive to the feds in
particular so you can have you
know you can part of the time
that a professor would actually
spend instruction or in research
might be covered by by internal
you know programs that are
already in place that's one way
of providing cost share the
other way is gets to tap the
endowment typically and the
research universities have have
a a foundation endowment but
it's very difficult to have
discretionary money from that
endowment and and this is
something that the that the
National Science Foundation
understands so it's very very
difficult for for especially for
public universities that don't
have large endowments because
those to endowments are
typically spoken for those are
governor that's donor money and
then you put it and and into a
fund that generates money that
that pays for the endowed chairs
in the things that for which the
donor intended very little of it
is discretionary and as a
consequence of that is very
little cost you got it so one
last question Mr chair just with
regard to how I guess you said
that the H. E. D. would be the
one that would make the
distribution from the fund and
the criteria that they would use
what would that be based on
typically as it's done in other
states with with regard to that
decision making you know we we
sometimes are under the gun
about our capital outlay and
everybody wants some committee
quote to make the decisions on
how that money is spent so how
would have a higher ed
distribute those funds across
the state.
Mr chair Senator I've had spent
extensive conversations with the
F. score people and some of the
people in AGD and it has to AGD
has to be the fiscal agent for
it could go directly to F. score
their biggest concern is who
would make the decision as to
which other worthy projects or
not and S. score indicates our
bills that is able to do that it
has experts at the various
universities as to whether a
project is.
Is big enough is worthwhile
enough has a good chance of
getting the funding and is able
to provide the experts to review
those grant proposals as to
whether this really is a viable
one and so it would be up
together with them the money
would seated AGD but escort
would say yes we want to release
yeah five hundred thousand
dollars as matching funds for
this project it's yo of the
scale of the type of thing that
is a benefit to the state in the
number of.
Graduate students potential for
spin off economic growth and
development for the state take
some of the issues that they
would be looking at and so Mr
chair would there be a reporting
mechanism where if this occurs
and and money is distributed
that they would come back to the
legislature and make sure that
that we're aware for those
dollars have gone to make sure
that we feel that there's equity
in the distribution.
Madam chair yes I would hope so
as you know one of the problems
we have right now with higher
education doesn't have any
interim committee that reports
to other than the finance
committee certainly this would
be part of a report to the
finance committee there are some
efforts to have higher education
move under the LTSE but yeah the
finance committee is the
recording
Committee for everything higher
education and so we would be out
of that.
Perfect all right so they would
be reporting mechanism to the
LFC most likely and we would
with we would know that at night
you mentioned the fact that
if there's not many available at
on a recurring basis that that
universities and colleges we
just have to know that in and
certainly you know as I said
before we're going to be I'm
pretty good this year at the
going forward you've heard my
concerns about revenues and just
wondering if it makes more sense
no what the out years ago to be
for for the state of New Mexico
that we might consider rather
than spending down everything we
have this year to to increase
our reserves so I continue to
struggle with setting
appropriation bills out of this
committee no that Senate finance
is going to have to be the one
that's going to have to say you
know we this just doesn't fit I
certainly support that the the
thought it is just that to me
it's.
Discouraging to know that we
might be able to do this this
year and then in the out years
when we do not have the money
this will probably be one of the
first things to go so I'll
probably support the bill
because I do think it is on the
right track but I am going to
continue every opportunity I I
have to say.
Better enjoy this year because
it's not going to be here in two
to three years thank you.
Mr chair and and senator I
certainly understand that that's
why I'm trying to well going to
do raised of semi recurring
funds things that we would like
to have the chair but we
recognize there could be the
first things to get cut when
things get tight as far as.
Thank you Mr chairman and we
start we can reverse that trend
would like your help on that
thank you.
Thank you.
All right thank you Senator
Kernan do we have any other
questions from the committee.
Well I will just and and the
question I have is being new to
the Senate.
You mentioned the concept of of
it can be a recurring
appropriation I I guess how
would this work I just want one
understand that.
Mr chair recurring money's is
that each year we would be
requesting ten million dollars
to replenish the fund they got
used up that year in doing the
cost sharing for the research
grants that year
Non recurring money would be a
one time only and so next year
this money would not be
available we would like it to to
be something that proves its
worth and similar to lead that
people get behind because it is
such a good economic driver for
the state it's a brand new
program we recognize that and
it's going to be incumbent upon
the university's an escort to
show that this has a a large
return on investment for the
state.
Great.
Thank you thank you Mr chair so
having no more other questions
from the committee.
Do I have a a motion over the
past Mr chairman.
I have a second.
Okay we have a second from Santo
Domingo.
If we could get a roll call vote
from the committee secretary.
Okay first.
Senator Brandt no.
Thank you Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Saying that I just got on and my
apologies to the committee Mr
chairman I I had to the bureau
was going off track in my head
together back on but since I
missed the discussion I'll have
to pass.
If I might.
And Senator Hickey you do need
to ensure you can pass it till
several of the other legislators
have voted and then it'll come
back you for about thank you
very much.
Mr chair.
Senator Kernan I would have to
vote no.
Senator nouvelle.
I'm gonna vote yes in explaining
of our.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Thank you so yes and then back
to Senator Hickey yes.
And to senator Neville to
explain as well we do have a due
pass.
Thank you the.
Mr chairman I I have the same
concerns a Senator Kernan
expressed while ago about the.
The current cost of this but it
is not going to go in the budget
as recurring so it if we can
come up with ten million this
year I don't know if there's any
if if there's ever any repayment
on some of these projects as a
as a progress and and maybe.
thank have some kind of return
down the road but I would hope
that that money can if there is
anything some leftovers or
whatever it can revert back to
the fund.
This is the kind of thing we've
we've been on universities
pretty heavily the last few
years every time we turn around
and what they do is then they
turn around raise tuition so any
way we can Senator that's a tax
on our our students is one of
the monsters so I like to help
where we can on universities I
think we overdone it to some
degree in the past that's my
thoughts on that thank you Mr.
All right all right.
Hi Mr chair Senators souls you
do have a due pass on Senate
bill forty four and we will
proceed with Senate bill twenty
nine cost affordable takes
systems.
Thank you to ensure the
Mr chair and committee of the
next four bills are all very
related they are all part of the
New Mexico facilities authority
which is responsible for helping
us build our our public schools.
We have a couple of new members
and let me give a very brief.
Overview of what what that means
is in New Mexico all of the
operations for schools comes
through the formula but building
of schools is has been more of a
local taxpayer bonded
requirement for building the
schools because of this the
lawsuit the ability to formula
that it started off
with setting up a system where
tax wealthy or property wealthy
districts had better bonding
capacity for their schools and
that's had a requirement for a
larger share of building new
school buildings and some
districts had essentially no
well in order to build schools
and the state stepped in and did
that it we call that the state
local match a district wide zoom
is a hundred percent state
funded we have a couple of
districts Mr chair when you
might read know of some of the
specific ones that are ninety
ten districts I'm ninety two
needs the local.
Property bonding is responsible
for ninety percent of building
the buildings and the state will
pay for ten percent of the
public school facilities
authority and I'm a Ms all wrong
but the group that oversees that
looks at which projects
districts have determined which
ones are the most needy and then
sets up the to put the state
funding into those provided that
the local district is coming up
with their matching share as we
go through all of that that
assist.
Districts that have low well
being able to build buildings
and it's a mechanism for for a
requiring those with lots of
well to pick up a larger portion
of it I that funding formula has
been modified over the years as
to what percent of most recently
a couple years ago and I think
we changed it to look at the
actual building cost in
districts districts that are a
hundred miles from the nearest
hardware store it costs more to
build the district
Representative building there
than others and so there were
some adjustments made to all of
that but every district gets at
least a portion of buildings
covered by the state though
sometimes it's very small and we
have a few districts that get a
very large portion covered by
the state all of these deal now
with the public school
facilities authority and so the
first one that we have is Senate
bill twenty nine which is the
cost of photovoltaic systems few
years ago we modified the state
local batch to allow districts
that need good on you H. fax
systems that that would qualify
for the the state local match on
it we made some other
modifications what this does is
if the district with is in the
process or would like to put
photovoltaic systems on their
schools that they would qualify
for the the percentage of the
state local match in order to
put photovoltaics on their
schools one of the things that
it'll come up in one of the
other ones on building new
buildings when you put
photovoltaics on the schools
that the district no longer is
covering the cost of all of the
electricity for the school the
because it's now being generated
on site
electric costs for schools comes
out of operational budget so
this effectively shift some of
those costs directly to the
classroom that normally would
have been spent for electricity
of this particular one all it
does is it's.
As that putting photovoltaics
will now come under the systems
portion of the state local match
for public school facilities
authority consideration and if I
could Mr chair have a Mr
Champlin who is the are you
executive director or the
director of the public school
facilities authority Sir Senator
is also thank you good to see
you again this morning next
Jonathan jam one
director of the public school
facilities authority.
Mr chair members to summarize
the Senate bill twenty nine
we're discussing right now
quickly.
This bill as mentioned would
allow the state to fund
photovoltaic systems through the
systems funding program which is
one of.
Several different funding
programs that are.
Being run by the council would
be a C. O. C. right now to make
awards for capital projects at
schools the systems program is a
relatively new program started
making awards four years ago.
And it is of.
One that was intended to make
awards state funding awards to
eligible districts to replace or
repair building systems to
extend the life of the facility.
and so over the last four years
this program has evolved a
little bit
this upcoming year twenty twenty
one will be the fifth year of
awards for assistance program of
the council will make and one of
the eligible systems as defined
by the council for this little
program this year is a track
heating and ventilating and air
conditioning systems on schools
our expectation for this
upcoming year is that with COVID
and the need to improve expects
systems
that will be a heavily requested
system through this funding
program for the upcoming year.
One thing that we are no already
based on our research and
on going conversation about this
whole topic is.
When schools schools choose to
upgrade their eight track
systems to be more COVID ready.
They will in most cases need to
install a more sophisticated
expense system and they have
now.
and part of the impact will be
potentially many cases the
system that will require more
electricity to operate over the
life of that heating and cooling
system at the school.
you got to introduce more
outdoor area to filter cetera to
higher degree and so all of that
the nets out to require more
electric electricity.
And a higher electric bill for
the school potentially as a
result for the life of that HX
system.
So what this bill is proposing
is to Google H. back replacement
projects with.
Photovoltaic system.
Of design and installation
intent underlying this is to
potentially design and install a
PED system that will generate
electricity on site.
just simple grid connected
electricity feedback to the
power grid.
To lower the utility bill for
the school of the does this
work.
So it's a capital investment up
front in the project for H. fax
systems in particular that
should in most cases result in
some long term operational
savings for the school through
our utility bills lower electric
bills.
So we've got some numbers
estimates in our analysis we see
that about twenty to thirty
percent of the school's
electrical bill is a result of
their H. back system.
with the COVID rating systems we
would expect again that those
are probably be closer to thirty
percent of the total electrical
bill for the school each year.
And so with that we think the
the the typical range of install
Peavey systems that might need
to offset a larger electricity
load from the effects of some.
might be somewhere in the range
of than eight or eight to ten
percent increase cost to the
whole cost of the H. fact
project School potential.
so it's
a
beautiful part of the part of
the role that will play with
districts on behalf of the state
and to help districts is to help
them when they apply for new
cheque project when they're
trying to design one after they
get state funding award
potentially and if they want to
install a Peavey system to again
lower their utility bill into
the future will be helping
districts look at the numbers
and analyze the design system
and understand the full
And if there is one and if so
how soon will it pay itself off.
Part of the service that will
provide typically we would
expect that some of these
systems if properly designed
appropriately designed would be
paying themselves often ten to
fifteen years the PED aspect of
the project so so I could go on
but I think I'll leave it there
and
taking questions you might have
about this topic thank you
Senator and Mr chair members.
We are prepared for questions.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to start with public comment
anyone that is in opposition of
this bill once again one of
Senate bill twenty nine.
We had Chris balls on now in
opposition but it doesn't appear
that he has joined us.
and your friend Stan rounds.
Mr chair members the committee
good day we appreciate the spots
bringing this bill forward I
don't know that I stand in
opposition quite as much as I do
wondering if this is the correct
button for this cost as you
heard data Mr chairman talk
about balancing our capital
projects is an issue that each
district has to be very
judicious and thoughtful.
Time for pay back versus the
funding of this money but most
importantly Mr chairman members
the committee we wonder about
the competition between the US
and other prevailing systems
issues especially the cost of
the filtration systems and what
not that are immediate in the
COVID response process Mr
chairman I'm not quite sure for
for or against I just want to be
these issues raised for the
committee's consideration thank
you.
Thank you Mr Allen's.
if we have anyone else and
public comment I think I see one
hand up yes we do first we'll
hear from Gary Payton.
Gary if you're available Gary
Payton was next to speak.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning committee members my
name is Gary Payton representing
the coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico it's a
coalition of the elected leaders
of the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County elected leadership of
approximately forty percent of
the population of the state of
Mexico we are the committee to
vote yes for this bill.
Consideration is given to the
upgrade potentially of H. back
systems we think about it in the
long term both the long term in
terms of the contribution to
renewable energy transition that
the state is either going
secondly in anticipation of the
increased electricity loads as
climate change will demand
greater cooling within our
school systems we urged
committee members to vote for
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Payton.
I think I see a Serbian waffler.
Thank you he I'm ten years I'm
part of the global one specify
at the community school in
Albuquerque and show my support
for Senate bill twenty nine
nationals trying to get so.
For.
Quite awhile and it was only
like wait.
This bill will finally possible
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Next we'll hear from Alex Hanna.
Committees.
The initial I'm also with the
global warming expects.
I know what lays ahead of me
many more years in school and
that sametime client.
We are.
New Mexico and the Rio Grande
drying up why is this happening.
I want to be a solution I
support SB twenty nine for three
reasons so school rules will
save hundreds of thousands of
dollars a year on electricity
costs.
Will be clean and renewable New
Mexico has two hundred eighty.
Thank you for that sunpower so
is a good solution to the
problem of air pollution if we
leave.
G.
thank you for.
To introduce.
Let's say New Mexico kids.
Panels on schools creates jobs
in the community we need jobs
because thousands of New
Mexicans have lost them already
these good old jobs will help
families.
School is doing something good
for the environment students are
learning about renewable energy
wind solar on the roof of that
class.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Alex did your brother
aged also want to make a
statement.
Yeah.
In committee my name is Adrian
and I have also twelve years old
and with that global warming
express.
And M. S. B. twenty nine I think
this solution to climate change
to have solar panels on school
buildings in terms of public
schools.
Million to dollars it is a good
learning tool students like me
contract in graph our son into
per month.
But most importantly it is one
of the solutions to solve the
climate crisis I.
Mexico's beautiful cotton wood
Gen spectacular sight.
No okay India's in the winding
we agree.
This thing is that these places
are getting destroyed by climate
change.
Yeah the real is drying up.
Global warming is fossil fuels
using.
Fossil fuels are in big
buildings will like schools will
help solve climate change and
preserve New Mexico's beautiful
landscapes.
We want Mexico to be a leader of
renewable energy influencing
other states to join us as a
student I want to be proud of my
screen.
Where I live don't be afraid to
say yes not to.
Mexico the intervention thank
you for your time.
Thank you Adrian now we will
hear from Camilla filament
Camilla.
Zoom link but she does want to
testify.
issue there in the room with
you.
If not I'm just trying to get
the link to.
Mark mark do we have anyone else
that would like to speak no the
last person on the list for this
particular Senate bill.
Unfortunately I think we're
gonna have to move on.
so I apologize but we're going
to go ahead and move on to.
Comments from the committee.
And the first one I believe that
was up was Senator Pinto and
then we'll go to Senator Kernan.
I think Senator Kernan was up
first.
My apologies Senator Kernan.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I
don't know no worries on that I
have a question for Mr Champlin
I'm and that is still on.
Yes chair on Senator I'm still
on thank you thank you very much
and I wonder Mr chair if you
could also talk a little bit
about that
that the funds that flow into
the public school capital outlay
of opportunity to do all of this
that we do for our schools can
you tell me the store some of
those funds.
etcetera so if you want me to
take that.
Yes please okay.
So Senator told Mr chair in the
Senator Kernan the source for
the public school capital outlay
fund which is the
bucket of money that's used for
funding capital projects via the
state in New Mexico is the
supplemental severance tax bond
proceeds with the to put it
simply is the some of the tax
excess from the tax on oil and
gas and other extractive
industries in New Mexico that's
the the ultimate source of the
funds thank you very much and
and so I just want to make sure
our new members understand the
source that we had a really good
tutorial on how this public
school capped out lady works and
and certainly issues that are in
a very effective and I think
fair way across the state in New
Mexico with regard to.
Worries I am a little bit
concerned I do do want to make
sure everybody understands the
source of the funds so going
forward
based on many of the things that
are occurring both at the
federal level and state level
that I have mentioned before the
potential for these funds to
begin to.
Decrease the process the state
of New Mexico is of concern to
me so we've got to be very
careful in how we spend these
funds currently so the question
is Mr chair if a district
chooses to move out
to the P. the system did they
basically get to kind of jump
the line and get ahead of
everybody else with regard to
that the distribution of these
requests for this particular
purpose.
Mr chair if I could that defer
to Mr Champlin but I believe
that all of these decisions
still would go to that Committee
that looks over things and still
would have opportunities
prioritise which are the most
important ones based on the
amount of monies that are
available Mr chair.
Sure I'd like to hear from him
thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair and senator souls and
Senator Kernan the public school
capital outlay council makes the
awards decisions each year for
the funding programs including
the systems program.
Assistance program like the
court program standards program
that does full screen
replacement.
Is awarded based on a
prioritization of that
alternately is based on the
condition of facilities around
the state so the rank list.
So that the council makes awards
decisions for this program
putting others based on that
prioritized list of need you
might call it awarding those who
have the most deteriorated
facilities first in any given
year and so this is a.
Adding this billing system P. V.
as an eligible system for
funding would just be would be
just that the prioritization to
make awards in any given year
would still be rooted in the the
Recommendation of the facilities
on the rank list well thank you
Mr.
Chairman Mr chair up I did read
in the FIR that it would be
given the highest priority or
higher priority is that going to
be the direction of the council
to make that a higher priority.
This bill requires that yeah Mr
chair of Mr chair if you
respond.
Sure us so
Mr chairman Senator souls and
Senator Kernan the language in
the bill there toward the end of
the bill.
Is this the high priority should
be given applications for
systems that must be renovated
or replaced in response to a
viral or bacterial update to
ensure proper error handling to
increase health and safety.
So that is proposing potentially
to prioritize H. back projects
and funding for a truck projects
through the systems program.
As I mentioned earlier this.
This upcoming year of awards
it'll be made later on in twenty
twenty one.
The council will has already
made the decision update that H.
back projects are one of the
eligible systems for the program
this year eligible for funding
and that that will be a
prioritized system
based on the COVID a pandemic in
the need to replace those
systems potential.
Okay so it is that Mr chair
cleared in the bill that
basically the council will
consider that PED system a
higher priority than H. fax
system that would have the a
very high level filters I
potentially so I just wanna be
really clear that the council is
according to this legislation
going to prioritize and send
funds to those districts that it
made the decision to move to the
the system rather than upgrading
their expects system.
Mr chair and and senator I'm not
sure I don't think that's what
the bill is saying with the bill
is saying is as they are
upgrading their H. fax systems
that the potential cost and
savings from putting PED on
shall be considered as part of
that process and so the if it
change it saved substantial
money to put PED on it that is
going to be one of the main
considerations as they're
looking at the high priority H.
fax systems that need to be
replaced so we thanks systems
are a higher priority and get
this saved money they shall
consider that as well.
All right and so Mr chair you're
wrong.
Okay thank you Mr chair so it's
still basically we didn't leave
those decisions to the council
and that that will make those
decisions accordingly I'm at I
appreciate that and I do hope
our young people certainly
appreciate their input but I do
think that good education
includes all education and I I
do hope that that the sponsors
of those young people also
educate them on the revenues
that come into the state and and
where those dollars come from
that fund their schools so I
certainly believe that every
child should should be educated
with regard to renewables not
going to get into that debate
with them but it's critical that
our children learn every side of
every at positions so at always
appreciate them on that I hear
that I doubt that any of them
knew that their schools are
funded by fossil fuels to great
extent and I think that's
information they need to learn
as well and I thank you for that
the options thank you Mr chair
that's all.
Thank you Senator Kernan we will
now go to Senator Pinto and then
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you for bringing the sport
Senator cells and the context of
it.
And thank you for our children
being here and I hope they also
continued to pursue as they get
a little bit older and you start
to see the cost efficiency that
should occur in the schools all
the way down to.
Sports that we stop having
sports towards the where we do
have to use the lights and
everything where we do use the
sunlight because it is a
cultural thing in the sense of
from sunrise to sunset then at
the very home actor that certain
time
in my culture so it is HM good
thing I hope we can cooperate
those things Mr Champlin into a
lot of the decision making and I
appreciate that hopefully we can
have a little more local input
in the communities so they have
some flexibility with their
school hours and am move forward
from there and they did have a
question I don't remember I
think it was a more constipated
on the kids and then being
involved here thanks very much.
Thank you Senator Pinto will now
go to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate it interesting bill
interesting subject Senator
souls I I do have a little bit
of a question
Do you have you look at what the
increased cost will be on the
the cost of building by adding
the the.
So the panels and and understand
I don't want the overall cost we
could talk about that a minute
but just the construction cost.
Mr chairman and senator Brandt I
don't have specifically Mr
Champlin may be able to to give
us a present it varies widely
though depending on the size of
the system economies of scale I
mean there's a wide range but he
may be able to give you that
it's an increase of whatever
percent service generated
briefly just what percent
increase to ADD age factor I
mean that PED do an H. back
system change so Mr chair Mister
sold Senator Brandt.
The estimates that we have four
PP systems are two to three and
a half dollars per wa installed
for the P. the system itself.
that would range and argue for
these types of PED's systems to
be associated with offsetting
your H. back electricity needs.
Are going to be relatively small
TV systems and so we think that
they'll be ten kilowatt two
hundred fifty kilowatt maximum
potential system size for the
larger schools in the state.
Of with ten kilowatt bang for
the smaller schools so the range
of costs there is thirty thirty
thousand
potentially up to around five
hundred forty five hundred
thousand dollars for a large
screen of the compared to the
cost of an H. fact project so if
you're just doing your H. back
replacement.
we estimate that that would be
about eight to ten percent.
Of additional costs to the H.
fact project itself.
in any given case.
Thank you appreciate that yeah
I'm just concerned about you
know right now we're yeah we got
this in the lawsuit we've got
all these other lawsuits and all
these other issues around our
capital expenditures and
Adding further cost.
Although it will save lives only
Rio Rancho has has actually done
some of these social service
chair especially in I think both
high schools have a pretty large
Solar race and mainly it was
because you get the operational
cost out of your budget honestly
it may not actually save money
in the long run just to be blunt
but it got the operational cost
of your budget so you could you
Mexico we move from one silo to
another for some of the new
members are at least three silos
of funding that comes education
and if you can use capital money
to free up operational dollars
sometimes you don't necessarily
look at the cost of scale of
doing that whether it actually
saves money in the long run you
do it to get the operational
cost out and so that's a concern
for me and I know that that
solar systems are getting
cheaper every day and and making
more sense every day you've also
got a lot of the places are
willing to lease and so I it
concerns me though that how
we're we're putting more cost in
the capital outlay system where
we're already struggling to keep
up
and we're buildings are getting
older in the state we've we've
got the the school systems are
part of that lawsuit that want
bigger and better schools
because they wanna you know
honestly you know this kind of
started my district where we
built a really nice facility in
our one wants to have the same
level of facility that we do
I was not part of the board back
then so please don't blame me on
that one of the.
Yeah that's what we're seeing
and I think that Senator Kernan
you're really hit on the head
you know we the the money that
we're using to do all this comes
from of your own gas industry
and.
There are great concerns with
the funding source for what's
happening from this
administration of both federally
and in the state and so I think
that the I I I don't know that I
could support adding another
cost into the speaker system
until we get to a point where we
have caught up and maybe ahead
with with that and so we and
also until we see what's going
to happen with the role and gas
industry in our state you know
there's a real possibility that
within a couple years we will
have.
Very little funding available
and be looking for new sources
we don't know as far as I know
Sir souls do we tax the
Generation of electric power
from any kind of what you guys
consider green energy.
Mr chair well that's not part of
this bill there are proposals
and I carried one in the past
about texting Energy at its
source regardless of what kind
of energy so I know there's some
proposals being floated of that
sort I certainly as part of this
bill
is Mr chairman Sir souls do we
currently tax in the.
Energy that's considered green
energy.
It's not part of this particular
bill I'm not aware of it but
across the country there are
proposals to start taxing that
as the as sources for public
funding similar to the way we've
tapped extractives.
Well as our schools will have a
start drafting the bill and you
and I can carry it together that
will do that because we don't in
New Mexico there is a small the
tax from the Land Grant office
if it's on state land that I was
made aware of fairly recently
thank you Sir current for that
but overall to say we don't but
I'll I'll have to start working
on the bill let's counseling you
and I can take you through that
together because that's about
the only way I'm gonna support
anymore of these things because
that source of revenue is going
away
Yeah we've got bills to ban
fracking we've got bills to ban
ivory source of fossil fuel and
yet forty to fifty percent of
the income to our state budget
is from those sources so I will
have let's council drafted bill
that will set a high end of tax
rate to replace all of that
income and you and I can carry
it together thank you Sir souls
I really appreciate your
commitment to do that with me Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt will
move on to Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
don't know if the students are
still with us many my questions
Mr chairman were asked I do want
to commend them I think they did
a fabulous job I love love love
when we get to hear from the
real people that these things
really affect thank you so much
for being here to the students
to the teachers I want to make
that happen
you know Mr chairman and
chairman souls you probably
might remember this chair souls
about two years ago
Not trying to be funny with the
minority quipped but he's
welcome to join my bill actually
I I don't know if you recall
Senator Mr chair souls I had a
very a bill on this very subject
I'm always beat the drum and how
we can fully fund early
education and I had a penny for
early education on every unit
that unit of energy generated in
the state of New Mexico any kind
took that bill to the Senate
conservation committee and it
got run over and then backed
over and then run over one more
time to make sure they got it
the thing is we need to to let
the industry get off the ground
and and I see that part I I
understand that and but I still
need to fund early education I
need to find all these other
things and and I think we all
cannot pretend like our cash cow
I hate to put it that way but it
is it is tracking and it's going
to shrink overtime and we have
to find a way to fill that gap
Mr chairman and that's why I
mention this and and so chair
pro thank you very much for
allowing me to to say those
things but but you know Senator
Brandt you're more than welcome
to jump on the bandwagon with I
would love to work with you on
that one
You know the other thing is we
are going to have to retrofit
and redo this and we do that and
and and those are economic
development drivers as well in
our communities all over the
state and I saw that as as as as
a possibility there I also had a
bill several years ago on on the
placing taking money out of the
land grant permanent fund
Representative short period of
time to put solar on every
single public school building in
the state that would fund that
with the account for at least
fifty percent of their energy
consumption projection so
another bill I would invite the
minority whip to to join me with
and to work with me on that one
as well and so that there are a
number of things I think we can
be doing here we are we are a
committee that has to be
proactive Mr chairman and and
and I think we should baby
helped lead the charge on
getting some of this proactive
stuff done because we're going
to be a world of hurt if we
don't in in a very short period
of time as we shrink the the
extractives industries and you
know it's not lost on me were
these monies come from and how
the schools are built in the
sidewalks and all these things
in my district and all your
districts and so we need to take
this very seriously and I I I
just want to make that mention I
don't have a question Mr
chairman thank you stern folk.
Thank you Senator Padilla
Senator Pinto.
Yes I remembered my question.
Well I guess it's a comment to I
don't know if we can answer it
but who's going to service all
these whatever we are putting
out there especially in my
district what happens is when
they do upgrade the system if it
breaks down if they have the and
it's under warranty they're
waiting forever for somebody to
come out and the kids are
sitting there two three weeks
with no air conditioner or
sometimes with no heat so are we
going to incorporate its into
the person of the maintenance
are you know are we going to
expand their
an opportunity there for them to
become certified to you know
tackle these especially not out
in the rural area thank you.
And so so Mr chair and senator I
know that's not part of this so
we have that same problem with
any system any building that we
have districts that's part of
their maintenance costs and and
management certainly problems
out in rural areas of getting
those taking care of are greater
than they are in more urban
areas but this doesn't doesn't
change any of those types of
issues or concerns which are
very real.
All right thank you Mr thank you
thank you senator cells.
Hello.
I I see no other comments from
the committee I guess I would
just like to close and say
thanks for bringing this bill I
know in the committee
Albuquerque mini I hear from
young people high school
students asking these questions
of why we don't have the systems
on their at their schools and
other high schools or middle
schools
and I was told this was a great
discussion I almost felt like it
was Tuesday and we were in
Senate conservation
but.
I think that everyone knows that
we get most of our money from
oil and gas.
But I think we all realize that
it's so volatile and over the
long term it you know we really
need to diversify the economy
here in the state
not only from a financial
standpoint but from an
environmental and health
standpoint and I think a lot of
folks even these young folks
realize that so I think it's our
job to lead because I think you
know we haven't done our jobs
you know as adults and we have
to make sure that we're leaving
a clean environment you know for
are you so I just would like to
leave it there and I wonder if
there is any type of is our
motion or anything on this bill.
Chair I move it to pass.
You have a second.
Second and quick comment the.
Senator pope thank you.
You could you can go ahead
Senator Hickey.
What is just you you're reminded
us we're talking about their
future and their future is what
counts thank you.
Thank you.
All right so we can have the
committee secretary do a roll
call vote.
Thank Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan no.
Well no.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator pulp.
Yes Senator souls yes.
We have a due pass.
right Senator suppose you have a
do pass on Senate bill twenty
nine we will now move on to
Senate bill forty three.
Funding.
I'm sorry funding of demolition
of abandoned schools.
Thank you this is another one
that comes from the New Mexico
public school facilities
authority lots of districts have
buildings that have been
abandoned that are a drain on
the local operational costs but
are no longer being used
districts often don't have the
money for.
Now funding the demolition or
when they do they actually would
Representative are in the
process of trying to build
things for students not air them
down it's a drain on the entire
state system to have buildings
that are banned and as well as
there are safety concerns and
maintaining some level of safety
on those buildings are what this
would do is if there are
buildings that need to be
download that the state through
the capital a outlay the.
Process would cover the entire
cost of this is not a share or
not share it's a relatively low
number overall but it gets those
off the rolls and similar to
what Senator branded indicated
means that operational monies
are being used to maintain
buildings that are being used to
get it off that moves those
monies over into the classroom
and I would of the operational
side industry gentlelady to
briefly give yup I didn't cover
that bill in any of the gaps as
to why there is a need FY we
ought to be paying higher costs
demolition.
Mr chair Senators souls members.
For.
This bill Senate bill forty
three as mentioned the proposal
is to.
Allow for expand funding for
demolition of abandoned or
unused.
Rural buildings around the
state.
Right now of following up on the
earlier per conversation about
the systems program the building
systems program has funded maybe
eligible state funding to fund
demolition projects since it
began.
For the last four years of
awards of that new program only
for the leave of the forty four
systems applications included
requests for demolition as part
of the scope of the award.
And to put it simply what we see
is in districts facility master
plans there F. and peas.
Many districts in the state at
least twenty I have listed on
their list of their long list of
capital improvement projects
that they would like to
complete.
Of on that list is demolition
for many school districts the
issue that we've seen is that
demolition is the least of
those.
Prioritize capital projects the
week prioritized and so
districts have not been getting
around to it and so as a result
again there are a number of
buildings around the state
That are empty not used and
could be downloaded and if
that's done could save the
district operational dollars
that right now they're paying to
insure.
and upkeep these abandoned
buildings as well you still need
to replace the stucco replace
the roof every once in awhile
maybe six doors and windows to
keep the building from
deteriorating further so all of
those are ongoing costs that
districts are having to deal
with the for these unused
buildings and so the proposal
here would be to allow for state
funding.
For that particular type of work
demolition and if the school
district can prove that the the
insurance cost savings.
Justify it the council could
award a hundred percent state
funding for the demolition to
incentivize it what we've seen
is that again going back to the
list of capital projects in the
district when the district goes
up for a G. O. bond to raise
local dollars for their projects
demolition is not a popular
scope of work.
and so it's difficult to get
local local voters to pass funds
in some cases if demolition of
an older building even if it's
on use is included in the bond
language so so this would the as
mentioned incentivize demolition
of these of the success on you
square footage state control.
So I'll leave it there chair
numbers and taking questions at
thank you.
Mr chair with that we are open
for questions.
Great thank you Mr chair I would
like to open it for public
comment do we have anyone in
opposition of Senate bill forty
three.
Yes we do you crystals although.
We are not in opposition Mr
chairman
we offer support as well as an
opposition.
I wait our turn.
No.
Is there are there any other
opposition.
No he was the only gentleman
listed as opposition so he can
go ahead and go first okay.
Mr bows I don't.
Mr chair Chris goes on a
registered lobbyist for Las
Cruces public schools are we
stand in support with our
sponsor on this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you now we will hear
From jokey in.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee a jokey and with
New Mexico school boards
association our members have a
support support this a
particular item on this bill we
feel very strongly that there
are quite a few there's actually
seven hundred fifty thousand
square feet of surplus of old
dilapidated buildings around the
state about twenty twenty five
percent of the districts have
these that we've as as a member
of the capital outlay council.
and currently chair we see many
districts coming forward asking
for this kind of assistance so
we support opening up the the
eligibility
and and funding for this
for this particular bill so we
are in support thank you.
Thank you and I will hear from
Stan rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again stand around
for the school superintendents
in New Mexico Mr chairman we
appreciate you bringing this
port this forward I stand I sit
on the public school capital
outlay oversight task force we
have done that for about a half
dozen years this is a continuing
discussion we've had and in that
particular task force meeting
this certainly was endorsed by
the committee is something we
think it is high time to do with
as mistress sponsor indicated Mr
Champlin dead
it's hard for local districts to
have local communities place
priorities and do demo of
demolishing
those buildings that have
outlived their use because
usually the funds raised will
only pay for the new buildings
the necessitated bring online as
we appreciate this we think this
is good public policy and thank
you Mr chairman for the chance
to comment.
Thank you Mr Graham's was the
last person signed up prior were
there any other members of the
public who would like to speak
at this time please raise your
hands.
Mr chair that looks like that is
all for public statement for
Senate bill forty three.
Thank you we are now I will move
on to comments and questions
from the committee we have
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
chairman souls on the on the
property itself is there already
a defined
mechanism to determine that the
that the facility or building is
is ready for demolition is is
that something that the school
district is going to make the
decision on or is there a
statewide.
set of parameters goal of your
check sheet checklist or
whatever how does the building
fall into this category.
Mr chairman thank you have a Mr
chair answer he deals with this
on a daily basis.
Mr chair and senator soul
Senator Padilla to your
question.
This is a local district issue
and decision districts are the
owners and operators of their
campuses and they choose to move
out of a building.
Impious and it's up to them to
decide when they're ready to
demo it.
the state doesn't have a
mechanism to come in and tell
the district that you're
building is empty and you need
to demo it now so it's a it's a
local control local decisions.
By the districts.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you
You know I'm trying to figure
out if say and a district has
say a.
It may be that Mr Ganter Mr
rounds can can tell me more
about this if you're willing
that's alright with you Mr
chairman
Are these folks are these
buildings that fall into this
category more expensive to
repair than what they may be the
worst is that why how they might
fall into this category and and
and that we're looking to eighty
six or seven different groups to
figure this out.
So Mr chairman and the Mr rounds
is of dealt with these things
for years and years as
superintendent a couple of
different districts and now as
the head of the superintendents
association so the be allowed to
speak.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Mr chairman Senator Padilla
essentially many of these
buildings of all of their
usefulness considerably many of
them have asbestos inside of
them let in the pipes things
like that they're very very
expensive I know that Senator
Pinto and in her district she
serves as a whole bunch of these
kinds of facilities and needs
their their as you do with the
difficulty of what what does
your local funds pay for what
your local funds pay for often.
These are by passed and so Mr
chair center Padilla
it is pretty well defined
usually a local district
planning as a whole useful as is
and is not there and the costs
due out around.
I appreciate that thank you it
just seems like yeah district
might not want to give up some
heated square footage unless
it's more expensive to repair
the thing that it is to to knock
it down and do something else
with it.
Is there ever a process by which
another group would come forward
maybe and say we're willing to
shoulder the expense to bring
this building up to code or what
have you and continue utilizing
I'm thinking of things like a
charter school or maybe
you know some sort of a
community organization that is
you know there's there multiple
communities in Albuquerque or
community associations and
organizations in Albuquerque
that might want to go in and
they may have the money not to
outright buy it the solidity but
they might be willing to repair
it every to to code
and then lease it.
And so Mr chair if I might
certainly in that situation the
it may be advantageous for the
board to not have that on the
demolition best I mean that
would be a local decision if
there was a way of bringing it
up somebody else putting to
build in the district certainly
that would be appropriated so
that's where it's up to the
local school board to determine
whether the building has useful
this or not.
And this Mr chairman is the
legislation call that out the
they should take that I have
that option made available or is
it that also district by
district they just decide Hey
you know maybe they don't want
charter schools in their
district or whatever and they're
just not going to make these
things available to them either.
Mr chair yeah I think is Mr
chairman indicated those really
are local decisions as to for
the local school board to make
as to how the buildings are
going to be used yep I'm all
right well I appreciate that I
just I'm trying to find out you
know what this is this is I'm
I'm on the fence on the some Mr
chairman I am a typically
support chair souls you know
most of the stuff that you bring
to this committee and and that
you work on and I'm just trying
to figure out how to vote on
this thank you very much for my
my aunt for my answer my
questions.
Thank you center Padilla we will
go to Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Perseid
appreciate the service all
spring in this bill did have a
couple of questions Senator
so what is what is the process
the district would go through if
they have an old building they
want to have to have torn down
ready to have torn down what's
the process they would go
through with the capital outlay
council.
Mr chair if I might yeah I would
need to refer to Mr chan was the
how that would happen but I know
having served on the school
board the school board goes
through the facilities master
plans and if their buildings
that need to be demolition we
would need to come up with money
through the capital process
either through local bonding and
whatever the state match was if
we decide it was on that list
this would now then go to the
the capital to the facilities
authority and then through the
capital outlay to council for
approval but Mr chair if you
could take over from once the
district has decided that it's
on their list how does it get
actually funded.
Sure Mr chair Senators holes
Senator Brandt.
Up so the.
Once the district is vacated the
building or facility and they've
determined that they're ready
that it's ready for demolition
potentially.
we would.
They would apply the district
would apply for funding if they
need it from the state through
one of our programs as mentioned
the systems program is one that
funds demolition as a specific
scope of work and so it district
could bring a request to the
council for state funding
participation in a demolition
project and then depending on
their state local share get
state funding for the cost of
that work.
Even as a standalone awarded
scope of work.
So that would be the that would
be the process and that's
available in the district to
each year to apply for.
Funding through the PS COCs
programs so that answers your
questions.
Thank you I appreciate those
channels and in this is one of
those I think we've talked about
Mr chair Sir souls for a few
years where we have some
districts who helped us very old
buildings there happened to
continue to pay insurance on
those buildings I can't really
use of except for storage so
this one actually makes a little
bit more sense to me than your
last one and so I I do
appreciate that thank you it
just makes you know some some
good sense
so the only concern I have is is
is there a process that the
school district goes through
where they talk to the local
community now Rio Rancho skied
of your newer community but I I
tell you people ranch would get
really upset if the building was
torn down Rio Rancho they can be
used for something else because
we just don't have buildings in
Rio Rancho and so is there a
process that the school district
would need to go through with
the local community to see if
that building you know if they
could maybe do a land swap or
something else of that building
could be used for something
else.
Mr chair having served on the
board going through many of
these kinds of things there are
times when you want to remove
the building or change its use
from being a public school to
being storage or other kinds of
things and the local community
sometimes arrests up welcome to
be on the local school board to
be some of the most contentious
areas but that really is a local
decision it's once that decision
is been made that this bill
would come into effect through
the public school facilities
authority.
So Mr chair Senators really
nothing requiring that the
school district would look or
talk to the local community
about alternative use for the
building before because you know
that could get that cost off
their books without adding the
cost of capital outlay council
of tearing down the building
because you'll just have to tear
down you got to take everything
off you gotta take it to a
landfill you know there's a lot
of other costs involved with
your demo demolition in the
building so there's nothing that
would require them to to work
with our local community just be
kind of that school board
relationship.
Mister Jerry I'm in the process
now is they can go to the for
capital outlay in order to have
a building about what this does
is when they come is they don't
have to come up with a local
match for doing it that the it's
completely covered it's a
relatively small amount of the
total that comes to the capital
outlay process but certainly
assist districts where they
don't have to go to the
community for bonding capacity
to get rid of a building which
is almost sounds oxymoron when
you're trying to get it
a people to support their public
schools to have them pay money
to repair schools down again
it's a local decision first this
takes in after the school board
has determined that this
building they would like to get
off of their their insurance the
rules and other things and that
allows that insurance money then
becomes available in classrooms.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir appreciate it that I do
think that this is something we
should we should look at how it
could help some of the the older
districts I don't think it would
really applaud my district
because all the buildings are.
You know within the last thirty
years and the but I will tell
you my community would be
furious if the building was torn
down when we don't have
buildings for anything in our
community if you want to open a
business and in Rio Rancho it's
hard to find an empty building
to open a business and and so
that would be really difficult
thing in my district but I I do
see the need in other districts
thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt will
move on to Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator souls for bringing the
sport and thank you stand around
for mentioning the need for this
it is a very big need was
specially when we talk about
money getting a spent and
whether we have it now to do
things land is the first issue
when it comes to my district
that's why we have to have
schools torn down completely
because there is no land in that
sense it but it's a long process
to have it
give in and set aside we're very
lucky with some of the other
areas in which stated donate
maybe a small track of land so
even moving forward some of the
areas at the government
buildings a generations and
generations I practically went
to school in of my brothers and
sisters and some of my aunts and
uncles in the same buildings so
they need to be brought up to
code when we talk about eighty
eight and simply when we just
say oh well we can just upgrade
the building well if there's S.
best isn't in that basement is
necessary they won't move on
that they won't budge on it many
kind of in that sense we it's a
necessary thing to tear down the
screen it is a high cost and as
far as having someone in the
area to come up with the funding
to take it over that's almost I
want to say some possible we
have a power ball winner up in
Shiprock so.
Well supported that thank you
senator souls thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator Pinto I don't
see any other hands raised from
the committee so I will ask for
a motion or do passed to have
that I'm in the past.
And you have a second from
Senator and so all right.
The committee secretary can do a
roll call.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Key.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Well.
Renewable yes Senator Paypen
excuse me Senator Padilla now.
Senator Pinto yes.
Senator pulp yes.
Senator souls yes.
We have a due pass.
Thank you committee I appreciate
it.
Senator so you have a do pass on
Senate bill forty three it looks
like we have about.
Thirteen minutes.
so we have to do a hard right so
I will pass it over to you.
There's one introduced anymore.
And that thank you Mr chairman I
think we are able to do Senate
bill fifty of fifty four of this
bill is been it heard in this
committee for the past two years
it is going all the way through
spending ring when it the reason
demand that it had nothing to do
with the bill added over on the
house last time this is a very
much a technicality type of bill
this Senate bill fifty four the
public schools facility
authority functions Mr Chambliss
office is funded based on a
percentage of the prior awards
two districts over the prior
three years what we have large
changes in the overall budget
over the last couple of years
their budget was very small and
then the next year there would
be a very large increase in
budget and awards and he was
functioning with an average of
the last three years for budget
was very difficult this bill
very simply changes from doing
it over a rolling average of
three years or budgeting for his
area to play five years so that
it smooths out those large ups
and downs in his ability to
manage the public school
facilities authority.
Mr chair if I didn't explain
that well if you'd like to very
briefly expand but I think it
really is just changes the
funding from the rolling three
year average of the facility of
the awards made to a rolling
five year average.
That's correct the Mr chair
senator soles of your summation
is is on point I would say that
we had a
We had of the three years in a
row of relatively small amounts
awarded from the fund and the
school years sixteen seventeen
and eighteen and as a result of
that those prior three years put
our put a hard cap on our
operating budget for FY nineteen
FY twenty.
that
Forced us to operated reduced
staffing level.
Was a fairly significant
reduction in our budget
in those years upper FY twenty
one going forward.
Will will be more stabilized our
budget
Based on the larger amount of
awards that have been made.
Sense but for the long term
lesson learned from this
experience is that our agency
would certainly benefit from a
greater stability in its
operating budget and the five
year average rather than a three
year average won't subject the
HSD to these kind of budgetary
up potholes.
In the future so it's a it's an
important policy change to
provide some a better
predictability stability for the
agency going forward.
Mr chair again this bill is
passed easily through this
committee and Senate floor and
everything in prior years but
got hung up in some personal
politics take things last year
and so we bring it forth again
to stabilize the funding source.
Great thank you Mr chair like
right now moving to public
comment if we have anyone in
opposition to this bill Senate
bill fifty four.
Are you know at this time we
don't have anyone listed who
wanted to speak in opposition is
there anyone in the public who
would like to speak now who
didn't get a chance to email me
ahead of time.
It doesn't appear so sewer von
to supporters first we'll hear
from Joe Kian.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee to be in with the
New Mexico school boards
association and again member of
the public school capital outlay
council as the sponsor indicated
Senator souls indicated.
This would eliminate the peaks
and valleys from from our hiring
process and staffing process at
the public school facilities
authority on these projects take
three to four years to complete
we've been out of an all time
high in the number of projects
with all the additional the
programs that we've implemented
over the last three or four
years and one or two years of of
limited funding would really
impact our state are adequate
staffing for these projects so
again we support the the.
The bill and I think the the
selected for the chair for us
sponsoring the bill.
Thank you now we'll hear from
Stan rounds Mr rounds.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee thank you center sold
for bringing this for this bills
also endorsed by the public to
capitalize oversight task force
I'm stand around for the
superintendents in New Mexico as
we did last year we stand strong
support stability is very
important to proper staffing in
a proper management of the
public school capital outlay
fund thank you.
Thank you and now we hear from
Chris falls on.
Attractors boasts on a
registered lobbyist for a Las
Cruces public schools and we
stand and support for this bill
for the same reasons a stated
previously thank you.
And that was the last person for
public statement are there any
other people who would like to
speak.
And that looks like everyone.
Thank you more Kayla now I will.
Yes it over to comments and
questions from the committee
right now I do not have any
hands up.
Okay Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chair if there's no
I would like to do passive
there's no no one else on the
list second I think I have a
second from Senator Pinto so the
committee secretary can do a
roll call.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Icky.
Yes.
Yes hundred renewable yes.
Yeah yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope.
Yes Sanders Sauls yes we have a
due pass.
Thank you everyone and the
hopefully we'll get it all the
way through get some stability
in the the funding for the
public school facilities
supported.
All right senator souls should
we press on.
the next one almost certainly is
going to take a bit longer than
the time we have remained and so
I want to thank you for so very
able the cherry while I was was
presenting my bills do that
masterfully very much appreciate
having you there just for the
committee we are will not get to
the other three to four on our
list so you're gonna have one
more for me on Wednesday so as
senator Neville what we're
talking about like we do
certainly have an agenda for
Wednesday that that we can
follow through on so on
Wednesday will and SB sixty
three photovoltaic systems for
new public schools Senate bill
ninety four student athlete
endorsement act Senate bill one
oh seven career readiness
systems statewide there will
almost certainly be some
additional education bills get
ready and today we will look at
adding those on to the agenda
for Friday Graham I want to
remind the committee on
Wednesday that at eight o'clock
we have a combined be with the
house Education Committee of the
secretary of education Dr Ryan
Stewart will be there and the
discussion will be about the re
opening of schools February.
And moving forward I hope as a
committee that we will look
forward and not use that as a
plan to the bashing prior
decision but really what does
this mean for our districts I
know we're getting lots of
questions about who's
responsible what do we do when
and really trying to get some
information about what this is
the first students moving
forward and certainly the staff
at school than other kinds of
things Senator Moores I
apologize we are going to get
you today.
Will be up second on Wednesday
the first one will take a little
while and so probably won't be
until probably at least nine
thirty or so on Wednesday we
will see you then serve and
Mr OSHA it's good seeing you
again it's been a while and but
what will have you back on on
Wednesday thank you.
There is anything else from the
committee any questions concerns
issues of the week for eight
o'clock on Wednesday is a
difference to win you should be
getting from our hello the plan
is that we'll go from eight
eight forty five will have a
fifteen minute break and then
we'll pick up on a regular
meeting at nine o'clock.
Rejected by will bring you any
himself I'm not seeing any gyms
going up you if that's the case
we will adjourn for today and we
have a four session starts at a
level.
Thank you all very productive I
appreciate it have you see
virtually on the other side and
and the the chamber.
