President.
Of the of itchy, which is again
the Western interstate
Consortium of Higher Education.
New Mexico is a member of that,
and so Demi, if you'd like to
come up, please, any other
announcements before we get
started?
OK, and I think we have 11.
11:30.
Then
We'll check and find out.
We have a fairly short agenda,
so I think we'll get through
that without too much.
I don't think it's gonna be an
issue today, but we'll, but
we'll see. 11:30. OK. So, I mean
if you come up, please. Thank
you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee.
For the record, my name is Jemm
Michel, and I'm the president of
the Western Interstate
Commission for Higher Education,
or WIE. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here with you.
Honor and a privilege.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, uh.
I'm sorry.
My apologies, Mr. Chairman, I
seem to have cursed it.
Thank you and my apologies. Um,
the goal of my presentation this
morning is to share information
about the long-standing
partnership between Wichi and
New Mexico. In 1951, Wy was
formed through the Western
Regional Education Compact.
And the Western governors had
come together back then to form
the compact and the Spirit
Regional collaboration and
resource sharing. Well, we are a
state organization formed by
states. The compact was ratified
by Congress in 1953.
We are one of 4 regional higher
education compacts in the
country and New Mexico is one of
our founding states.
Our mission is really quite
straightforward. We work
collaboratively to expand
educational access and
excellence for all residents of
the West, and we do that through
promoting innovation,
cooperation, resource sharing,
and sound policy. This map that
you see here, I realize is not
um an accurate visual
representation because I can't
fit our large region on a map, I
would need a globe, but you can
see that our regions spans from
North Dak Dakota all the way to
Palau.
We serve an incredibly diverse
region in terms of geography,
demographics, political
leanings, economies, etc. but we
come together around issues of
higher education, workforce, and
economic vitality.
I like to share this slide to
give you a sense of the history
and development of which he's
membership. We started with 5
states and grew membership
through the 1950s, but we
remained studies and we remained
steady until about the mid 1980s
when North and South Dakota
joined. And then we had another
period of stability until about
2012 when the US territories and
freely associated states joined.
In the US Pacific territories
and freely associated states
share a membership. And there
are reasons for this, um.
One, there are 6, and they have,
if you look at their population,
if you add their entire
population together, they still
are smaller than our smallest
state, uh, their economies are
such that they're um, uh,
there's a lot of poverty and um
economic challenges there and
the commission at the time
decided that it was best for
them to share a membership.
But she's governed by a
commission composed of 3
individuals from each of our
states and that Pacific Island
membership, and they have 3
primary responsibilities. They
provide strategic direction.
They have fiduciary authority
over the organization and they
evaluate the president.
Our commission officers rotate
around the region and represent
the various states and
perspectives. Currently, our
chair is from New Mexico, and
we're very proud of that. Doctor
Barbara Dameron represents the
University of New Mexico, and
she's the former secretary of
Higher Education.
Senator Ann Milner is from Utah.
And
Excuse me. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, Senator Ann Milner
is from Utah and our immediate
past here is Doctor Antoine
Jefferson, representing
Colorado.
Our current commissioners from
New Mexico, two of whom are in
the room. We have, um, Doctor
Robert Dameron, once again, uh,
Senator Bill Souls and Doctor
Patricia Sullivan, who hails
from New Mexico State
University.
The commission approves our
annual work plan, which guides
the work of staff and sets the
direction of our organization.
Our 5 strategic priorities are
listed here and um we work very
hard to advance the mission in
the context of those strategic
priorities.
Now I'll focus more specifically
on the long-standing partnership
with New Mexico.
Richie Student Access programs
are generally what people most
commonly know itchy for, um, we,
we have 3.
Primary student access programs
and those programs increase
access for students, tackle
affordability, and allow
institutions to maximize their
higher education resources.
are offering for students at all
three levels, undergraduate,
graduate studies, as well as
students seeking a professional
degree in healthcare fields.
The Western undergraduate
exchange or WUI allows students
to access programs across state
lines at reduced out of state
tuition rates. Importantly, this
program, no money is exchanged
between the states just by
virtue of membership, uh,
students can access those
benefits.
Students saved an estimated
across the region over $615
million in the region by
participating through WUI alone.
Our WUI program served over
49,000 students in academic year
2425 and 170 schools participate
in WUI with an average savings
of $12,500.
There are other benefits of WUI
as well, providing greater
options for students. We know
some students will choose to uh
go out of state and it helps
keep programs robust and viable
and avoids duplication of unique
programs.
This illustration gives and just
a, a sense of where students go
both coming into New Mexico and
when they leave, they're about
1300 students who access uh
programs outside of New Mexico
and about 751 WI students who
come into New Mexico, there is a
lot of mobility across uh the
line from Colorado and New
Mexico, that will not surprise
you, um, and that, and also
Arizona and the students that
are coming into New Mexico, I'll
point out many of those are
coming from.
California.
The student or the institutions
that receive the most out of
state undergraduate students are
the University of New Mexico,
Eastern New Mexico University
and New Mexico State University.
We have a similar, similarly
structured program at the
graduate level called the
Western Regional Graduate
Program or WRGP and I, I feel I
must apologize for all of our
acronyms. We have a lot. Um, and
again, with this program,
students pay no more than 150%
of resident tuition and no money
is exchanged between the states.
WRGP is quite a bit smaller than
Wui in terms of size and scope,
um, but it is growing. We are
seeing more programs, uh, enter
into, uh, the, the WRGP program
and there's sort of a structural
reason for that up until a few
years ago, we had some
restrictions on what types of
programs were allowed in. Now
that the door has pretty much
been swung open, um, we're
finding a lot of institutions
are finding uh that very useful
to help expand access into their
universities.
And so currently we have about
3000 students that are served
through WRGP. We have 67
participating colleges and
universities with the savings of
about $40 million over the last
or the current academic year,
excuse me.
The average savings for students
is about $13,961.
Benefits of WRGP are similar to
WUI, um, keeping in mind that
this is at the graduate level.
And the numbers are again
smaller for New Mexico, but
you'll see that um more students
are coming into New Mexico then
leaving for the graduate
programs, and that says a lot
about your, uh, New Mexico
institutions, the uh
institutions that are benefiting
the most from WRGP or eastern
New Mexico University and then
University of New Mexico and New
Mexico State University.
The 3rd program that I will
discuss is our professional
student exchange program, and I
know there's a lot of interest
and participation, uh, from the
state in this program, uh, the.
Professional student exchange
program or PAP as it's known,
allows students pursuing health
careers in 10 healthcare fields
to enroll in participating
programs in the Wichi region and
simultaneously they uh received
substantial tuition support, and
that tuition support is a result
of the appropriation from this
body.
Um, and that's direct. Students
save between about 9000 and
$35,000 annually on tuition
depending on the field that they
choose to go into.
Overall, the most popular fields
are vet me, optometry, and
dentistry.
In terms of PSAP, uh, the total
tuition savings was about $15
million. The program overall
again is smaller than the other
two, which is not surprising
given it's a professional level.
We served, uh, 556 students this
past, uh, or the current
academic year, and they're about
130 programs available.
This is a snapshot of a piece up
uh from New Mexico, um, New
Mexico is one of our um most
participatory states, uh,
students saved over $2 million
in academic year 2024, 25, and
that again is a direct
appropriation from the
legislature.
The fields that uh students are
benefiting from, as, which is a
choice by this state, is
dentistry. You have supported 28
students this year, 3 in
optometry and 37 in vetmed and
68 students total are benefiting
from this program. And it's
important to know that 94% of
your students are coming back to
work and live in New Mexico as a
result of this investment.
I also want to briefly mention
whichie's policy work because
this will be quite relevant to
what do.
Relevant to what you do here at
the legislature. We offer a
variety of policy and data
resources and support and
technical assistance should you
find that you need that, um, I
don't have time to show all of
the resources that we have, but
we have a lot of data around um
tuition and fees, uh, grant aid,
anything that you might need
that could show your uh
positioning with respect to
other states and in the region.
So, um, I'd be happy to answer
any questions about that.
I will mention just two aspects
of our policy work that I think
is important for you to know
about, the first is our
legislative advisory Committee,
which works to strengthen state
policymaking and higher
education across the West. This
body has been in existence since
the mid-nineties and I used to
personally staff it, and I don't
have favorite things in whichy,
but if I had a favorite thing,
this is one of them, um.
And the legislative advisory
committee is composed of state
legislators, uh, from each of
our, uh, itchy members, our
states and Pacific Island
membership, up to 4 from each
state and the uh and the.
Network, the LAC comes together
annually in September for a
meeting, and they have
opportunities to engage with
each other, um, explore policy
issues, learn about relevant
research and uh just be informed
about the emerging policy issues
that are happening in the West,
and it really benefits us as
itchy because we can keep our
finger on the pulse of what's
happening across the region
legislatively.
Our legislative committee
members from New Mexico are
shown here. Um, we have
representative Romero,
Representative Saranana and
Senator Bill Soz.
The other area of work that I
want to mention is really quite
current and um.
We have, it's our projections of
high school graduates. And we
have been projecting the number
of high school graduates, uh,
every 4 years since the late
70s, it's kind of a.
One of our most widely known,
uh, data products and our most
recent release was in December
of 2024. And so we've been going
around the country, um, and, and
I say the country, not just the
West, because we do national
projections, um, sharing these
data, we've had, um, webinars,
we've been doing lots of
presentations, so I, I wanted to
share this in case there is a
need here in New Mexico, we'd be
happy to come down and do any
presentations if that would be
useful. Um, you also can explore
our uh data.
Yeah.
That is freely available on our
website if you're interested in
that. The, the utility of our
knocking work is really to show
um what you can expect from the
K-12 pipeline coming down um in
terms of what you may expect in
enrollments in post-secondary
education.
I will close by mentioning two
other areas of work within
which, um, we have WCET which is
our uh area within the
organization that focuses on
digital learning, it's, you can
kind of think of it as a
national organization within a
regional interstate compact and
they really focus on the
practice policy and advocacy of
digital learning in higher
education. The membership is
primarily institutions, but they
have some systems and other
entities as well.
They have done a lot of work on
artificial intelligence,
monitoring federal and state
policy issues and sort of the
post COVID world and what
digital learning, uh, looks like
in that and um have been very
useful in uh the in the.
Analysis and um monitoring of
digital learning in in today's
world.
The current members just as a
reference from New Mexico that
participate in WCET are listed
here. I won't read them for you,
um, but that gives you a sense
of the the participation in WCT.
And then finally we have a
behavioral health program within
the organization and that.
Behavioral health program is not
new. It's been part of Wiy since
the mid-1950s. And the focus of
the behavioral health program
has really been about promoting
and um expanding the and meeting
the workforce needs of the rural
West. We have one key initiative
in New Mexico that I'd like to
mention, which is a psychology
internship program and it's
working to train mental health
professionals that will stay and
work in New Mexico.
We were pleased to announce just
this month that the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority and the New
Mexico psychology Internship
Consortia received full
accreditation from the American
Psychology Association for their
psychology internship program,
and they're dedicated to
training, recruiting, and
retaining behavioral health
providers in rural and
underserved New Mexico.
Their work is located in Silver
City, Shiprock and Las Vegas. As
you can see, we, um, are.
Uh, we continue to work closely
with the state. We're proud of
what we do here and we hope we
just look forward to many more
productive years. Thank you for
the opportunity to be here, Mr.
Chairman, and I welcome any
questions.
Thank you very much, Doctor
Mitchell Lou. Where do you want
to be called Demi Doctor
Mitchell Demy, OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That's
easier.
And, uh, Barbara, did you wanna
come up and say a few words as
current president?
Thank you and Doctor Dameron was
the prior secretary of higher
education under the last
administration and was
wonderful, great to work with.
Um, so we have plenty of time
for some questions from the
committee.
Anyone has
Particular questions and and a
couple of things, um.
There are openings on the
advisory membership. If anybody
is interested in expanding your
knowledge of higher education
type things, serving on the
education committees. Uh, we are
lacking any Republicans on that
if anybody is not looking in a
particular direction, um.
And because I'm one of the
regular commissioners, I could
easily step off of that and make
room for someone else on that as
well.
Um
Also, one of the things and I
know I've uh.
Talked with Demi about a little
bit is down in New Mexico State,
New Mexico is one of the couple
of states that has prescribing
psychologists as a professional
degree and about trying to add
that into the EAP program for
other states for people to come.
That are interested in
prescribing psychologists to
meet their behavioral health
kinds and needs.
Any questions?
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you,
a very good presentation. I, I
definitely, uh, enjoyed that.
Just one quick question, you
mentioned your fast facts, you
always have these savings. How
do you determine these savings,
uh, for each of these programs
that you?
discussed.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thornton, thank you for the
question. Um, we collect data in
partnership with our
institutions, and that's part of
the agreement with the
institutions, so we are able to,
um.
Uh, work with them to to
understand their tuition levels,
and then, um, we have the um the
formulas to be able to establish
that. And we know how many
students are in each program and
what the out of state, uh, or
the non-resident, excuse me,
tuition rate is and then we're
able to.
Anyone else
Send it up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I do appreciate your
presentation this morning
whenever you're talking on, on
this along the same lines as
Senator Thornton was. Can you
tell me some of the problem I'm
not asking you to name all of
where these where there's access
to these certain programs on
your WRGP Fafax.
Mr. Chairman Senator is out, um,
yes, and um relying on my memory
is probably not the best, but
what I also can do, um, and I'll
list a few, um, we have, um, IT,
we have, um, um.
There's their health care, some
healthcare ones, um, there is,
there are business ones there,
are business ones they they
really is anything, any
institution um wants to include,
um, for instance, University of
Hawaii has all of their programs
like they have, they have made
that decision to allow every
single graduate program at the
institution. So that gives you a
sense of the breath of that, um,
one thing that we are uh talking
about as a commission right now
is there is currently a
limitation that um
WRG if if it's a, if it's a PAP
program, it is not.
Allowed to be a WRGP program,
there are some, uh, there was a
rationale for the commission to
have that at one point, and I do
expect the commission to have
that conversation if that may,
that restriction may, um,
possibly be lifted at some
point, um, and there's, there's
a conversation to be had around
that, but uh, there really are,
um, many opportunities in my
opinion, uh, for WRGP for
institutions to really think
about how they want to use that
program to uh.
Manage their capacity, you know,
if they have programs that
perhaps uh have extra space,
they may want and they don't
have that currently listed in
WRGP, they may want to think
about doing that so that they
can keep that program viable.
Appreciate that, that that's
good to know.
On
This year, I don't know how to,
it's it's a PSEP students from
New Mexico and I was really
encouraged whenever I saw that
obviously for veterinary
medicine, there's 37 students
that are benefiting from this.
Um
We're the majority of these
students.
Going to school.
Whenever they leave New Mexico,
I know that they can prep like
in New Mexico State or eastern
either one. And then they can
make applications. So where can
you tell me where most of these
students are going in your
consortium that you have right
here.
Mr. Chairman Senator Azel, um, I
can get that data for you. Um,
I, I would.
The
It would not probably be great
if I guessed. I mean, I, I can
probably guess, but I can get
specifically where the New
Mexico students are attending on
this handout that this young
lady is going to Washington
State University. I know of a
couple of other students that
have gone to Washington state,
but I was really, really
thrilled with her interest in
beef cattle, but I don't know
what this word is.
T H E R I O G E N O L O G Y.
That's.
Oh.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I don't
either.
the chairman
and Senator, I, you had asked
about the veterinarian. I think
the majority of their vet
students go to Colorado State.
Uh they do go to other ones, and
I know through which we've been
working on getting an agreement
with the
Whatever the one is in the
middle of the country where our
students on Eastern that have an
agreement with the Texas
schools.
Which is sort of a little side
piece of itchy that we've helped
set up for them so they get it
more regionally y'all don't have
to tell me that. I just saw that
and I'm like I don't know what
that means
anyway
a branch of veterinary medicine
that focuses on animal
reproduction. That's awesome
and
I'm really surprised that I have
never heard that word because
all the all the studies has been
done on.
metal is applicable to human
beings as far as uh.
Artificial insemination, the
whole nine yards because of the
cycle of the cows, the same as
the female, so.
Human, OK, and then Mr.
Chairman.
Like I said, I'm, I'm really
excited.
Tell me about the on the back
part of it, you're talking about
behavioral health program.
Tell me what full full
accreditation.
is on that particular part of
your program.
Psychology psychology internship
program.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Azel,
thank you for that question. Uh,
so just as a little background,
I think it might be helpful to
explain first what a student is
required to do. So in order to
become a fully licensed clinical
psychologist, a student needs to
earn their side or psychology
PhD in psychology, and then they
have to do a one year
internship.
And that internship program must
be accredited by the American
Psychology Association. And
that's the accreditation piece
that you're asking about and
to give a little more background
about the programs that we're
doing in the West, we found
about 10 or 12 years ago that we
did not, we had many, many
Western states that had no
accredited psychology internship
slots and so we had programs and
we were uh preparing students
and then forcing them to go to
an internship elsewhere out of
the West and we know that many
students will live and practice
where they do their internship.
started working with Western
states to, uh, develop these
accredited internship slots and
programs and work with the APA
to make sure that they were um
viable and um we started in um
Oregon and Alaska, and now we
are in 10 states and Guam and
New Mexico's program is
relatively new in the grand
scheme of things, but um we are
really pleased with the progress
of where things are going now
and it's a
It's a big deal to get that full
accreditation now because those
students can go out into the uh
workplace there, they've
graduated from an accredited
program, they're licensed
clinical psychologists, they've
been working in rural areas, so
we're really excited about that.
Well, Mr. Chairman and uh you're
Analysis of what they have to go
through to be able to come back
to our state is very encouraging
to me because we do have
problems here. We're trying to
address the mental health issues
and the state of New Mexico, and
I think that this might be an
absolute bonus for what we're
trying to get done here, so I do
appreciate that. Thank you for
all your answers and for the
presentation.
Thank you Senator and
uh from our last meeting where I
really learned about that, uh,
behavioral health, the
internships is
When they finish their PhD, they
have a match date similar to
doctors do, and there were no
matches in New Mexico available
and so we were sending our
people off to Idaho and other
places kind of crossing our
fingers that they were going to
come back and now we've got a
number and hoping to expand to
lots more in other communities.
So if you've got contacts with
behavioral health providers that
would like to be internship
sites for our New Mexico
students, we're looking to
expand that.
Sure, or Doctor Damer, I
apologize. Barbara's fine, Mr.
Chair and Senator Reel. I also
want to add to that, we're very
excited to announce that lannel
Los Amos National Lab has now
become one of the sites. Um, I
have a colleague who works there
and one day it hit me. Why
aren't we training our
psychologists while allowing
them to come to land. They have
a very robust uh psychology
program there to provide
psychology services for all the
scientists and staff who work at
Lane. And so after about a year
of work, uh.
We now have that as one of the
sites. So it's very exciting. We
already have interest in, as you
can imagine, psychologists from
around the country wanting to
come in to have their internship
at Lane. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Other questions?
They're both
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation. I know
Witchy is more involved with a
lot of the graduate and
professional programs, but um
just wondering, is there any
type of support.
Um, given to undergraduate
students and how is the
information kind of given to
them, um, just to make sure they
know about this program and
No help.
involved.
Mr. Chair and Senator Pope, um.
So we, we are a very small staff
at Wichi right now for all of
our student access programs, we
have, uh.
2.8 FTE on that about um 33 FTE,
so we do not, we really leverage
our high school counselors and
our, uh,
Other types of tools such as um
our website, working with the
institutions, um, however, we
are very excited. Um, we have
really pushed this last year
trying to use some different
tools we just created a wooee
video that, um, is now on our
website and our, our wooee
information on our witchy
website is by far the most
visited area of our website. And
we have put a lot of attention
and investment in that.
Um
And
Next week.
It was supposed to be this week,
but it's next week. Um, we have
um, uh, worked to um essentially
get a list of 14,000 counselors
across the West that we will be
sending, um, not only the video
but a variety of resources that
we've created to directly
contact them, and we've never
been able to do anything like
that before and we're very
excited about the impact that
that could have because of the
timing of letting them know
about Wui. We do not have kind
of back to your first question,
um, our
um,
uh, savings program at the
undergraduate level is Woo. We
do not have an equivalent
program where the legislature
can invest like PSAP, right? Um,
but the, the wooy program, um,
is really where our efforts have
been allowing for those types of
uh tuition savings and, and
again, we're about um.
40,000 students across the West,
but we are, we're, we're working
really hard to make sure that
the word gets out and using
technology to try to do that in
a better way.
And if I might, uh, because we
talk in acronyms, Wooee is the
undergraduate program that
allows people to pay no more
than 150% of in-state tuition to
go elsewhere where normal out of
state tuition is usually 4 or 5
times in-state tuition. And so
it's a big savings for our
students to have these yes, go
ahead, center.
OK, uh, I do want to point out
that even when a a long time ago
in the last.
I remember what we're talking
about here.
Even whenever I was in high
school, the witch you program
was brought up through our
counselor that we had at Artiha
High School, so the programs
were put out there for the
students to access and so I do
appreciate that and it's still
alive and well in my particular
district so thank you for that.
That's all Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
witchy presentation. It's not,
thank you and thank you for
coming down from Denver from the
national office, and I think
you're headed over to the house
to do a similar presentation for
the House Education Committee.
So again, thank you for for
joining us this morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you members of the
committee. This was a real
pleasure.
And if anybody is interested in
being appointed as one of the
legislative liaisons to which I
think you talked to Mimi Stewart
about that, the pro tem steward.
OK, if not, then we'll move into
our schedule for today, um, and
we may have to move around a
little bit depending on whether
people have to be in other
meetings, but first, we'll start
with Senate Bill 416, the pre-K
through 3rd grade online math
and reading that compos.
And Senator, I believe we have
an amendment. Do we want to move
the amendment first, so we're
talking about the whole bill or
is it better to talk about it
and then the amendment. Thank
you very much Mr. Chair, members
of the Senate Education
Committee, it's probably best to
go ahead and move the amendment
because that does make the uh
significant change and it does
clarify exactly how the
resources would be used where
they would go. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. OK, if you would
please, Mr. Chairman, I'd like
to move, uh,
Amendment 231497.1 for
discussion purposes.
OK, for discussion purposes, uh,
I don't know if you'll explain
to us what the amendment does.
So basically, Mr. Chair, members
of the Senate Education
Committee instead of us talking
about uh pre-kindergarten all
the way to grade 3. All it does
is it specifies that it would be
um the resources would be used
for the kindergarten level.
Uh, for the online math and
reading initiatives that would
be produced, if you will,
through uh modern technology.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, on the amendment,
anyone in the audience?
No the amendment in it there
anybody online? Probably not.
committee members on the
amendment.
The discussion on the amendment.
Seeing none, we can have a
motion for the amendment,
please, Mr. Chair, I move a do
pass on Amendment 23. We have a
motion for a due pass.
The 2nd, seconded by Senator
Boone.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman, I gave you the
wrong number, so I, I apologize.
It's 23. I move the amendment
231497.1.
OK, I'm sorry, I,
I thought I had followed
through, but I must have missed
it, so.
So everybody know which
amendment we're talking about
that the right one? OK, I'll
make sure we're not.
Making an amendment to something
for a different bill and I.
OK. Is there any opposition to
the amendment?
No opposing, you haven't amended
bill 7. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee, in essence,
uh, what this bill does is it
requests a million dollars from
the general fund and with that,
this, the purpose of this would
go ahead and be to use some of
the initiatives that have been
developed and will continue to
be developed, if you will, uh,
to improve, if you will, math
and reading support for
kindergartners, along with that
the initiative itself uh is.
very creative in the sense that
what it does is it takes uh
today's uh modern.
Technology and ways to make
learning fun, uh, I'm gonna go
ahead and go up a little bit in
terms of post-secondary
education many years back when I
was with Luna Community College,
uh, developed a similar program,
but for uh more of the adult
learners and within that, what
it does is it takes the uh
creative uh means to uh help to
develop ways so that people
enjoy learning, if you will,
particularly like the program
that we saw the other day where
as we go through.
Uh, we do go back, if you will
to areas like algebra.
Same thing with uh reading in
terms of some of the modern
technologies as they uh have
games that uh propose this, uh,
this too would go ahead and be
one of those initiatives again,
uh, what this does is it also
helps, if you will, uh, support,
if you will, the initiatives
that are making their way
through the legislature. I
realized that there are already
resources that are available in
other programs, uh, for things
like reading and math, uh, but
with this one specifically, if
It does make it out of this
committee. The intent would use
be to use the language.
If you will, some of those uh
modern technologies in order to
go ahead and provide uh
incentives and better ways if
you will to help young people
learn, uh, both reading and
math. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee and I'm
available for questions.
OK, thank you. Up to the
audience first, those in support
of this initiative.
OK, is there anyone in
opposition?
A, if you'd like to come down.
Vo your support.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm JD
Bullington, uh, speaking on
behalf of myself today. I have
been lobbying alternative
education choices, many of those
virtual for several years in
front of this legislature and
what this appropriation is about
is that there are now some
amazing.
Programs that only require 10 to
15 minutes a day.
On the part of parents and
students they are game based.
Some of them are are are
developed by former people who
worked at Disney and these
game-based reading and math.
Instructional literacy programs
have the ability to really,
really move the needle. There
was a recent study out of
Florida.
Where they took two groups of
kids, one of them used one of
these little programs for 10
minutes a day game-based and
over the course of 6 months,
just one school year.
Those kids who had this 10
minutes a day.
App that's Gamebase for for
reading versus the ones who
didn't, they were 4 months
ahead.
In reading at their grade level,
young kids than the ones who
weren't using this for 10 or 15
minutes a day. These are
designed to go in the public
schools to be a learning tool
for teachers and also the
parents can use them at homework
period and because they're
electronic and digital, they
track the progress in real time
of each student as they go
through these programs and the
teachers can get a reassessment
and, and re-evaluate where that
student is every single day.
They're just.
Absolutely amazing. Um,
Secretary Padilla has seen
demonstrations of this, um,
she's not here supporting it.
I'm not saying PE is supporting
it, but these programs are
looked at very favorably now.
Thank you. Anyone else?
We went online.
OK, back to questions from the
committee.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you for bringing this
forward, uh, Senator Campbell,
um, quick question for me, I
guess a couple of things. Is
there a particular software that
you have in mind for uh.
Or you see ECD to use.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and thank you very much, Senator
Thornton. It's a very good
question, and this is one that
uh I'm always dealing with and
very concerned about as we move
forward, there is not any
specific curricula, if you will,
or program that uh we would have
in mind.
This would go ahead and have to
be uh put out if you will, to
those who would have an interest
in programs like this because
they're already making their way
across the country and within
that there would be a uh a
vetting and a procurement
process if this bill were to
pass and the resources were to
be made available. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, Senator
Thornton.
Thank you for that, uh, Senator,
Mr. Chair, so I, I guess my
question really is then is this.
Since it's going to be going out
to all.
K through 12 or K through 3, K
through 3 like.
Is that correct? Mr. Chair,
Senator Thornton, uh just
kindergarten now with the
amended bill.
So then it's so.
So is it going to be centralized
out of ECD ECD or is it going
to, are they each be allowed to
uh pick their own Mr. Chair and
senator would be centralized and
then from there, of course,
those that would uh have an
interest in participating within
this, uh, they would go ahead
and work, if you will, through
the uh central means of how this
would be developed.
Thank you Mr. Chair. That's all
I have. Thank you. Other
questions?
Oh, there, sorry, I didn't,
didn't see your hand. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, Senator Campos, I see
that uh the request you're
asking for will be a recurring
expense, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator is, it
would be a uh recurring amount.
Again, just to go back, however,
if this was to make its way
through this committee and it
made its way to finance. Uh, it
would be again reviewed uh it
may not end up as a recurring
expense. It could end up as a
non-recurring one-time expense,
uh, where this would turn out to
be a pilot project.
Again, making its way through
the process, and I continue to
reiterate, uh, even though this
is where it's at today, uh,
again, it could change as it
makes its way to the finance
committee if uh it is uh so
intended by this committee.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator Ruzel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for that response. I am
looking here quite uh I'm
curious why, why are you
changing it from the
pre-kindergarten through 3, now
making it just available for
kindergarten.
So Mr. Chair, Senator is a
couple of uh questions there
because within that if we went
ahead and we did uh the K3 or
pre-K3, uh, we would be dealing,
if you will, with uh possibly
two subsets and so in terms of
this, the intent now would be to
target uh one of the smaller
learning groups and in
particularly the kindergarten
group, uh, aside from that, uh,
we didn't want to go ahead and
convolute the process in terms
of.
Uh, the expansion in terms of
going from early childhood all
the way, if you will, to, to
grade 3.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Oh, thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman, and Senator.
I'm looking at the analysis from
the ECECD.
And under significant issues.
According to the American
Academy of Pediatrics, Children
aged 3 through 10 should have no
more than 1 hour of screen time
per day.
And then I'm seeing that it's uh
underperforming performance
implications is saying that it's
uh very structured.
Uh, instructional time.
So is the
Kindergarten instructor going to
be.
Working with these children
individually.
So Mister Chainator is ill, in
essence, uh, let's say for
example, in a kindergarten
classroom, what would occur, it
would be for uh no more than the
10 to 15 minute period of time,
it would be on a daily basis. It
would be with the entire group,
however, you would have uh
instructional oversight and then
from there after the uh game
exercise or if you will, the
learning exercise, uh, if there
are any additional questions or
Activities that tie in, they
would not be related directly
to, if you will, the monitoring
or the game, uh, period of time,
they would be, uh, that other
time would be instructional
period where there would be the
socialization, the articulation,
and if you will, possibly some
of the hands-on activities, uh,
that may be related, but they
would not be uh created, if you
will, and used by the uh the
gaming mechanism of the
particular program.
OK.
Thank you for that response, and
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Compass.
We heard uh one of the
proponents of this bill.
Stating that this was.
A game, basically. Is there any
science-based evidence that this
is a better way of teaching
these younger children about
math and where they're going to
embrace it.
So, so Mr. Chair, Senator is and
I'm going back to the
experiences that I had as the
president of Luna Community
College, and we were dealing
directly with game-based
instruction which uh
specifically was in the area of
math.
Uh, helping to basically
understand, if you will, physics
and some of the related uh
components, uh.
It uh takes a different
approach, the science-based
information has indicated that
uh particularly with today's
youth, what they're looking for
are fun ways to learn and along
with that as they learn.
Uh, in a lot of cases they don't
even realize what they're
learning, but they have found
ways through, if you will, the
today's technology, uh, in order
to better understand it and to
learn it, and so that's the
purpose of that. I don't have
the uh specific science-based
data in front of me, but if
there is information that you
require, uh, I'll ensure that
you do get that, uh, database
and uh uh information to you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Risel.
And thank you, Senator Compos
and Mr. Chairman, I do agree
with that.
Learning can be fun, and if it
has to go through a game system
such as you're proposing right
here with this legislation, um.
And it's going to help our
students with math. I'm for it.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Any other questions?
Figueroa.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I just
wanted to clarify with the
amendment.
Um, this bill now pertains to
kindergarten through 3rd grade.
It's not, we didn't strike 3rd
grade, so it's the whole
section, we just struck the ECCD
part.
So, so, Mr. Chair and, and uh uh
representative uh looking
closely at it, yes, however, uh,
the intent right now is going to
go ahead and be the uh the
kindergarten level.
And uh in that, yes, it doesn't.
It states going up to the 3rd
grade, but again, um, I'm, I'm
focusing on the kindergarten, so
uh what I said and then of
course what the bill indicates
uh.
If there's needs to be further
uh clarification, I'd be more
than happy to go and provide
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, sponsor and
The rest is not a particular
question, just a, a comment.
Um, I think if we're talking
about building numeracy and
literacy skills, um, I think I'd
rather not create a silo
targeted for a specific method,
but.
Add money and increase to the
pot where we are providing like.
Tutoring to students.
targeted to those who need it,
opportunities for all students
to play in our education budget.
We need to build out, Mr. Chair,
our education budget as a whole
rather than silo specific things
so that local schools can
choose.
What they need to do for their
children from a broader, bigger
budget.
Um, that's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Couple of questions that I
Um, is this in
The administration budget, the
LFC budget or the LESC budget
that we're going through in
finance committee now. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the Senate Education
Committee. No, it is not. And,
and again as we uh come up for a
60 day or a 30 day session and
uh I am a believer, if you will,
bringing information forward as
we work through the interim,
however, with EESC, with LFC,
with uh other of the interim
committees, uh.
Things
Mm
Don't often
Um, make their way through that
process whenever they start of
the session occurs, we do have
additional uh
pieces of legislation that are
brought to us, uh, we introduced
that because ideas do continue
to flow and uh through the
process, at least as part of
what I deal with, um, I believe
that as many thoughts and ideas
need to continue to make their
way through the system. They are
vetted, but again this has not
been a recommendation or a piece
either through LESC, LFC, or any
of the other interim committees
that uh that I'm aware of. Thank
you, Mr.
itu
Thank you. Um,
Where would this go in the
education budget? Would this be
a grant program that the
districts would apply to the PE
to get money to support this,
uh, tell me more about how it
would function.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
education committee, uh, if the
resources were appropriated, uh,
then of course they would go
again to a central location from
there then through the program
itself, uh, in essence, uh, it
would be developed.
I would anticipate as a grant
program, uh, as we do other
programs below the line and
within that uh those that uh
feel like this would be very
appropriate for their learning
curricula, uh, they would apply
for that and then of course be
monitored and uh and the
resources would go for
implementation of that program
at that level.
Thank you. Our districts able to
do this now if they have
capacity within their budgets
to.
to contract with the company to
to do this. Thank you very much
Mr. Chairman, members of the
Senate Education Committee, as
we all know, whenever uh SCG and
if you will, below the line
resources go to districts, uh,
that is determined, if you will,
by the Board of Education by the
superintendent by the
administrative staff in terms of
how they are going to utilize
resources that go to the
district, so.
uh, my
But uh they would be able to go
ahead and use their existing
resources for a program like
this. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And this question may
go to Greg, you know, and I put
you on the spot a little bit,
but
Where would this money reside
in is there capacity in ed to
administer another grant program
with this requires some FTE to
manage it.
How would you envision this
functioning?
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Greg Frostadt,
Assistant Secretary of Education
at the Public Education
department, I would anticipate
that this would go in our
teaching, learning and
innovation, um.
Team and that it
As
As it's been discussed, it
sounds, and I have not read the
amendment. It sounds like most
likely it would be
Um, well, it could be handled in
a, in a couple of different
ways, actually. It could be
Wrapped into what we're already
doing around um
Hi
It's not high quality tutor. I'm
trying to remember the other
word, high impact tutoring.
Thank you very much. Um, so it
could be wrapped into our
tutoring programs or it could,
it could be um
It could be an RFP for a vendor
that could provide services
around the state as well. So
there are a couple of different
ways it could be handled. It, it
will be, um,
Important for us to understand
the
Uh, the, the legislative intent
of the appropriation.
Thank you. Uh
My concerns are.
First additional screen time for
very young children. Uh, we
already know that that's a
problem, uh, when we're
everything from doing testing on
the
Was it the I
But
Ice station, uh, you know,
there's concerns about more
online and so much of learning
at that age is relationship with
teachers. It's not about actual
curriculum types of things, um.
This sounds like there are
particular vendors who are
interested in pushing this and a
million dollars spread across
all of our kindergartners.
Groups doesn't go very far if
this actually is an initiative
that we want to be taking
statewide, um, and so I
It, it doesn't, doesn't follow
her track with me when we've got
so many needs and so many other
areas to to be adding additional
little pieces when this was not
vetted through the LESC as part
of a, of a long term program or
through any of the other
mechanisms, but
So that's just where I see it,
so.
Any other questions from
committee members?
That been
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
I, I've just got one quick
question I, I, I think anybody
will figure out pretty quick.
I'm a local control.
Uh
Yeah, and I just, I just wanna
ask if, uh.
If these curriculums are gonna
be chosen by the the soup or the
the board or whoever makes those
decisions at that level, will it
be made at the local level?
So, uh, uh, again, Mr. Chair and
uh Senator Boone, it's a very
good question. Uh, and, and
again, this is from my own
experience in dealing uh for
27.5 years in education at
different levels. The decisions
will be made at the local level,
primarily the way that we deal
with it today, of course, with
the superintendent, but I would
anticipate that reports and
recommendations, uh,
particularly for policy and
implementation of the resources
would be in consultation.
with the board and with the uh
the the superintendent
administrators, teachers, and
others, so it would be all
inclusive, uh, so the decision
would be at the local level.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you,
Senator Boone.
Thank you Mr. Chair, send her
out and I've got just just one
more, uh, and I think it'll be.
Pretty quick, uh
The there's several of these
curriculums mentioned and I, I
just wondered if there was any.
Curriculums available out there
that would do the same work but
are.
But won't cost anything just
just curiosity, so, uh, Mr.
Chair and Senator Boone, another
good question when it comes down
to it, uh, as we deal with it,
we want to ensure that it does
meet, if you will, the uh
curricular uh curricula
objective. Secondly, as we deal
with it, there are programs,
there are apps that are out
there, uh, that deal with
different aspects of education.
Again, these would have to be
fully evaluated and there would
have to be the intent and
hopefully.
With the data available in order
to go ahead and show that uh
learning is not only fun, but uh
it can uh definitely increase if
you will, the skills of the uh
the young learner. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Boone.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. Other questions?
Not emotion
Mitty
Anyone?
I'll make a motion for a table.
People in motion.
So
You'll call the roll.
Senator Boone
Sinriel
Cinder Senator Hickey.
Centri Nova
Yes.
in der Ramos.
Sarah Thornton
Yes
Senator Pope
Yes, explained my vote.
Senator Isel.
Cinder souls
Yes, the table.
So on a 5-2 vote, the bill is
tabled here in Senate Education.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much members of
education. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this.
I'm not opposed to what you're
trying to do. It's just the
mechanism, the amount of money,
I, I think it's not enough and
really it's kind of piecemeal.
I, I would like to see is kind
of.
Um
Do this just in a different way,
the mechanism. But thank you for
bringing.
Did I miss, did you wanna
explain your vote, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. The reason I voted to
table this bill I too agree that
it's probably not enough money
to get this done. I like the
concept of it.
The recurring part of it is
troublesome to me because on
every one of these pills we've
heard not only in education but
all the other communities, it's
all reoccurring money.
Folks,
We may not have all this money
all the time.
And it does come from an
industry that is trying to be
vilified up here in in the
legislature.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, members of the Senate
Education Committee again, uh, I
really appreciate your
participation in the process and
with the uh with a demeanor, of
course, more than that, just the
validity of what your thoughts
are. It's very healthy.
I, I, I may, Mr. Chair to
Senator.
Uh, we're tabulating, if you
will, the number of federal
dollars that are coming into the
state right now we're at $40
billion coming in, uh, these are
resources coming in from the
federal government. The other
aspects of it as we deal with
or.
As we deal with oil and gas as
you, uh, you mentioned, um,
that's another issue. And then
again, as we do move forward,
unfortunately, we're not sure
exactly what the uh uh federal
determination is going to be to
the state of New Mexico. You're
making prudent decisions. I
appreciate that.
Senate Finance, we're going to
be doing that as well. And then
during the interim, we're gonna
be looking, if you will at the
entire program, uh, as we move
forward we're really in a very
precarious time in the state of
New Mexico.
uh, as we balance and we look
towards to see exactly what is
going to happen, but again, with
the resources that are coming
in, the resources we have, and
then the objectives and uh what
we intend to deal with uh that
is gonna definitely be part of a
stronger educational platform
that we all need to participate
in. So again, Mr. Chair, thank
you very much for allowing me
that extra minute or so to go
ahead and further uh comment on
today's presentation. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Campos, and
it was interesting to watch,
everybody, this was not an easy.
decision for everyone, and I
understand and I appreciate the
committee's uh.
My hearing just got really bad
too.
Oh, they're sending myesters,
OK.
If you would, sir, you're up.
This is Senate Bill 148
anti-hazing Act.
And Senator, we, we do have a
fairly major amendment that I, I
think uh you or your team were,
were part of, uh, we'd like to
move the amendment first.
Yes, Mr. Chairman.
OK, I think those are being
handed out now.
So if someone would like to move
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
Senator Ramos, you're always
good at doing this. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I, I'd like to
move amendments 231200.2 for
discussion purposes for
discussion purposes of Senator,
would you like to or your
expert?
You like to introduce and then
uh talk about what the amendment
does, then it'll make more
sense, the bill afterwards.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Honorable members,
Senate Bill 148. I'm joined by
the Attorney General lawyer, Mr.
Sullivan, uh, and he will
explain the amendment as it
relates to the bill and then
we'll present the bill as
amended. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. And by the way, I
went to let everyone know I
appreciate you allowing us to
bring this bill into education
and the amendment.
Was lots of the reason for that
because it had to do with the
public school side of things. So
again, thank you for your
understanding and we've worked
on getting you in here really
quick to get that done.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, Sean
Sullivan from the New Mexico
Department of Justice, um, as
far as the amendment, you'll see
that there are 10 different
paragraphs, but they each do the
same thing. Uh, they strike
reference to public school, uh,
private school or that shows up
10 different places in the bill,
uh, the effect of that amendment
is to remove a K through 12 of
the application to K through 12
schools in this bill, and so the
bill as amended would only apply
to higher.
Education institutions, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, questions on the
amendment.
And, and maybe you ought to go
out to the audience first, you
know, support for the amendment.
And and stand and if you'd like
to come and kind of explain the
public school side of why it's
necessary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents and the
coalition of educational
leaders. We want to thank Mr.
Sullivan and the sponsor for
hearing our concern, the
Children's code is something
that runs headlong into this. We
felt like it wasn't, we weren't
prepared to move forward with.
So we simply requested to remove
public schools from that. We
really appreciate this
amendment, uh, in doing that,
Mr. Chairman, I would point out
one other technical point that
I, that I found in looking at
the amendment and it's on page
2.
13.
Mr. Sullivan, I'll ask to see if
this is friendly. Mr. Chairman,
it removes junior or junior
varsity that's a secondary term
and so I think it wouldn't be
I ought to have my mic on. I
always wanted to check with my
expert on making sure we
technically get everything done
right so we don't mess up the
The documentation and things
later.
Any other discussion from the
audience on the amendment?
Anyone in opposition?
Anyone online?
When I
OK, um, questions from the
committee on the amendment.
No questions, but someone like
to make a motion to adopt the
amendment.
Then her Pope
No.
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to move.
Uh 231-200.2.
The motion for the amendment. Is
there a second?
OK.
Seed by Senator Naba. Is there
any opposition to the amendment.
No opposition. The bill is
amended.
Now, I'll make a motion to.
For an amendment on page 2 line
13 to strike junior varsity
athletic teams uh 13 and 14.
And Mr. Chairman, that's a
friendly it's basically a gramma
goal, grammatical.
Correction grammatical, it's, it
was a lost piece.
Because we need to take that out
of there, so.
But
But it is a a friendly
amendment. Is there any
opposition to that amendment.
Like, was it seconded?
Mr. Chairman, I do, I do have a
question on that.
That
I would like a definition of
varsity in that aspect whenever
it's striking junior varsity,
varsity does reference the high
school age kids, so I'm kind of
curious why we're leaving
varsity in there and just
striking junior varsity. So I
think I need clarification on
the word varsity and and senator
on the amendment uh typically
college athletics is considered
varsity athletics, so I don't
know that that is, but I
wouldn't be opposed to take out
a varsity or junior.
Varsity. I don't think that.
That hinders anything and so
let's say if
I'm certainly open to just
extended to take out a varsity
or junior varsity. Mr. Chairman,
I think personally I would be
more willing to go along with
this second amendment if we did
strike.
Varsity or junior varsity.
I actually we should line 13 on
page 2, we should strike a
varsity or junior varsity
athletic team that whole.
Between the commas right there.
OK, Senator, thank you, Mr.
Chairman us get this
straightened out. We want to do
it right. Thank you, Mr.
Senator, Senator Rael.
We would consider it a friendly
to strike a varsity or junior
varsity.
We would prefer to keep the
words athletic team.
OK.
And, and I'm certainly
comfortable with that amendment
also. Is everybody
Understand what what we're
doing. I want to make sure it's
clear.
You know, some of my
Um
Time with the
The judiciary Committee where
they're doing bunches of these
strikes and ads all over the
place and trying to keep up with
it's hard. I wanna make sure, I
mean he knows exactly what we're
doing.
Chairman, I have
Read through as fast as I could
the rest of the bill to make
sure that we didn't need to
amend that anyplace else and I
think that's the only place
right now that I see it.
So yes, I'm comfortable with
that, Mr. Chairman.
OK, everybody comfortable with
the amendment, they're in the
opposition to the, did we have a
second?
On the amendment.
I'll seconded by Senator Pope.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment?
Seeing none, then you are twice
amended. Thank you.
OK.
Now let's talk about the actual
bill.
Uh, which is now taking out all
the public school portion of
things.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Members, we appreciate being in
this committee. This is a
criminal proposed criminal
statute. This is proposing to
create a new criminal law in the
state of New Mexico, the
anti-hazing Act.
And it's been very difficult
through the years to create uh a
criminal penalty with regards to
this act because there's some,
there's some semblance of
voluntarism. I think that the
words and the uh the legal minds
at the uh.
At the Department of Justice
have have captured it.
Uh, so that we can move forward
with this endeavor. So
basically, um, Mr. Chairman, it
creates the definition of great
physical harm, great
psychological harm, physical
harm, and student organization.
It, uh, the section 3 is the
crux of the bill, hazing
consists of intentional knowing
or reckless, and it describes
what would constitute the crime
of hazing, um.
And then uh
And then whoever commits hazing
on page 4 is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Uh, there are
provisions that lead to felony
prosecution in the event that
there are great physical harm,
uh, great physical harm or
heaven forbid, even death.
The, the key, Mr. Chairman is on
page 4, line 20. It is not a
defense to hazing uh under the
following conditions, uh, you
know, there, there's coercion
elements and things of that
nature that go into it, even
though you may.
There may be somewhat of a
consenting person, uh, this
takes away that defense at trial
and also adds a civic a civil
cause of action and a code of
conduct requirement for the
colleges, and with that, I'll
turn over to Mr. Sullivan from
the
Department of Justice.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to
talk about this important topic.
I know that you all have had
conversations on this topic.
Um
It's news to no one that hazing
has unfortunately become
ubiquitous in this country,
particularly on college
campuses, uh, students
victimized by hazing.
Uh, experience poor education
outcomes oftentimes lasting
psychological harm.
Uh, and potentially severe
physical harm or even death, as
Senator Maestas noted.
Uh, colleges and universities
who do not take this issue
seriously risk the development
of a toxic campus culture
perpetuation of harmful norms
and an impairment to
institutional reputation.
Uh, just to frame the scope of
this problem for the committee,
according to some statistics
that were compiled by some
leading national hazing
prevention groups, 74% of
student athletes experience at
least one recognized form of
hazing while in college.
55% of college students involved
in fraternities or sororities.
Uh, experience some hazing.
And up to 95% of those hazing
cases.
Those students who are aware
that they were hazed did not
report it, and up to 25% of
hazing cases, coaches or
advisors who are aware of that
hazing did not report it. Uh,
those are not, uh, Mr. Chair,
and merely national trends. Um,
there have been instances in New
Mexico, rather high profile uh
instances, including a pledge
being shot during a fraternity
uh initiation event, uh, months
long sexualized hazing scheme
involving collegiate men's
basketball players. Uh, and so
Mexico is not alone. Uh, I will
say, however, that New Mexico is
the outlier in terms of having a
law that penalizes this. New
Mexico is one of 6 states that
currently does not have a hazing
prohibition law. Uh, we believe
that Senate Bill 148, uh,
appropriately is a solution to
fill that gap, um, balancing
criminal and civil penalties,
but also, um, you know,
imparting necessary programming
that I think institutions should
take seriously in terms of
hazing awareness and prevention.
Um, all that to say, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, college should be the
best time of people's lives.
Unfortunately, it's ruined far
too often because of these types
of things. Um, Senate Bill 148
will ensure a consistent focus
and priority on the part of
institutions and ensure a safe
and supportive learning and
extracurricular environment for
New Mexico students. So thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anything else,
Senator?
Thank you. We'll stand for
questions. OK, first we go out
to the audience, those in
support raise of hands. Anyone
in opposition?
OK, we'll take the supporters
first. We will get to the
opposition.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Nicky's right there behind you
with the micro.
Thanks, Mickey.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
There's a committee. I'm JD
Bullington speaking to you on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
today, which believes it's way,
way past time to lower the boom
on hazing.
Um
Organizations in the view of the
chamber, to tolerate hazing,
especially the kind that leads
to great charm or or physical
harm.
are doing nothing less than
endorsing and encouraging gang
violence, and that needs to be
dealt with harshly. Uh, this
bill, um.
attacks this problem through a
series of increasing penalties,
requiring incidence of hazing to
be reported, and it requires our
institutions of higher learning
to include prohibitions against
hazing in their codes of conduct
and communicate those codes and
those hazing policies throughout
the institution. The bill would
also allow a person subjected to
hazing to engage in a civil
action.
For either injury or damages
resulting from hazing. These are
all sensible requirements that
are overdue and the greater cham
chamber of commerce urges you to
vote yes on this bill.
Thank you, JD. Welcome,
Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. I
am Stephanie Rodriguez, and I am
the cabinet secretary of Higher
Education. I stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 148 and
thank Senator Maestas for
bringing it forward. New Mexico
students deserve to be safe
while attending college and
participating in school-related
activities. Unfortunately, as
we've seen played out in the
news, recent incidents of
hazing, sexual abuse, and
failure of school officials to
adequately address these
incidents on their campuses have
underscored the need
for the state to take action at
this time. New Mexico is one of
6 states in the books that does
not have criminalize hazing in
some form, creating the crime of
hazing strength strengthens
student protections by holding
offenders accountable and liable
for hazing that takes place on
campus and also provides a
unified approach for how the
state tackles ha hazing on New
Mexico's colleges and
universities rather than a
piecemeal approach and policies
in their handbooks. And last, as
identified in the LESC.
ana ly s is this bill aligns
with many of the best practices
identified in the nation by the
Cleary Center Stophazing.org and
hazing Prevention Consortium.
Don't let New Mexico be 1 in 6,
and please support the bill
before you today. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you.
Yes, sir. Uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Ryan Lindquist. I'm the
director of the Student Activity
Center at the University of New
Mexico. The student Activity
Center advises two student
governments, 350 student
organizations and our 22
fraternity and sority
organizations. I did have the
pleasure of working with Senator
Nava and her brother while they
were undergrads at the
University of New Mexico.
Um, after graduating from Las
Cruces High School many moons
ago, came to the University of
New Mexico and by the way,
Happylobo Day today's uh UNM's
136th birthday.
Um, and, uh, I am a proud member
of the University of New Mexico
for trainingsority Community.
After graduating with my
master's, I've had a role of
working with student
organizations and fraternities
and employs for about 24 years.
Uh, behind me is Chris Brooks.
Uh, he is our primary fraternity
and sorority advisor on the
campus, and I'm gonna let him
introduce himself, but I believe
he is probably the state's most
knowledgeable person on the
subject of hazing, hazing
prevention. So here's Chris.
Thank you. Uh, Chairman Souls,
Vice Chairman Pope, and members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity, uh, to speak in
support of SB 148. Thank you to
Senator Maestas as well for
bringing it forward.
Uh, my name is Chris Brooks.
I've spent almost 20 years
working professionally in
fraternity and sorority life
across the country in student
affairs divisions and doing risk
prevention education. I
currently oversee the 22
fraternities and sororities at
UNM and have been there for 7
years. I've also worked
nationally on hazing prevention
policies, uh, policy development
and education for multiple
national fraternity and sorority
organizations, including my own
Sigma Chi, where I was a staff
member for over 10 years.
Hazing is a pervasive issue that
demands immediate legislative
action. Nationally, 55% of
college students involved in
clubs, teams, and orcs have
already experienced teasing.
Alarmingly, 47% of students
entering college have already
experienced hazing in high
school.
Uh, despite these statistics,
New Mexico remains one of only 6
states. I'll mention that the
other two of those states are
Hawaii and Alaska, which have
significantly lower risk of
hazing than the rest of the
contiguous US states.
Um, and by establishing crim,
excuse me, this bill pro uh
provides a comprehensive
framework to address this issue
by establishing, by establishing
Uh, comprehensive framework to
address it, uh, to address
criminal penalties, mandating
prevention training, and holding
institutions accountable. I
strongly support this bill and
would be pleased to see it
enacted as is. Uh, however, I do
believe there are some things
that could be strengthened in
it, and I would welcome the
opportunity to sit with this
bill sponsors to, uh, continue
to work on it.
We think we're pretty much
almost there. Uh, we would like
to see some funding for
education, uh, as I believe
Chris is probably the only
person in the state of New
Mexico qualified to present on
hazing education as New Mexico
State does not currently have a
fraternity and sorority advisor,
and obviously we've seen some
stuff within um our athletics
teams. Um, we do have a sample
of some modules that are
nationally produced educational
modules, uh, that can be
delivered, it's approximately
$15,000 per year for the student
body at the University of New
Mexico.
Uh, the training, uh, shall be
provided, but it is not required
of students, and then there is
no requirement for anonymous
reporting methods. The last two
incidents we've had at the
University of New Mexico were
reported anonymously initially,
and that allowed the conduct
office of the University of New
Mexico to follow up and produce
sanctions on those organizations
and students involved. And then
uh we would like to also see
conduct uh officers involved
with the reporting mechanism as
well. So thank you very much, we
do support this bill.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in support?
OK, online, I believe we have 2
in support online.
Please go ahead.
Mr. Chair, senators.
Mr. Chaired senators. Good
morning. My name is Jacqueline V
Hill. Thank you for allowing me
the opportunity to speak in
support of Senate Bill 148.
As a mother to a child that was
on the receiving end of horrible
treatment. I cannot stress how
important it is to start holding
offenders accountable for such
malicious behavior.
It is time to Mexico stands up
for victims of any physical or
psychological harm being done to
our students of New Mexico.
The long term effects of such
violent actions is very severe.
And has lasting effects on our
students mentally, and as you
all know, New Mexico struggles
with mental health issues. This
bill shows one step.
Closer to helping with this
issue by holding offenders
accountable, making it
unacceptable, which may help
deter future harm, and showing
our students in New Mexico that
we will protect you.
My son Carlos Bhill was 17 years
old when he took his own life.
As a victim of others' cruelty
towards him.
I ask that you please help our
New Mexico students by passing
Senate Bill 148. Show our
students they matter.
And that you will not stand for
such unacceptable inhumanity.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, and our last one in
support, William Benjamin.
Welcome, William.
Oh
Good morning.
Um, my name is William Benjamin.
You might recognize my name as
uh
Um, my son was hazed at uh uh
New Mexico State, uh.
Uh, university during the 2022
basketball season, and, and, and
throughout.
Um, I'm, I'm an alumnus of uh
New Mexico State.
And uh, and, and I don't, I say
that uh with a lot of pride, and
uh, and I don't, I don't say
that from a basketball
standpoint cause I played there.
uh, I received my bachelor's
degree and my master's degree
from uh
From that university, and so
the, the, the, the opportunity
and the relationships that I
build with, with different um uh
teachers and admin, uh.
I, I, I cherish those. In fact,
I even, uh, I remember sitting
in Mr. Soul's office on many
occasions, um, uh, with him
telling me the importance of
education, uh, as a young
person.
Um, uh, I totally stand in
support of this bill, um, as it
will hopefully protect students,
uh, like my son, um, who are
trying to get the most out of
their college experience, um,
without being harmed. Um, it's,
it's very important that, that
we allow these kids to have a
positive uh
Oh, a positive experience, um,
in college and, and for them to
be safe.
Um, and so the the more
education that we can put out
there, the better. And uh so I I
I really support this bill, and
uh thank you very much for
hearing me out.
Thank you, William. It's good
hearing from you. OK, um, I
think that was all the ones in
support, those in opposition.
for
You have up to 2 minutes.
We, we, we need the mic. Hold
on.
We are webcast. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Rickie Lee Chavez
on behalf of the Law Office of
the Public Defender. We do
appreciate the work of the
sponsor and components of this
bill as it seeks to educate and
bring awareness to issues around
hazing on college campuses.
However, we do stand in
respectful opposition to the
criminal components of the bill.
These are young people.
Sometimes this is their first
interaction with the criminal
justice system, and it's very
difficult to leave the criminal
justice system once you are
initially involved.
Additionally, most of the
conduct that is outlined in the
bill is already covered by other
parts of our criminal code and
we would um ask that those are
used as opposed to creating a
new crime, there are certain
components of this provision
that do change, um, what we see
in established criminal law as
it relates to great bodily harm,
and so we also are opposed to um
creating different circumstances
for great bodily harm, um, that
do not align with established
practices.
and procedures and um components
of our criminal code as it
relates to that piece. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition in the room.
We have one in opposition
online.
So Jasmine?
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Jasmine Tying Fong. I'm an
attorney with ACLU New Mexico,
and we respectfully ask that you
oppose this bill. Well, we
understand the goal of keeping
young people safe, for
criminalization is not the
answer. There are a myriad of
laws already codified in New
Mexico that can be used to
charge someone for alleged
conduct that underlies hazing,
such as aggravated assaults,
harassment, battery, sexual
offenses, and many.
other charges.
Section 4B of the bill requires
that a student who participates
in hazing forfeit scholarship or
awards for a time to be decided
by the educational institution.
It's unclear if participates
being found guilty in a court of
law, or how the act of
participation is determined. In
allowing educational
institutions complete discretion
to withhold financial awards
without guidelines or
consideration to the level of
student participation or
seriousness of the conduct could
lead to incredibly serious
consequences.
is being wielded unfairly
against students that result in
inequity of consequences, and
that will likely be felt harder
for students of color. While
this bill calls for education
around hazing. This can be done
with further without further
criminalization of students, and
we respectfully ask that you
oppose uh SB 148. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, any comments
before we go to questions from
the committee. No, Mr. Chairman,
thank you.
OK, then we're on questions from
the committee.
Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward.
I'm struggling with this.
Um
Maybe you can help me.
With some of the issues that I
see with this.
Can you tell me the difference
between hazing and
bulling
What is the difference between
those two things?
Hazing and bowing.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
that's a great question. Um,
currently bullying is actually
defined.
Uh, under New Mexico law for the
safe schools for all students.
Act, if I'm not mistaken, I
think it was a a piece of
legislation that this body may
have passed in 2022 if I'm, if
I'm not mistaken, um, and what
that requires is that certain
institutions put programming in
place as it relates to bullying
and cyberbullying, just to give
you a sense, uh, under that
statute, the way that that's
defined is severe, pervasive or
persistent acts or conduct that
target students uh either
electronic.
or verbally
Uh, and reasonably predicted to
place them in fear of physical
harm, causes substantial
detrimental effect on their
physical or mental health, um,
or substantially interfere with
their ability to participate or
benefit from the services
provided by the institution. So
that's how bullying is defined.
Uh, bullying is not a criminal
penalty, but there are
requirements under state law to
provide programming. That does
not exist for Hating. And so
that's one of the things that
we're trying to accomplish with
this piece of legislation. Um,
hazing.
Obviously, we have the
definition uh in the bill that
comes straight from the federal
stop campus Hazing Act that was
recently passed in December. Um,
so that's been a well vetted uh
definition of hazing, but
essentially the primary
difference is that it's harmful
conduct uh that results from uh
the initiation into or the
affiliation with a group, which
is why you primarily see it with
sororities, fraternities and
athletic groups. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Thornton, that is the
primary.
difference.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that explanation that, that
helps a little bit in that in
that regards.
And you mentioned just now that
hazing occurs kind of primarily
as a initiation into an
organization, um.
On affiliation.
Team or something like that. So,
so my question is, and, and I
never joined the sorority or
fraternity.
Um
So I've never had to go through
anything like that.
But I'm, I'm curious what types
of activities?
Or initiation would be
acceptable.
Uh, for to, to, to.
Every group has their issues or
or.
Some way to become part of the
team, if you will. So what kind
of activities would be
would be acceptable under this
new law.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton,
um,
I think there are a range of
activities which constitute very
innocuous conduct that I think
everybody would be in agreement,
would not constitute hazing
where my mind goes, um, is when
I played uh athletics, uh, the
freshman had to carry the bags.
Right, the seniors would put the
bags down. They would say
freshmen, come get the bags.
Freshmen carry the bags to the
bus. Uh, things like that, this
is not intending to criminalize.
Uh, what this does is stands
squarely on the other side of
that line, which is why you see
the requirements are very
strenuous.
Uh, to constitute hazing under
this bill. It must, as we noted,
be committed in the course of
initiation into affiliation with
or maintenance of membership in
a group, which is really the New
Mexico State example, but it
must cause or create a risk.
above the reasonable risk
encountered in the course of
participation in those
activities of physical or
psychological injury. And so
what what it's trying to do is
lay out a comprehensive
framework to ensure that the
people who are making decisions
about whether or not this is
hazing institutions, law
enforcement, um, prosecutors
that they are clearly only
attempting to criminalize
situations that are clearly
those which create physical or
psychological risk, not some of
the more innocuous conduct that
I think you're concerned about.
Senator, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that answer. That that kind
of brings me to the, to the last
question then because
How do you respond to the
concern that, uh, many of the
issues that you identify that
are
Criminality, we considered
criminal.
Um
That they already, these are
existing statutes that already
exist.
And
And that they're already covered
under other statutes. So why do
we need this?
This particular, um,
Rulings in place because the
statutes already exist for some
of the things that are outlined
in your in your bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Thornton, let me just give you
my impression before we hear
from uh Mr. Sullivan, but number
one is from a prosecutorial
standpoint.
Um
If I acquiesce to getting
slugged in the face, it's not a
crime.
Um, if I voluntarily do
something.
or allow someone to do something
to me, whether coercing me to
Perform a sexual act, consume
food, sleep deprivation, it's
not a crime. I'm voluntarily
doing that.
So this adds uh.
Uh, this, this takes away that
defense, uh, that even though
the person acquiesced or
consented, I'm looking at the
bottom page 4, or even though it
was sanctioned or approved by an
organization, it's still a crime
that coercive level rises to
that level. Also, secondly, I
think more importantly, you
could the the state can charge
someone with battery assault,
sexual assault, those things
don't really fit. I mean, if
someone's charged, if someone,
you know, does something in the
locker room that's completely
inappropriate.
And they get, they get charged
with sexual assault that that
jumps off the page that it's not
really a sexual assault in in.
The way someone would think
about it, uh, 99% of the cases
before the
forward in that regard. So,
I think
I know that it's a bummer to
have hazing on someone's record,
but it's a lot worse to have
battery or sexual assault on
someone's record. Haing fits.
The crime itself.
Uh, can be expunged after a
couple of years.
It, it
I think it benefits the
defendant in certain ways rather
than charging them with other
elements that that meet a
particular crime currently on
the books.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thornton, if I may, just two
things in addition. Um, there
are some important pieces of
this that are not captured under
current criminal conduct, for
example,
Um, if a fraternity member
required a pledge to go sleep
out in the cold, for example,
exposure to the elements, and
they were to die.
I'm unaware of what under the
criminal code you would charge
an individual with.
It's, it's hazing.
Right? The requirement that you
over consume alcohol or food.
We've seen instances of that
throughout the country. That's
hazing, and that's what's
captured here. Um, the other
thing that I will mention, and
this is um as someone who, who
was a prosecutor for about 10
years, um, before doing this,
um, there's nothing in our
criminal law that prevents
charging, say for example,
someone gets whipped, beaten, or
stricken, right? Subsection A.
Um, you very well could charge
battery.
You can also charge hazing.
There's no legal restriction on
charging.
However, people do of course
have double jeopardy protections
against sentencing for unitary
conduct. And so there would be
nothing to prohibit the state,
for example, from pursuing these
different theories of a crime
and if a jury or a judge found
you guilty of both, then one
would simply be vacated and then
you only be sentenced on one.
And so I think that that's a
really important piece to
consider as well. What we're not
doing is double penalizing
people. That would not happen
under any circumstance, Mister
Chair, Senator Thorn.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, I
believe that covers most of my
concerns about the bill, so I
appreciate those explanations.
Thank you very much.
Sennaba
Thank you, Mr. Tur. Thank you,
Senator Maestas for the bill. I
have several questions, um, and
I have to point out, uh.
As a former UNM student and as
many of us have gone through
these systems.
Um, we may have experienced
these things, I think
differently. I also Senator
Thornton and Chairman was was
not in a sorority, but I had
many friends who were harassed
and experienced this, so I am
far too.
Um
Knowledgeable of of several of
these situations and the lack of
accountability, um, and it's
been concerning over the years,
so my question is, Mr. Chairman,
pertain to uh Senator Mattis,
has there been an increase in
hazing over the past.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Nava, um,
I cannot speak as it relates to
New Mexico. I know that um I
believe it was the hazing
prevention framework, one of the
things that they noted is that
at least one person has died on
a college campus every year
since 1970 as a result of hazing
and that really stuck out to me.
Um, what I will say is, in 2021,
there was a situation that I was
referencing where a pledge was
shot at one of our, our
institutions, um, the instance
with the collegiate men's
basketball.
team happened in 22, 23. Um, it
very well could be that I simply
wasn't in tune to what was
happening before that, but I, I
certainly do at least
anecdotally start to hear that
more and more of that is
occurring, Senator Nova, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
uh, Senator Mayes is an expert.
Um, I also want to draw your
attention to section 3, under,
um, hazing failure to report
penalties, uh, subsection 2 of
Mr. Chairman, uh, it states
causes or creates a risk above
reasonable.
risk encountered, um, the word
reasonable is mentioned here
more than 6 times on the bill,
and I wanted to, uh, direct your
attention, um, and ask for a
clarification on what is the
definition of reasonable risk
and then lower on that same page
on line 25, it says an activity
that places another person in
reasonable fear. Um, can we get
definite uh clear understanding
of what reasonable risk versus
reasonable fear would be.
Um
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I, I
smile because if you have the
misfortune like me to read a
number of legal cases every day,
you would see that that
reasonable is a hallmark, um.
Uh, of our our civil and
criminal justice systems. Um,
it's incredibly hard to define,
but you see it.
Um, all over, you'll see
reasonable detention beyond a
reasonable doubt, right? And I
think what, what we're
recognizing is that um the, the
individuals who are going to be
tasked with making a
determination about whether or
not certain behavior is hazing
are generally judges and juries.
Uh, and so those folks.
They serve as sort of the
collective consciousness of the
community as to what's
appropriate behavior in a given
circumstance. Uh, so you really
can't define it any better than
that other than to say, um,
It's a recognition that in a
certain circumstance, behavior
was appropriate or it was not.
It's very fact dependent. It's
very circumstance dependent, but
it is something that's very um
That our judges and juries are
very knowledgeable to, uh, and,
and able to utilize in their
analysis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. And lastly, I will
just mention that.
Uh, I know we had some folks
noting the concern about
criminalizing our communities
and our young people, and I too
share that concern, but I also
share it on the opposite side,
because I've known of.
Communities of color who've been
through these situations. I know
students, I know friends, um,
who are those specific people
but have not received the
support systems to hold these
folks accountable. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, and we'll go to
Senator Pope and we'll note this
does go to judiciary.
the other hazing bill is also
and I suspect judiciary is going
to sort out some of the, the
more legal terms, Senator. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
sponsor, thank you.
Uh, Mr. So and, and I appreciate
uh working with folks.
On your team and
The Department of Justice on
that bill and incorporated some
of your bill into mine.
Stuff in there.
Um, but
As a person a little different.
I'm a person who is a member of
fraternity and will file for
fraternity Incorporated.
chartered at UNM, historically
black fraternity.
Also a member of the military.
And these are issues that we've
been dealing with.
With changing that culture.
hazing.
Oh it's wrong and
Really, how it doesn't produce.
better member.
Better team, better, more
loyalty, right? It's really just
causing harm.
Um, you know, a lot of
fraternities and sororities
understand this issue. A lot of
them are getting sued. A lot of
them are being de-chartered. A
lot of them.
Um
It's just really hurting the
organization. So we really
understand and
Um
the fact that we're one of 6
states that don't have any laws.
It's been a big issue for years,
even when I was an undergrad at
UNM.
People have been pushing for
this.
So overall, I like what you're
doing here.
Very similar to my bill, but I
do have concerns.
And it's really their concerns
on page 4 on the new uh the new
penalties. This is something
that we've discussed.
I, I understand, um, you
mentioned that.
There wouldn't be the double
jeopardy and things happen, but
I mean, just the verbiage in
here that
You know, us on line 17.
Uh, Part F prosecution or
conviction for violation of a
provision of this section does
not preclude the prosecution or
conviction under other
applicable laws.
So
Senator
Expert, um, could you explain to
me because from the way I read
that is someone could be charged
for one of these.
Uh, felonies above.
And could still be charged for
what's on the current books as a
felony. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Pope,
that is, that is correct. That
happens all the time in our
criminal justice system, as I'm
sure you know, um,
Again, sometimes at the
inception of the case when the
charging decision is made, um,
there's limited facts and
circumstances in the, in the
prosecutor's purview and so
alternative theories of
prosecution may be charged, um,
and so there's, there's no
limitation on charging. What
Double jeopardy is preventing
his multiple sentencing. So for
example, um, if hazing.
Uh, say it's a misdemeanor
hazing and it's committed
through striking a pledge. You
could charge that individual
with a petty misdemeanor or
misdemeanor battery and
misdemeanor hazing.
They could, we could go to the
criminal justice process. There
could be a conviction on both.
Uh, none of that would run afoul
of any protections. However,
when it came to sentencing, the
judge would have to vacate one
of those convictions and only
sentence on either hazing or
battery to ensure that that
person's not being sentenced for
two misdemeanors. Also, also,
Mr. Chairman, Senator Pope.
The, um
That paragraph 17 through 19 uh.
Allows prosecutors to go bigger
if necessary. There's, there's a
rule of.
There's a general crime, but a
more specific crime.
Prosecutors and, and the crime
fits the specific crime
elements, the prosecutor is
limited to that specific crime.
So this, this paragraph would
allow them to go to a different
crime that as suggested if, if
the facts deemed necessary, but,
but you're correct, you can't
charge them both. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Senator. And I was also looking
at that language and and adding
it to mine and I was told that.
You can put this in there, but
They can choose to do this or
not, whether this language is
that correct?
They could, they could choose
Mr. Chair, Senator, they could
choose to.
Charge them with additional
crime even if we don't put this
language in.
Mr. Chair, Senator Pope, that,
that's right. This doesn't
impact criminal practice. I
think it's just important to
give clarity to litigants and
the courts, and that's what this
does. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator, and I
just going back to your
response.
And so you're saying there would
be the double jeopardy and and
what would happen.
And so I guess my argument would
be
If a person can't be charged for
multiple, then why would we?
But in statute
Where they're getting charged
for 3 things when they can only
be
Film, you know, basically be
penalized for one.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, Senator
Pope, so, uh, to clarify, uh,
individuals can be charged with
multiple crimes. Um.
And and as I mentioned earlier,
a lot of the reason for that,
um, prosecutors understand that
there's never going to be a
situation where you're going to
be sentenced on all those, um,
but very often early on in the
case, you may not have all the
sufficient facts to know what's
the best theory of prosecution,
and so you do that to leave your
options open. If it becomes more
clear through the course of the
investigation and the
prosecution that uh one charge
is more appropriate than the
other. You have the ability to
Noli Prosecchi or to dismiss.
One of those charges or you can
proceed all the way through
trial on both charges. You just
simply can't sentence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. I, I just
have concerns with this, with
the felonies and, and I
understand you laid out there's
some that are maybe not on the
books that we would see in these
situations.
But
Uh, from what we've seen that
happened in New Mexico State, I
think.
For me, the issue is.
Folks were charged.
Folks are being
They're going through the court
civilly on these issues. I think
the big issue is, we haven't had
The charge for actually.
Hazing in general and then also
the charge for failure to
report.
And for me, that's where I think
The emphasis should be to kind
of change the culture because we
do.
still a, you know, some things
on the books that would cover
some of the other.
Arms to people.
And so, uh, from you, Mr. Chair,
Senator.
I
I'm just unable to support this
bill as is and we've talked
about it just with, with the
three felonies.
And so Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I
would propose I, I have an
amendment that I want to propose
to you.
And I'll
All uh pass it out and um just
see where you're at on that.
OK, and so, uh, we need to move
the amendment you want, uh, Mr.
Chair, I move Amendment
0.231503.1
for discussion.
And so uh first I'd ask you, is
a friendly amendment, not a
friendly amendment. You want me
to explain it want me to explain
it first,
uh, anyhow.
Uh, Mr. Church senator and, and
Um
It's, it's, I'm not forcing this
on you. It's friendly or it's
not. But what this amendment
does is on page 4, it's gonna
strike lines 10 through 19,
removing section C, D, E, and F.
Um, basically the three felonies
and then the um
Section F, prosecution or
conviction for violation.
Provision of this section.
Um, and, and removing that
because I, I think that can
already happen.
Um, and so that's what this
amendment does. And so Mr.
Chair,
Senator
Would this be a friendly?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Pope. I appreciate the
thought process behind it.
This is a dialogue that.
This committee will have the
next committee hopefully on the
floor, hopefully the next body,
um, it's an unfriendly amendment
I can.
This time and I'll turn over to
the reasons why for Mr. Solomon.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Pope, um,
I thank you for this as well.
Conversation we've had on, on
this issue. Um, I think to some
extent, you know, there's,
there's a, a difference of
approach and going back to our,
our reasonable conversation,
reasonable minds can, can
differ, um, and I think that
this is one of the, the places
that we do, um, I guess the
issue for me is it is it makes
sense to index.
The criminal penalty with the
resulting harm. And the reason
that that makes sense is because
Um, hazing doesn't come in a
single flavor.
Uh, it is, uh, there are, are
more drastic.
Um, more harmful, more lasting
forms of hazing compared to
others.
Um, we look at some of the
situations that uh at New Mexico
State and, and we heard from one
of the individuals, fathers
today, 3 years later, the these,
so they, they come in different
forms. And so to suggest that
there should be a single
baseline misdemeanor penalty.
For the different variations of
hazing, I don't think accurately
takes into account, um, those
differences. And that's what
criminal penalties do is it
allows you to take into account.
resulting harms. And so that's
why I think it's important to,
to index it. The other thing for
me as a, as a prior prosecutor,
I sort of look at these things
comparatively and so I look
where else in our law do we say
something is a misdemeanor.
And so for example,
Um, driving on a revoked
license.
Is a misdemeanor.
Do we think that if a frat
member
Requires a pledge.
To go sleep outside.
And that frat member dies from
the cold and the exposure.
We think that that resulting
harm is similar.
To driving under a revoked
license. I mean, so, so to me, I
look at things in that way and
through that prism and so for
that reason, um, I don't think
that that having a misdemeanor
across the board makes sense.
And so that would be our
rationale, I think, as to why
the amendment would be
unfriendly. Senator Pope, Mr.
Chair.
So um
And this is on the amendment.
OK.
Discussion. Well,
Nobody else really has in front
of them we don't need to go out
to the audience. Senator is on
the amendment.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much in reading what.
Senator Pope has.
Oh
Put it forth in the 2nd
Amendment to it.
I am reading all the way down
and starting on.
Page 17 through 19.
That particular language does
right there.
It is at the discretion of the
prosecutor that these things may
happen, that he is wanting to
strike above. Am I understanding
that correctly?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that,
that is correct. There will
always be prosecutorial
discretion and so even in a
situation where a 3rd degree or
a 4th degree felony, for
example, may apply. There's
still the discretion to, to
charge at the misdemeanor level.
And Mr. Chairman and uh
Senator, I
That to me is very important,
it's on any law that's out
there. It's up to the discretion
of the prosecutor to make that
decision on what.
Stage that he wants to
ultimately sentence somebody to.
So I, I cannot agree with this,
this amendment right here. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Other questions on the
amendment.
And I have a question, you know,
that came up as a result of what
Senator Zel just indicated.
I, you know, for instance, on
line 13D, whoever commits hazing
that results in great physical
harm is guilty of a 3rd degree
felony. That doesn't sound like
there's prosecutorial
discretion.
Other than
You know, whether it's hazing or
not, but it this says, and then
the one below it.
Um, results in death, is guilty
of that doesn't sound like
there's discretion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
So, all, all.
Crimes on the books are written
that way, is guilty of is guilty
of, but yeah, there's a total
discretion on whether to bring
charges forward, whether to
indict somebody, whether to go
all the way to trial, it's.
The prosecutorial discretion
with regards to any.
Criminal allegation still
stands. So, but if, but these
are written so that
Uh, if in fact the state were to
prove great bodily harm in this
context, that person will be
guilty.
OK.
Learning, learning.
I have to say I'm glad I'm not
on judiciary. I know I will
really have made somebody very
unhappy with me if I ever find
myself assigned to the judiciary
Committee.
Uh, other questions on the
amendment.
Not Senator.
Mr. Cherry move a do pass on.
Amendment 2.231503.
OK? And I second that.
I don't know that we table
amendments, we tabled bills.
Now, are you moving to table the
bill, Senator.
OK, then
And on the amendment, if you'll
call the roll, please.
Cinder Boone
Sinnery
Cinder Figueroa
No.
Cinder Hickey.
Center Nova
No.
In Ramos. No.
Sarah Thornton.
No on the amendment.
Sinder Pope. Yes.
And cinder souls. Yes.
But the amendment does not pass,
so we're back onto the main
bill. So discussions on the any
other discussion on the bill,
Senator Thornton.
One more question on the bill
itself.
So and I guess uh.
December of 2024, I guess.
Biden administration put in the
anti-hazing law bill.
And so my question to you is,
what is the difference between
that law and your current bill.
That you're putting forward. In
other words,
There's already now officially
in the nation, an anti-hazing
bill.
So I want to understand what the
difference is between what
But that bill is and what we're
offering up here.
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton, um,
thank you for that question. Uh,
we had the, the benefit of
seeing that bill passed in
advance of the crafting of
Senate Bill 148, and so we
essentially had the best of both
worlds, right? We could take
those things that were good
about the federal law in terms
of the definition to ensure that
institutions aren't being
subject to a federal and a state
definition.
But we were also on the other
side of the coin, able to make
sure um that we were not
duplicative of what the federal
law was requiring. So to give
you an example, the, the federal
stop campus Hazing Act, um, it
requires higher ed institutions
to report instances of hazing in
what's called their annual
security report under the Clery
Act, which is a federal law, um,
every institution already has to
provide uh stats on campus
crimes like sexual assault,
harassment, things like that.
They have to go on an annual
Security report that's that's
published, um, what the federal
law requires is that now
violations of hazing also have
to go in that annual security
report. Senate Bill 148 does not
touch that. Um, another thing
that it does is require what's
called a campus transparency
report. So if on a higher ed
campus, there is a finding of
hazing, um.
The institution has to summarize
those findings, so, you know, a
fraternity had a hazing
instance. Here's the basic
details, not running afoul of
any, you know, personally
identifying information or FERPA
or things like that, they have
to put it online. And what it
really is, is it's a way to, to
show parents and perspective
students, hey, this is what's
going on at this institution, so
that they can make an informed
decision about whether they want
to send their kid, send bill 148
does not touch that at all. In
fact, the original iteration
a reporting mechanism, we
removed that so as to not be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's,
it's.
Um, so Mr. Chair,
Having said that, I guess the
question I'm asking is, uh, does
the federal law also include
penalties for hazing, I mean,
as, as you were putting here,
you know, the prosecutor must or
will charge. So is that in the
federal law as well?
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton, it
is not.
The federal law does not
criminalize using the federal
law does not provide civil
remedies. Those are more issues
left to the states, Senator
Thornton.
That's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, when I was in
college, I was in a fraternity.
Uh, my father had been in the
same fraternity at Ohio State
years before that. They're
absolutely was hazing going on
in my fraternity, um, as I got
in there and certainly it was
very detrimental. I think
Senator Pope indicated it, you
know, people would couch it in
terms of, you know, brings us
all closer together when we've
all been through those hard
things.
You know
And it's just not true. Um, I
then was domain director for
this area for the 5 chapters of
that fraternity and worked very
hard on trying to, to eliminate
all of that. And so, you know,
it, it's a an ugly nasty thing
that we certainly need to get
rid of. Um, I want to make sure
I'm always of the opinion, part
of the reason I voted, uh,
against the felonies is, you
know, my background in
psychology is different
penalties, don't change
behaviors.
It's more the the victims feel
better because that person's
really being punished now, but
it doesn't change behaviors. So
that's the only reason. Um, did
have a question because in the
prior bill it came up.
And I think, uh, Senator
Thornton, you were asking about
the difference between bullying
and hazing.
In medical school, we hear
regularly about students under
extreme stress, you know, trying
to keep up in medical school,
uh, being awake for 48 hours as
they're doing rounds and then
having a doc come in and quiz
them and demean them and put
them down. Is that bullying,
hazing, or neither?
Uh
Senator, uh, Mr. Chair, um, I
can certainly say that the same
is true of law school. I think
the Socratic method is, is
intentionally designed to push
you to your limits to
You know, ensure that you reach
your maximum performance. Um,
those, those are certainly
situations that I don't think
the contemplation is that it
would be hazing. And if you look
at page 3.
Uh, subsection 2 is in is
requires causing or creating a
risk above the reasonable risk
encountered in the course of
that participation. And so I
think the very, you know, the
argument would be, and I
certainly know of no prosecutor
who would charge a situation
like that, despite um all of
them having gone to law school
and feeling as if they might
want to, uh, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you, and the
Socratic method is more a method
of questioning, not putting
people under stress and keeping
them awake for more than 24
hours. Yeah, we have somebody,
you know, because they're
exhausted or driving home and
are in a car accident. Isn't
that a direct result of what
they were being required to do
in their profession.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so it, so it is a
good question. Sure, and it's a
good question. And what I would
say is, um, you see the language
resulting in great bodily harm,
resulting in death. So there's
actually a uniform jury
instruction that juries are
given that explains what that
means and, and I won't get into
the legality of it, but it's
called but-for causation and
proximate causation, you're
essentially required to show
that something that happened was
a foreseeable risk and that that
behavior was a significant
can't um factor in causing that
outcome. And so under that
circumstance, it would probably
be difficult to demonstrate
that, Mr. Chair. OK, I
understand it's just, you know,
continued concern when you hear
about people who commit suicide
that are in medical school
because of the psychological
stress, the lack of sleep, and
other things that they're being
required to do, which
at least doesn't seem like it's
a requirement to actually become
a good doctor other than
everybody else went through it,
so the practice continues, so.
OK.
result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I was reading through the
FIR and on page 4 of that if IR,
the 3rd paragraph down its
talking about the consequences
for hazing.
And I went back to read what
they suggested might need to be
changed. This is coming from
NMSU.
Changing the online 25 on page
6.
There was a concern with that
shell.
Instead of saying may.
It may, uh, let's see, I will
read the, not all of the
sentences, but.
did not make reasonable attempts
to prevent it.
Right now it's reads shell
forfeit any official residency
recognition or approval.
And if it was changed, it would
read.
and did not make reasonable
attempts to prevent May forfeit
any official recognition or
approval granted.
What's your thoughts on that,
Mr. Chairman, and
Senator, Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
I will say that I, I certainly
understand that perspective.
What I would say is there is
some, uh, there are some
protections that are built in to
subsections B and C, for
example, um, in terms of the
loss of any entitlement to funds
and scholarships that would be
um for a period of time to be
determined by the institution.
Um, additionally, in terms of
student organizations that might
lose affiliation. Um, it's, it's
a, it's a higher standard that
you would have to reach. It's
not strict liability, for
example, meaning we don't care.
if there was, who was at fault.
It happened and so the
organization loses affiliation.
Um, in fact, subsection C,
there'd be a requirement that
you would demonstrate that that
organization knew or should have
known of the hazing and yet
still failed to make any
reasonable attempts to prevent
it. So it's actually a pretty
high standard for that to be
met. The other thing that I
would say, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senators is something that the,
the higher ed secretary said in
her opening, which is one of the
things we're trying to do is
ensure consistency. And
So I guess my concern would be
if you don't have sort of those
consistent that consistent
penalty framework, what you
allow is for a pretty serious
hazing situation atitu A to be
met with a
A very minor response versus the
same situation and institution B
be met with a far greater
response. So students committing
the same thing would have two
disparate outcomes. So that
would be my concern.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman, the
reason I'm bringing that up
because on page 8 of your bill
under section D, you're talking
about the makeup of the
membership.
On the committee
And if everybody is aware of
what the new Hasing rules are
for each.
I, and I'm assuming they are
going to be all standard
throughout.
Post-secondary aspect of our
makeup on higher ed.
That
Well, let me ask this, you all
are taking this to the next day,
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, correct.
Good luck on that.
Um
But with the makeup there, I
think that May might be a very
pertinent word to put in there,
but I'm gonna leave it as it is.
I just wanted that pointed out
there too.
see what your thoughts were.
That's all, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Uh, motion from the committee.
Motion for a due pass.
The 2nd
I second. Seconded by Senator
Nava. You'll call the roll,
please.
Tender boom
Sindriel.
Cinder Figueroa, yes, sender
Hickey.
Serchinova, yes, said to Ramos.
Thornton.
No, explained my vote.
Pope
No
Senator Souls. Yes.
So you have a do pass on a 4-3
on its huge boom.
Judiciary, the
Two people excused, uh,
certainly in judiciary and my
guess is they probably will hear
both bills or try and combine
them and figure out how it moves
forward.
With that, but again, I wanna
thank you for bringing, bring it
in so we could fix the part
about with the public schools, a
very good discussion here, um,
and others please explain your
votes. I just, yeah, I just
wanted to say that. I think
Senator Pope had an issue with
I think the, the
I think the issues with regards
to the charges, one would be
receiving.
are pretty severe and so I, I
think I understood where he was
going.
So I'm still struggling with
that as well
overall, obviously we believe we
need to have some control on
hazing. And so I, I support the
bill overall, but
going to be coming back to me
anyway in judiciary. So, um,
maybe have another conversation
with Senator Pope and maybe we
can work out something that that
works out.
We all feel comfortable with it
as well.
Thank you very much for that.
Thank you. Anyone else you
wanted to explain the vote? Was
that the only.
OK.
Thank you, Chairman. I
appreciate it you pass on the
judiciary.
And uh the next bill that we're
gonna do is gonna be 426. It'll
be the last bill we do today.
I'll roll my bill over to.
Monday because.
Well, we were due on the floor
in about 15 minutes or so, and
so I
If, if we get both of them done
quickly, I'm, but let's get, see
how this one goes and if there's
still time and the committee
wishes we can do.
So,
Yeah.
Senator Pope and you're gonna
Handle this for Senator Lopez.
So senator, and this is one of
the shortest bills that we get
to see.
All right, Mr. Chair, I'm going
to be presenting Senate Bill 426
uh for Senator Lopez, repeal
obsolete school provisions.
Senate Bill 426 is a cleanup
bill that repeals.
22-14-20 NMSA 1978, um, the
original bill transferred the
New Mexico school for the
visually handicapped to the
blind administrative unit.
Within the vocational
rehabilitation division of the
Department of Education.
In New Mexico school for the
visually handicapped is now the
New Mexico School for the Blind
and visually impaired.
The otherwise known as the
NMSBV.
I
Um, it is a state special school
under the Board of Regents
appointed by the governor.
It's also supported by state
state land grant funds and is
placed within the higher
education department.
blind administrative unit is now
the commission for the blind.
The commission for the blind is
an independent commission with
the board of commissioners
appointed by the governor
pursuant to the commission for
the Blind Act.
The commission for the blind is
the designated state agency for
individuals who are blind as set
forth pursuant to the Federal
rehabilitation Act of 1973. Mr.
Chair, I have two experts with
me that I want to give, uh, just
a little bit of time to present.
We'll be short. We know we have
to get to the floor. We have
Jeremy Rutherford and we have
Greg Trapp, JD who's the
executive director of the New
Mexico Commission for the Blind.
So if I could allow them just a
few minutes you would quickly,
very short, Bill.
OK, I will try to
talk loudly here, uh Mr. uh
Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, the commissioner
for the blind certainly does
support this change. This is
Uh, opposite language, which is
no longer applicable to really
any of the entities in any of
the ways referenced Senator Pope
described it very, very well.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Yes Jeremy Rutherford registered
lobbyist for the Mexico School
for the Blind. We appreciate
Senator Lopez and Senator Pope
bringing this forward.
It
Does create a little bit of
heartburn on the rare occasions
that this comes up in a draft.
Talking about transferring
property and buildings to
another entity from the school
for the blind.
And uh so
repeal this senior analysis, it
doesn't have any impact on
anything.
Well, thank you very much. Thank
you, Senator Poe.
With that, Mr. Chairman, we're
ready for public comment, any
questions from the committee the
audience, those in support.
Anyone in opposition?
I went online, questions from
the committee.
Overdue pass.
Motion for a due pass, seconded
by Senator Ramos, you'll call
the roll, please.
Senator Boone
Sent to yourself.
Yes. Ciner Figueroa.
Yes. Send her Hickey.
Serranova, Senor Ramos. Senator
Thornton Center Pope. Yes.
Tinder soul. Yes. So you have a
due pass.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
That's why I asked the committee
on the last one there, no school
use corporal punishment, you
want to continue on and.
If we get through, it's
relatively quick and short, but
It's up to you all.
The what?
That
Yeah
But, but, but you're not a
school, sir.
Let, let's just roll it over to,
to Monday's meeting then, uh,
and so with that this bill we
moved over to Monday's meeting
and we are adjourned.
