Is going to be running most of
our meeting this morning tell
Kara this will be her first
chance at that fully doing the
Senate Education Committee she's
been trained by.
By our our prior webmaster so I
think she'll be doing fine.
But I think is is right there
with her as today is more kelas
last day with us.
And senator souls we are now
being webcast it.
Thank you and so with that let
me start with kind of the quick
announcements as to how things
are going to go today on today's
bills Senate bill two eighty
nine has been rolled over at the
request of the sponsor again so
we will not have the Senate bill
two eighty nine the special
division of the IT department
also under the new business
Senate bill seventeen the family
income index act of still have
some other amendments that the
public get department and the
sponsor are working out so it
will not be today I think it
will get rolled over to Friday
but I'll check with the sponsor
after the meeting today Senator
Gonzales we also waiting on him
getting to the committee so we
are going to start with Senate
bill three forty one.
The legislative appropriation
for community schools fund with
senator Neville.
Follow David by Senate bill
three fifty three I yes for
school kids Senator I just and
then we'll check and see if
Center Gonzalez's in before we
go to our first house bill house
bill twenty three as amended the
med school licensure
requirements of centered in the
bill are you ready and prepared
for Senate bill three forty one
I think it's my expertise years
Rachel on the line.
Eight I am here okay it's a
fairly simple bill but it simply
it's basically a one line deal
it it's changes the.
The community schools fund from
being appropriated are managed
by the PED two appropriation by
the legislature and and the
resource for this bill is
there's other of others number
ten million dollars out there
that is subject to the passage
of this bill to be appropriated
and community community schools
fund and there's I think there's
three million dollars also
already there but we want to
make sure that we don't lose out
on this money this is a very
good program it seems to help
considerably in some of the
lower income communities and so
forth not an expert in the fund
but I'd like to turn it over to
my experts Rachel Gadgil to talk
about what community schools
fund us and why we need to do
this Rachel.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of Senate at at at.
As you're aware the community
school fund is what the
legislature has been
appropriating to for the last
few years to make grants to
community schools so the fund
authorizes fifty thousand dollar
planning grants and then up to I
believe it's four years worth of
a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a year
requests for implementation of
community schools the house bill
two actually as it stands right
now is approved by HDFC has a
ten million dollar general fund
transfer into the communities
got community school fund and
then another ten million dollar
transfer from the education
reform Fund and so the intent of
that is to put money in the fund
allow you guys to appropriate
out of the fund based on the
language in this bill over the
next few years for continued
implementation of community
school funds.
That Mr chairman I would stand
for questions.
Thank you for we actually go out
I had a phone call from the
secretary early this morning
that had a concern that the
money that's currently in the
fund because this takes out
appropriated the department to
distribute.
Whether money that's currently
in the fund they would still be
able to that this confuses it
subject to appropriation by the
legislature that taking that out
of money that's currently there
and you know what I was trying
to understand exactly what that
does but they had a concern
about.
What's currently there and the
new money coming in and with
this mess up their ability to
administer what's currently in.
So Mister chairman the money
that you guys appropriated in
the twenty twenty general
appropriation act PED has
already you spend those dollars
so there is budget authority
through the end of this fiscal
year to spend those dollars so
they wouldn't have a problem
spending The appropriation and I
was trying to look and find it
there's a three point three
million dollars appropriation.
For FY twenty one that they
would still be able to continue
to spend
I don't remember and I'm trying
to pull the bill up if this has
an effective date if it doesn't
we could put an effective date
of July one twenty twenty twenty
one on it not wouldn't that I
think that would address the
secretary's concerns.
Madam has an additional
appropriation in it for FY
twenty two assuming that stands
as it is through the process.
The secretary would be able to
spend the money that's
appropriated but not the twenty
million dollars that is
getting deposited in the fund
those would be subject to your
appropriation in future years.
Okay and is yeah they get before
we go to questions because I'm
still trying then Senator with
your your approval I mean I
don't want to go over your bill
but I think these are important
things to clarify I before we
even get other questions about
the bill because I think it has
it gets right to the structure
of what we're what's trying to
happen here is up Mr sent are
you on with us and can you call
by the concerns of the the
secretary of the the path yes
good morning Mister chair
members of the committee thanks
for the question see our our
concern is obviously that.
We appreciate first of all the
the so far the the budget
recommendations for the twenty
million dollar deposit into the
fund that's.
I really important to support a
program that we provide is this
is successful and and actually
this really high demand across
the state for and I think that's
sort of at the heart of our
concern is last year again we
appreciate the.
Three point three million
dollars appropriation that
amount really at this point does
not meet our demand for
community school applications
across the state
and the current three million
dollars appropriation in H. B.
two would not be sufficient to
continue the community school
operations that we currently
have.
And so I think we're just
concerned that without the
ability to administer the fund
or at least have access to more
of more of those funds we
wouldn't be able to support what
we currently have and obviously
would be able to expand it as
well.
Mr chairman if I can clarify one
thing that's a in its in the FIR
is the bill as a companion to
the general corporation Act of
twenty one and house bill one
seventeen which includes a
nonrecurring ten million
transferred community schools
that is contingent on enactment
of legislation in this session
so that's the purpose of this
bill is to make sure we can
utilize that ten million
dollars.
Yes I think this provides the
framework to hang appropriations
money from the house on that's
correct.
We just wanna make sure that the
path is able to use it
effectively get access to it
effectively.
So Mister chairman can it I
think what Mr sentence noting is
the level of appropriation for
FY twenty two is not high enough
based on what what PED's concert
and I think the LFC recommended
about four point nine million
dollars almost five million
dollars appropriation as it
stands right now on house bill
two is three million dollars
there is you know a good
opportunity to have that
conversation I would say with
Senate finances they do their
work the bill has made its way
from the house over to the
Senate I believe they're going
to do that today all of this
bill the twenty million dollars
that is being transferred into
the fund and the general
appropriation act zooming it
stays like this would not get
deposited into the community
school fund.
So that would be at the
contingency wouldn't be Matt and
so the dollars would stay both
in the general fund and the
education the public education
reform Fund.
Okay.
At the bill anything else where
we go out to Republic COVID I
think that's it it's a simple
bill Representative stations
there are two runs the money and
that so we would be able to
utilize the dollars we need to
pass this bill.
To make sure that the the funds
flow as intended from from the
issues with the appropriators as
a that build a budget thank you.
Thank you at this point will go
out to the public Jocara if
you'll take us through public
comment.
Okay are you there.
I'm not sure what what the
concern is let me go out and
check and see if we're they've
got problems with microphones
out the outer office survey hold
on for a moment.
Is this better the audio any
better we can hear you.
If the chairman comes back we'll
continue.
It's better we can hear you yes
okay thank you for your patience
at this time we did not have any
members of the public who are
registered to speak in
opposition of Senate bill three
forty one but if there are
members of the public here today
who wish to speak in opposition
you may use the reaction by an
to raise your hand.
All right it doesn't look like
we have anybody so we will be
moving on to Robert Beatty who
has registered to speak in favor
of this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Robert Beatty
with Robert F. Kennedy charter
school our our page our schools
community school before they
were community schools are we
strongly support this piece of
legislation and the expansion of
funding for community schools
are across the state there are
thank you at Senator Novell for
being the sponsor of this
important legislation.
Thank you very much do we have
another members of the public
who would like to speak.
All right I see it Joe again.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman members
of the committee this is Jody
and with the New Mexico school
boards association of community
schools is one of our premium.
Well programs that we support at
the association harm our members
many of our members participate.
we we are supportive of the
additional funding that would be
made available through this bill
we're still not clear however
what the difference is between a
paid administration and being
subject to legislative
appropriation we're pleased with
the manner in which had New
Mexico public education
department has administered the
money and we hope that that
would continue under this
program under this bill we're
just not certain so there are
some questions that maybe
they'll be clarified during the
discussion thank you so much.
Thank you very much next up we
have stand rounds.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee good morning Stan
rounds Representative of the
school superintendents
association as Joe root again
indicated we also strongest
supporter community schools act
in funding expansions on the
community schools as we review
this legislation we actually
order as enabling legislation as
ms gradual indicated to house
bill two is a one at we to as
with the school boards I want to
be sure that as this moves
forward that and the
administrative ramifications are
are considered contemplated and
enabled so that they can be
properly administered which
attended continue to expand the
so very useful program thank
you.
Thank you very much do we have
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in favor of
Senate bill three forty one.
Do you Siena's.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Steve C. R. U.
S. government relations director
for any a New Mexico.
Support this legislation as the
central part of our legislative
goals committee schools meet the
needs students and families by
including them as full partners
in the decision making process
in out and allows them to shape
the programs and policies they
wish to see in their schools
community schools identify both
the assets in need to the school
community in the continuous
cycle of improvement science is
used to address the identified
needs through the hiring of an
on site coordinator will works
within the school to bring about
grassroots change.
We also believe that community
schools model should be rolled
out statewide as part of an
effective strategy to combat
poverty improve our educational
achievement and achieve racial
and social justice and equity in
New Mexico for these reasons we
support SB three forty one and
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward thank you.
Thank you very much do we have
any other members of the public
at this time.
That concludes public comment at
this time thank you very much
thank you took our
I would like to go back of
Senator Neville any comments
before we go to questions from
the committee just just a
clarifying thing I'm trying to
give an example of why we might
do this the water trust is a
good example with the the
legislature takes a number of
projects and puts them on in the
bill and I think this is trying
to set up a model that I'm not
sure that's exactly a fair
comparison but Rachel can
correct me if I'm wrong but I
think that might be a reason why
we're trying to do it this way
as opposed to.
In the past but Rachel you might
want to add comments to that if
if you would like to Mr chairman
Senator in.
You appropriate lies with the
legislature and what new
creative is that how the
language that state money in the
fund is appropriated to the
department it gives the
department the ability to budget
those funds as Stacey
just as they see necessary
outside of the appropriating
process so I'll give you a of
for example the Indian education
fund is not subject to
legislative appropriation for a
number of years fund balance
grew the department had a hard
time getting those dollars out
the door in the early two
thousand ten two thousand
fifteen years and then outside
of what you appropriated to the
department from the fund in
fiscal years which right which
is about six hundred and
eighteen thousand dollars or so
the department would budget an
extra one or two million dollars
to try to spend those fund
balances down and there was some
concern about what we're that
that things the department was
spending those dollars on going
to really improve student
outcomes for native American
students so.
Subject to legislative
appropriation on the fund the
department still administers the
fund but it allows you as the
appropriating body the authority
to determine the amount of money
that should be spent from the
funding ET.
And it it allows you know if you
if you think about the language
in the GA right now that states
twenty million dollars in
transfers into the fund are
contingent on this language
there's clearly concern I think
From the appropriators about
growing the pot of money
available for community schools
in a single year to Beck as I
noted earlier fifty thousand
dollar planning grants and then
your your.
Only needed for each additional
year triples and so there's
concern about making sure that
growth of state funded community
schools happens in a sustainable
way and that these dollars the
twenty million dollars isn't all
spent in a single fiscal year
that's the.
I'm sort of in a nut shell of
why that language why the
appropriators still that
language is necessary.
And I want to remind the the
committee that this is a non
reverting fund these are dollars
set there and and and can grow
but we wanna make sure that they
get out the door thank you Mr.
That's our comments.
Okay we'll go to questions from
the committee so I'm looking for
and from the committee.
I'm not seeing any and so I just
yeah this is not an area as far
as setting up funds or things of
that sort that that that I am
expert at the center renewable
and Senator Kernan you've been
on finance more as to whether.
This is under the general
appropriations act and.
Whether this actually gets the
money to the students or is this
setting up and another fun that
sits there in is not actually
serving students but is growing
slowly instead of meeting the
needs that we have now and again
that this is not my my area of
of understanding so no help me
out where does this need to have
a a date put on it or any of the
other kind of the concerns and
issues Mr Chairman as I said
this is non reverting fund we do
want the dollars out the door we
don't want to grow and the
appropriators we're concerned
that if without legislative
approval or oversight that we
might have these dollars starter
build up and we don't want to
see that happen we will see him
get get to the community schools
this is a very good programs
like as I understand every
research to that and up I think
we want to make sure that it
happens the contingency is if we
don't do this bill we don't get
the money so that's the bottom
line Mr Chairman.
Yeah and and Senator yeah the I
don't think anybody's debating
that part of it of yes certainly
we have to have the framework in
order to hang the money on I
think the the department and
again not an area of my
expertise so I just ask that
make sure to check with the
department that they understand
and feel that they can manage
this appropriately with that
change of us subject to
legislative approval as opposed
to appropriate by the department
to distribute with that change
because I think that's where
their concern is is whether
that's going to hamstring member
hide them from being able to to
move the monies are not.
Any other questions from the
committee.
What's the pleasure the
committee I'm in the past what's
your produce passed by Senator
Kernan.
second my bill Mr chairman
seconded by by Senator Neville I
was about to say Senator would
you like to second your your
motion and million if you'll
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Sinton of Bill yes.
No
I'm Senator Padilla what you say
yes.
Senator Pinto pass.
Senator pope.
I'm Senator Paypen.
Yes.
And back to sender panto yes.
Senator souls yes.
Senator you have a do pass
again I think it's a great thing
we're getting some additional
money out for for a good purpose
so thank you Sir thank you Mr
chairman members committee I'll
let me check is Senator Gonzales
with us I know he might be
coming late.
Mr chairman if you'd like.
Well is he going to be coming
later we can move to the other
bills don't have when he's able
to get with us yeah I think
maybe we should move in and that
way you give another chance to
get it thank you okay with that
will move the Senate bill three
fifty three I yes for school
kids with senators on just and I
just want to the Senate
Education.
Center such as with us I thought
I saw him.
No senator Sanchez is not here
yet.
I've sent him messages to come
on so.
Okay yes.
Will move down the house bill
twenty three as amended I know I
saw Representative Gaydos with
us Representative are you with
this and what do the Senate
Education.
Representative Gaydos are you
still with us or did you.
I do Senator Gonzales so let's
move back over will do Senator
Gonzales I see that you are now
with this if you'd like to do
Senate bill three thirty seven
workplace preparation school
programs.
You're still there.
Thank you.
Can
can hear me now yes
Very well.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize a little bit I just
walked in all.
I do have an expert witness and
maybe we can go to that it could
come back to my notes.
Yes please that you introduce
your expert witness it's it's
your kind intervention will help
you choose to do that okay very
well let me see if they're on
board.
Want.
Mr chairman with your permission
well let the Senator gets is
expert on I just wanna let him
know that I intended to present
this bill but we waited as long
as we could so that he could do
it themselves thank Senator
Padilla if you don't mind if you
can go ahead and started I'm
having a little trouble getting
in the way.
I'm happy to do that with your
permission Mister chair yes.
So so just offered to when
center called me last night
Senate bill three thirty seven
essentially appropriate seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
over to the public education
department
for programming that would be
contracted with an organization
to provide training and
development for CTE teachers I
think I got that right I'm going
off memory Senator Gonzales I
just get myself set up in my
office as well and and
essentially what that does is is
it it continues this long effort
that many of us even here on
this committee have had to to
drive more access expansion at
cetera and professional training
for the CTE teachers across the
state so this would be a
statewide program Mr chairman
and I don't know Senator
Gonzales if you're ready and you
have your witness one at that
person's because well.
With that Mr chairman what the
bill that's.
Okay I still Mr chairman of all
just some of the trouble with
the law the internet on one
part.
Well maybe you could just
continue just a little bit
longer Senator Padilla.
Well and I think what we all
know is that C. T. does a number
of things for our students to
graduation rates are in the.
Low to mid ninety percentile
range for for students to
participate in CTE C. team you
know we're really does help the
students walk at a high school
with a skill that's usable and
employable almost immediately
and and I've seen you know the
time that I participated in in
these to be called a poke at
back in the day.
What was that we had multiple.
Courses in Mandalay.
In the help me to really start
my business a long time ago and
I think what we can than what
we've been seeing with C. T. is
that it has evolved over time in
terms of the types of skill sets
that are offered by CTE so I
think that Senator Gonzales
probably has his witness now and
I'll just keep talking Mr
chairman if you'd like.
I think probably Senator Kernan
could talk about this one too I
know that we're both very high
on CTE so.
Senator Gonzales you're on mute.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator by the all of
the witnesses are Elaine Romero
and that stuff for you.
So which would you like to go
for Senator it's your your time
of that's the flame.
Senator Gonzales this is Merion
the committee secretary neither
of your
Expert witnesses are on the zoom
although they were sent the link
okay well very well we'll just
continue that
All Mr chairman of I think what
senator by the economic synopsis
of Bill you know what very much
if you want to go to public
comment and then we're ready for
questions.
Okay.
Okay the card you'll take us to
public comment on Senate Bill
where are we three thirty thirty
seven it's nine o'clock.
Percent.
Three thirty seven we do not
have any members of the public
who registered to speak in
opposition are there any members
of the public who would like to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill three thirty seven at this
time.
Eric Vazquez.
Mr chairman I excuse me I'm here
to speak in support.
Okay thank you very much is
there anybody else.
All right moving on to those who
wish to speak in support first
up.
We have sharing Berman who is
joining the call at this time so
we will go to the next person as
she joins Roger Gonzalez.
All right Sherin Berman.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is Sharon
Berman I'm a civic engagement
policy manager at New Mexico
First and I'm a registered
lobbyist for New Mexico first we
support Senate bill three three
seven and at thank Senator
Gonzales for sponsoring this
bill.
In our recent higher education
and workforce town hall and even
in our recent health town hall
which has.
A track for workforce in health
and education areas
prioritizing historically
Underserved under knowledge
populations has been a really
important thing for all of our
participants in a lot of
consensus agreement has come
around
making sure that there is
career.
Preparation for our students and
we feel this is a very powerful.
And direct way of doing it and
we would like to support this
and we hope that you will too
thanks very much for this
opportunity.
Thank you next up we have Dr
Lillian Torrez.
Dr Lillian Torrez.
All right next up we have Eric
Vazquez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is our
hospice I service the one stop
operator for north in New Mexico
overseeing all the one stop
workforce connection sites in
the ten county area on behalf of
the northern area labor
workforce development board we
minister number programs
providing workforce assistance
job placement services and
education training to northern
New Mexico's residents this
includes supporting education
and training programs for our
area used.
All of the area want stocks
would not directly work with on
this program Senate bill three
thirty seven provides the
resources to create an
innovative and valuable training
program for northern New
Mexico's you interested and this
growing industry and we see
great potential for
collaboration of providing more
opportunities for our area you
want to thank Senator Gonzales
for bringing this bill forward
in this times as we are really
really trying to restart our
economies and get residents back
to work in a very changed
economy we encourage passage of
the stop.
Next up we have Ashland an
audio.
Ashlynn Tenorio.
All right next up we have a
bricks rebel.
All right actually may go ahead.
hello my name is options in our
area I am from the proposal
looking incentive can go.
He am I missing here at this
school.
and I am hearing on behalf of.
I'm here to support the Senate
bill three.
And concerns are nervous.
Sorry.
And this bill.
Supported this bill would
support me to continue to do the
work that I enjoyed doing very
much and
helping me get more involved in
the game who are.
Get more.
I'm so sorry.
It would help me get more
prepared and being able to do
stuff like this I'm.
Sorry that's it just thank you
and giving me the opportunity
to.
I think this comment.
Thank you Ashley and next up we
have a bricks Morella.
It breaks are you just I'm here.
Good morning my name is affects
for I am from the public ma'am
may I am thirteen years old and
I am seventh grade students
walking down the middle school I
believe Senate bill three three
seven should be passed to allow
for you to have opportunities
like receiving trainings
certification programs
mentorship programs and other
means to allow you to gain
skills that will benefit them in
the future.
I myself have benefited from
these programming just in the
past year I have had the
opportunity to take social media
management course which then
allowed me to be accepted into
an internship program where
myself and at least now manage
social media accounts for
different businesses and
organizations we utilize graphic
design photography videography
and editing to create content
for clients that increase their
following customer base and
audience a few of my other peers
have also been able to see dual
credit for the internship
program we part of but
unfortunately I'm not yet old
enough to receives a dual credit
opportunity but it's a bill like
this is passed I'll be able to
receive in the future.
Thank you very much next up we
have Saturn hawk.
Saturn hawk.
All right moving on we have
heather Bassett.
Hi there are you with us.
Okay moving on we have Julie
Henson.
Julie I see that you're with us
are you able to on mute.
Okay that concludes those who
registered.
To speak are there any other
members who wish to speak.
Justice Daniels biz out.
Thank you.
Chairman members of the Senate
thank you for having me I am
actually one of Senator Gonzales
these expert witnesses I I
however did not want to speak
out of turn but I'm actually
here to speak I'm in support of
Senate bill three thirty seven
and career and technical
education and skills I'm former
graduate of New Mexico I come
house New Mexico and a senior
now here in northern Arizona and
northern Arizona university
studying philosophy politics and
law my time in New Mexico was
characterized by a lot of
different things I spend a lot
of time lobbying and advocating
for the rights mental health my
fellow teens across the state
and in doing so ultimately
created a suicide prevention
happen on the be declared in the
nation by the Verizon foundation
new year twenty eighteen and I
was able to do that the coding
schools that I was able to
attain while I was in New Mexico
my time in Mexico I was able to
obtain so many different skills
that have completely changed my
life you're right now I am a
senior I'm a senior in college
getting ready to look at law
schools and I'm sending New
Mexico and that came because of
some of the very skills on its
in built three thirty seven
advocate for and so I cannot
advocate enough for this bill
and I know that for many of you
Sanders I don't have to explain
why our our youth need this to
stay competitive in twenty first
century world world in which we
live in is one of competition
and for students to remain
competitive and to have all the
skills that they need to be
successful into the into the
stand H. Senate bill three
thirty seven true that support
that.
Thank you very much I saw Rosie
Hey it.
With your hand up yes thank you
chairman and members of the
committee I just I do want to
acknowledge that justice Daniels
who just spoke and Beth to foil
or both expert witnesses who are
available to answer any
questions from the committee I
also am very supportive of this
bill this is a cat is kind of.
Follows up on a bill that
senator Carlos Cisneros a past a
couple of years ago funding
programs like this that give you
the opportunity to be on career
paths and to gain skills both
technical skills and
interpersonal skills that will
lead them to be successful in
any career but definitely
working with industries that are
growing in New Mexico and and
need a a qualified workforce so
of the the components of this
bill expanding dual credit
digital badging professional
certification and also
professional internships and
doing this supporting academic
growth and social emotional
learning in and out of school
capacity of summer and after
school programs with roots in
the classroom I think is a
fantastic formula that will
support the direction we want to
go for you thank you very much
you'll back.
Thank you very much I also saw
Lillian Torrez is yes thank you
so much I apologize I couldn't
get my idea working at the rate
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity my name is Dr
Lillian Torrez I'm the
superintendent of Taos municipal
schools.
Ask for your work with your.
Making appropriation provision
of academically integrated out
of school and summer programs
statewide one of the biggest
pieces of this bill is that
we're focusing on serving low
income Hispanic American Indian
and African American students
and other underserved
populations statewide.
This.
Correctly I will on an opt
on the opportunity gaps for the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit but more
than that what it's going to do
is put as many dollars as
possible going to our students
to give them an opportunity for
college and career readiness
which they need so much right
now and to give them a quality
of life that we want for them
the value of every dollar will
come back to a hundred people to
the packed taxpayers will have
improved economic development
and we will have so many people
that can contribute to our
citizenship here in New Mexico
so it is really important that
we do this and continue I.
It should be a long term plan is
report other divisions in New
Mexico in government and create
a commission into a line college
and career planning of students
that is a long term plan but
these things that we're doing
right now the start and it is
very imperative so thank you so
much.
It
just.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you.
Senator Gonzales anything else
you I think some of your experts
may be on with you now.
Senator you're on mute still.
Senator Gonzales you still don't
hear you.
There.
Mr chairman of the car with the
system and our public comment
you know they have all made some
very L..
You know very concrete
Comments just about the program
and you know what he does and
what it works with the not at
all we can stand for questions
and I'll be able to any of my
witnesses so far comes to any of
those questions.
Will stand for questions.
Thank you we'll go out to the to
our committee for any questions
I'm looking for hands to come
up.
I'm not seeing any hands I have
a couple questions this are
Senator it seems very much like
a bill that you brought to us a
little while back in that on
page.
Page one and I'm looking online
twenty it says contract with an
organization what organization
are we talking about their.
Well Mister chairman the Libya
deal to one of my weaknesses
Beth oil.
I'm good morning chairman and
members of the board thank you
so much since I didn't get to
introduce myself I'll do that
quickly I'm an educator in
northern New Mexico secondary
educator
so in organization would be
anyone that qualified according
to what PED is talking about I
think there are organizations in
our state that are already
making forays into this
area trying to do these kinds of
things but where it says to
contract with an organization
well then I think later in the
bill it definitely says whoever
qualifies according to the PED
and standards that they set up.
So.
and an expert witness it sounds
like though that it is going to
be one R. F. P. for the full
seven hundred fifty thousand is
that accurate.
Mr chairman and Beth.
I'm.
I don't.
Chairman could you point me to
where you the line that you feel
like that that's what it is
saying that the one R. F. P.
goes to just that because I
didn't read that way but maybe.
On page one one twenty it says
that they're going to contract
with an organization that's one
organization it doesn't say that
multiple schools can put in for
the money or anything of that
sort it sounds like what
organization is going to get the
contract for seven hundred fifty
thousand.
You're saying thank you.
Mr chairman the members of the
dust right in the form saw I
would say that if it's one
organization.
From there they probably will
develop the criteria how to go
to well.
The interested parties.
So Senator what kind of
organizations might there be
that can handle a seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar contract
to put CTE programs out
statewide.
You will you'll to Mari
witnesses.
Yes.
Greetings chairman members of
the board.
Morning members of the committee
to answer your question directly
there numerous introduce
numerous organizations across
the state of New Mexico with
whom are qualified to handle
those those that the Scality
right numerous organizations
around Mexico within half of
course I have seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars but I do
think it's significant reason
why one specific organizations
not necessarily specified there
might need right is the fact
that we you know the importance
in New Mexico equity right we
know that on it is important not
just talk to your doctor one
individual to talk to all
individuals I'm in to make sure
there's a poly inequity in that
conversation and so it is not
necessarily just one
organization or entity that is
in fact qualified we're prepared
to do so but in numerous number
of qualified New Mexican
organizations nonprofit
organizations on that and use so
that wouldn't have to buy
through PED if I'm not mistaken
for those funds and I'm sure
which that PED would make sure
that whoever they handed that
those funds over to wasn't back
all right to do so.
So Senator I'm I'm asking you
know what organizations in New
Mexico are there that are
qualified and ready to to manage
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollar contract.
And you know very well Mr
chairman up to our with this do
you have a names of some.
Senator souls and Senator
Gonzales are some of the ones
that are showing really great
promise and and significant
increases are the AP programs
the dual enrollment
opportunities
project lead the way there's a
couple more avid and then
there's another one that I can't
think of right now all of these
are making huge progress with
our students so they're all best
practices and does in any other
organization that
She is showing great promise
because we're gonna have to use
evidence based.
Our.
Information so that we can we
have higher proficiency rates
and show that are there is
efficiency and improvement with
every single one of our students
in these programs.
Chairman full if you don't mind
if I add in thank you and for
your question so to name a
specific organization that my
school has worked with I'm here
in northern New Mexico's called
true kids one
and they have worked in a number
of these areas there are
nonprofit organization they've
been highly being and working
with schools as a conduit and
mentorship opportunity I'm
giving classroom teachers
support and over well over five
years now that my school has
worked with them so they are an
organization by name true kids
one that I know of that is set
up here in northern New Mexico
and has also reached down into
Espanola of Pojoaque area that
tell schools as missed what is
has worked with them pueblo
and so they thank you have the
capacity to reach these
requirements that are in the
bill that's a specific
organization I'm familiar with.
Okay yeah on some of the ones
that were mentioned AP does not
have a kindergarten program I
mean which is very specific on
page two line twenty one.
do Raul doesn't have a
kindergarten program which is
required avid might project lead
the way I don't think has a
kindergarten program so those
are not ones that would be
available to meet the specifics
of this on this is a law this is
not yeah just.
You know for instance if they
must have the state
Again this looks like it's very
specific to a particular
organization
and I guess back to the the
sponsor of the bill seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
this is the little one money
essentially this is not money
that flows the districts through
the formula where every district
gets to decide what is in their
best interest your and senator
you sit on the finance committee
why are we not just increasing
of the the general fund
appropriations by enough so that
all districts can set up
programs that are most
functional for their particular
district.
Mr chairman you bring up a very
good point you know all that
something to be looked at all
this was so.
A request to bring this
legislation forward in the
working with this group so you
know what.
All that's why we have percent
of the bill.
Yeah okay.
You can register state.
May I time in on that Center
souls would you mind no please
go ahead no classroom educator
one of the gaps that I see
is that my school district and
especially where we're talking
about those words opportunity
gap for our rural schools in
particular is that although I
would never shy away from extra
funding for my individual school
ever ever right but there's only
so much that we can still do
right in northern New Mexico
other rural areas of our state
I'm having.
Another organization to partner
with like our specially on the
mentor training
what I run out of it's time and
people resources that's what I
run out of right so you can give
my screen all kinds of more
money and we still don't have.
People we can hire or bring in
portraying us or right even
within and professional
development monies and so what's
important to me or what I have
found valuable in the classroom
is having a network of mentors
that I can reach out to an
organization whether it's true
kids one or another one that
comes about and say Hey I need
help the all the all the other
men touring introduce in my area
are tapped out because every
organization Intel goes to them
you know what I'm saying so when
it's a broader maybe all of
northern New Mexico or within
the state that I can tap into it
becomes that's where the
opportunity gap.
Get filled in right because the
students in my area.
They get one teacher I am the
CTE teacher I'm that electives
teacher on the foreign language
teacher the art teacher so you
can give my screen more money
for extracurricular programs and
it's still just me.
Right and so that's where for me
this addresses the opportunity
gap for my students to have
access to a broader.
So within the state I'm and
maybe larger school districts
don't need this because they
have enough other resources
particularly professionals that
they can partner with where they
have Sandia labs or they have
Los Alamos or make you know but
in our rural areas we just are
so limited in that area and so I
feel like it addresses
opportunity gaps and and in a
more encompassing way.
Senator and and that maybe Mr
point out where the bill does
this say that this is only for
rural schools and not for
children and all schools.
I'm using rural schools as an
opportunity gap components.
Right so it does say opportunity
gap direct remedies and I'm
saying for my vantage points
opportunity that in a rural
school looks a little bit
different.
So I'm not saying able schools
I'm saying it addresses
opportunity gaps I understand
their opportunity gaps in our
largest districts and then our
smallest districts
this yes seven hundred fifty
thousand now how is that going
to meet needs across the entire
state of Senator at the on the
page three section do the Public
Education Department shall work
with the New Mexico Alliance for
college and career readiness how
many districts to participate in
the college and career readiness
and how often do they meet.
All Mr chairman of the alliance
for.
Or just an.
This is doctor torrez I do have
that information it's nineteen
districts in New Mexico.
And so Senator yeah we have is
that eighty nine eighty seven
eighty nine districts and
nineteen districts while they
are nineteen districts of that
the department shall work with
just those nineteen districts
that are represented by the New
Mexico Alliance.
Mr chairman they all have the.
You know what they all have the
opportunity and by following the
the request you know from
requesting to whoever Public
Education Department us a
procurement but it says so
career readiness system the
statewide.
You know so well you know every
district has the opportunity.
But senator that last section
online three says that the
public education department
shall work with this one
particular group that only have
representatives from nineteen of
the the districts to develop the
proposals it seems like those
nineteen districts are going to
write a proposal the budget
amendment and doesn't benefit
children across the entire
state.
Senator souls
I just wanted to
this is for every child in New
Mexico every superintendent
every charter school that would.
Spend their CTE program there's
there are large districts that
don't have enough there are
rural districts with forty eight
students there are are charter
schools that would like the
opportunity because right now
there's there's the the funding
is wrecked so within and we
really need something more
concrete in New Mexico but
that's a long term plan but
right now students need more
opportunity for internships
career in college pathways
And every child in New Mexico
will have access to this if the
district applies so once they do
the R. F. P. every district has
to be competitive that's that's
the tough part we all compete
against each other for a little
bit of money constantly.
But that's because.
It does.
Well you to ever have enough but
with this it does give more
opportunities to more students.
All of.
Well I couldn't get back to yeah
we ought to be putting funding
is there a department in the
public get department that deals
with career impact ready.
technical education that is
there a department within Public
education department deals with
these areas that distribute
things like Perkins grants and
other.
CTE types of funding.
Mr chairman I don't know if
they're sending one from the
department present in on the.
On this.
Usually it is Mr Senator are you
are you with us at who in the
the pandemic ministers have
things dealing with career
technical education or which
department.
Mr chair we we do have a college
and career readiness bureau that
that handles those kinds of
those kinds of issues.
So yeah we already have that
within the public yet Department
yeah we is this just additional
funding for them to distribute
or would this be a specific
program that there are they have
to develop to add on to the
again I think they distribute
Perkins funds I mean there's
quite a number of different
things that I'm college and
career ready education already
within the department is this an
add on for specific programs or
is this more money that just
goes to that for the push out
statewide thank you senator
stalls the difference is this
only focuses on low income
students who don't have this
opportunity.
There in pockets of poverty this
helps them get out of poverty
that's what it particularly.
I'm Hispanic American you
African American students and
and yet they're underserved
populations so.
A Perkins grant inTaos I might
get twelve thousand dollars by
the time I pay five thousand to
the person to coordinate it the
other seven just doesn't go very
far as an example.
So
yes this is particularly for
this subpopulation.
You give them an opportunity.
To.
Get out of the poverty's system
that they are in and this is
just extra support.
We're gonna have more students
getting out of poverty as
opposed to
working for minimum wage
somewhere and
That's why I'm so passionate
about this is because ET
subpopulations.
We need more resources and.
It will have access to this.
Yeah and and and and your
experts go as I read through it
and there is one line where it
says focus on serving on this on
page two five nine focus on
serving low income Hispanic
American Indian African American
students another generally
under served populations
statewide but again it says yeah
the request for proposals award
you an organization so it's one
organization only and then on do
it says that the department
shall work with a particular
group that includes only
nineteen of the districts
and I thank you my district Los
crucis are they one of the.
The nineteen districts.
It is out of school all out of
school
any any district this money is
for everyone so again we're very
we have to be competitive
against each other to try to.
At the money but
we any districts can be part of
the career and college alliance
I understand is Los crucis
district one of the those
districts.
I.
Don't think so.
They can be.
And I'm sure they would apply.
Yeah right right now what it
indicates is that group of
nineteen districts is who's
going to develop the request for
proposal.
What it says in the and it says
that this is going to one
organization an organization I
just got I've ever concerns in
the on I we go round and round
about it at I I think we're
better off trying to put money
into what we already have in the
head with career technical
education programs out and fund
those fully because the pen is
the one that's responsible for
pushing programs out statewide
not a an organization that
nineteen of the districts is
will determine what the request
for proposals are this against
more to build we had earlier
that is very specific yeah we
require the kindergarten
components are just.
Yes.
I'm not please note yourself.
the this yeah there are very few
programs that are going to be
all of these particular and very
specific requirements which
sounds like it's written for a
particular purpose
some of the other ones that were
indicated AP dual enrollment
project lead the way you don't
need all of these requirements
and that's concerning that we're
writing laws for seven hundred
fifty thousand dollar program to
to work through the head where
they already have a CG bureau
and division that's working on
trying to do programs of this
sort where we under fund what we
already have
but I'll stop with that is there
any other questions from any of
the committee.
Mr Chairman if I might value and
not been recognized right now
yeah we're we have moved on
thank you.
Senator Gonzales anything else
Mr chairman of.
No that's that's fine with that
bad a very good discussion.
Pleasure the committee please.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
We do dance.
Have a motion for a due passi
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
bye Senator pope if you'll call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville no.
Yes yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Center pope.
Senator pulp.
Yes.
And I see Senator Brandt is back
on.
My vote is no thank you.
And Senator yes.
I'm I'm.
You're there.
Yes yes I'm here and I both yes.
Senator souls no.
I think
the.
Mr chairman the substitute
motor a substitution that have
to pass the right.
Yes motion that's not if you
passes that this motion for a no
recommendation.
Is that.
Thank you Mr chair.
Seconded Marianna you'll call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Novell no.
Padilla yes.
No.
Yes Senator souls.
No.
No type of.
Mr Chairman I'm totally kidding.
Any other recommendations.
Your cricket.
I guess I I would make a motion
to table.
Well second.
Table don't require a second but
okay.
You'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator Nobel yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
No.
Senator souls yes.
We have a cable bill and senator
your your bill is stable.
Very well thank you Mr chairman
thank you members thank you.
The where are we moving on I
think senator Sanchez of Senate
bill fifty three senator Sanchez
with us yes here and I will
remind the committee that we are
going to stop at ten twenty of
because we've got a caucus
meeting Representative I believe
we will get your bills so hang
with us or come back in twenty
minutes or so.
Go out we will go to Senate bill
who three fifty three I yes for
school kids senator Sanchez
welcome sanitation.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members
I'm introducing bill three fifty
three three fifty three today on
I exams for school children
before from kindergarten to
fourth grade.
And
As we know a young
young students
the I. yes now is just a
screening at the schools and
sometimes when the kids are
young the when they read up
close the book is real blurry
but they can see the chalkboard
so in my bill we're doing is
eliminating the step.
Of when we sent to the school
nurse and then they're able to
read the.
The
The the the letters on the board
on the on the wall because it's
a distance of the talk were they
can see it so I think what we
sent him back to class and they
still need to be checked up for
their rights and I believe we're
missing that step in with a
comprehensive vision we won't
miss that step we won't miss the
lazy eye and the other issues we
have with young students in
their eyes
We see there is been our.
Three states just in the last
few years that have switched
over to making a mandatory
comprehensive vision before kids
enter school and Illinois
Kentucky and Georgia have all
put this into law and it goes
only up to the fourth grade
you'll you check the
kindergarten first grade second
grade and third grade.
And in my bill if there is
students or parents that want to
opt out on page two there is a.
They can fill out a request
submitted to the school they can
opt out if they don't choose to
be part of this
I don't have any expert
witnesses today I built pretty
short and sweet.
I'm open for any questions.
Any any experts I don't I have
one more
in the title if I could clear
one thing up more in the title
it has optometry practitioner
and I want to make it clear that
this is for optometrist and
ophthalmologist this is not just
singling out one practice or the
other it's just the way the law
is under the optometry that's
how the bill was written
and I'm open for any suggestions
or or anything anything we can
do to make this bill better I
believe this would be a great
bill right now in the schools
some school districts do have
the spot vision screening but
not all districts to do so.
In the elementary level right
now they get a screening exam
not a comprehensive vision I
just.
And if the school does have this
spot vision screener then it is
a little bit it's one step
closer to the comprehension
vision screening but it's not
the same and we do still miss
out on
Different things so with that
being said I am open for any
questions.
I do not have any expert
witnesses today.
Miss the I saw your hand up did
you have something prior to
wanting to be on the list.
Mr chairman I don't think you
went to public comment yet
either all right whenever you're
ready.
Thank you I just want to make
sure you have a question about
this process or something like
that that had not been to do
yeah with the specific to help
out thank you with that will go
out the public comment job Carl
if you lead us to that please.
Absolutely for public comment
will begin in opposition
beginning with Dr Sean Rivera.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John Rivera I'm an
ophthalmologist representing the
New Mexico Academy of
ophthalmology and pediatric
ophthalmologist Todd Goldblum
was unable to come to the
hearing today.
Well I think senator Sanchez for
his concern for the children of
New Mexico I am those I
represent opposed Senate bill
three fifty three and recommend
that it be withdrawn we like
Senator Sanchez want to provide
access to eye care for New
Mexico children but forcing
families to go for a
comprehensive eye exam is
unnecessary financially
burdensome and a poor use of
resources as you recall back in
two thousand eight the New
Mexico legislature did a great
thing and pass joint Senate and
house memorials addressing this
very issue at the time they
performed a thorough review of
the medical literature heard
from childhood experts including
Todd Goldblum and concluded
vision screening done at schools
and by primary care providers is
overwhelmingly preferable to
comprehensive exams and is
highly sensitive and specific
for identifying I disorders that
do require comprehensive
evaluation as a result of that
the save our children site fund
was approved and implemented by
the department of health so it
seems that I Senator Sanchez
deals children are being missed
by our current protocols that
are already in place it would be
preferable to do an analysis for
an audit of our current system
rather than making a whole new
bill The New Mexico Academy of
ophthalmology stands in
opposition to this bill along
with the New Mexico pediatric
society gamma the New Mexico
medical society the American
academy of ophthalmology and the
American Association for
pediatric ophthalmology and
strabismus but we oppose this
bill we look forward to future
dialogue with Senator Sanchez
about improving health care in
New Mexico thank you for your
time Mr chairman and committee.
Thank you very much next up we
have Rachel Davis.
Rachel Davis.
All right.
Now moving on to those who are
here but had not registered is
there anybody else here as a
member of the public who would
like to speak in opposition to
Senate bill three fifty three.
Stan rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee good morning again
of the I'm stand around
Representative The New Mexico
school superintendents
association for reasons you've
heard from a
Dr Rivera and other matters we
feel like this bill might need
to mature a bit before moves
along we're concerned about the
fact that this does not include
an appropriation and as we
started this bill we could not
defined what the cost analytics
might be to local school
districts to parents and others
we're not sure on Medicaid in
the school to work those kinds
of things and so for those
reasons Mr chairman this point
we unfortunately have to stand
in opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else would like to speak
in opposition to Senate bill
three fifty three.
Okay moving forward we have
those whose registered to speak
in favor of the bill beginning
with Todd Goldblum.
Todd Goldblum.
Moving on we have Richard mon
Toyota.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Richard
Montoya on the executive
director of the New Mexico
optometric association.
In general the New Mexico
Prometric Association supports
the concept of children
receiving comprehensive eye
examinations prior to entering
pre school or grade school
we all know the condition is key
to a good school year being able
to see is crucial for many
activities including skiing the
board reading and staying
focused we also noted eighty
percent of what children learn
in school is taught visually and
untreated troubles can put chair
children at substantial
disadvantages I'm outside of the
classroom good vision and eye
health care can be just as
important to a children's
development good quality of life
including playing on the
playground and activities that
require strong visual skills
I do understand that there meet
may need some work on this
legislation but in general we do
support the concept of children
receiving their eggs Isami shins
before entering crowded
preschool and those early grades
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you next up we have
Bernadette St Clair.
Bernadette Sinclair.
Finally we have doctor do
tricks.
Doctor detects are you with us.
All right are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in favor of Senate bill
three fifty three at this time.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you took out the Krishi G.
leading us through all of that I
always like to go back to the
sponsor etcetera so I'm just do
you have any any comments before
we go to questions from the
committee.
All right yes Mr chair thank you
I appreciate all the people I
called in in support and in
opposition it's good information
the one last thing that I did
the doctor is you know all the
new learning that the kids are
doing the young kids are doing
now
on zoom in computers there are
eight eyes are developed yet and
I I believe that we do need this
check to keep that up and keep
it going
us as adults I know some people
are my committees yesterday from
one to seven thirty last night
in my eyes were hurting and I'm
my eyes were should be fully
developed doesn't also that's
just one more thing that I.
Wanted to say you know what the
new learning and the kid staring
at the screens it is a bigger
strain on their eyes so back to
you Mr chair.
Thank you will now go to
questions from the committee and
no my goodness I've got all
kinds of hands up Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Sanchez and I really
wanted to hear this bill because
of that the title and so I think
it's very interesting I didn't
realize that this was haven't
had my children are twenty five
now they're twins and in the end
they did have like issues and I
problems along the way that we
were slightly able to correct it
so I want to make sure I wanted
to also hear from the the
doctors in the field and just
kind of get their professional
take
did so what neither one of the
doctors are the association and
drive about at Mr chairman and
senator such as they weren't
your expert witnesses they
simply came to speak in favor or
oppose or opposition.
Yes Sir Sir yes Mister chair
Mister center yes.
Mr chairman and senator Sanchez
did you reach out to those guys
beforehand to get their take on
this legislation.
Mr chair Senator yes I did am I
didn't get any comments back
until the bill ran and I've been
in contact with them
The doctors that we're gonna
speak today we're going to call
in but I I didn't know that.
So I've tried speaking to him
and now the bill is ran
everybody has been contacting.
Okay well Mr chairman and
senator I've been right there
where you're at right now.
I've gotten to the morning and
I've been beat the doors down to
get feedback and get people
involved in trying to here it is
here's what I'm thinking about
and and everyone decides to show
up about ten minutes before the
actual discussions I I I feel
for you there what a fun time
that always is for all of us I'm
not the only one that happens to
but my question is is is really
around can you just tell me let
me paraphrase but I think you
said the problem is that there
is an additional step the cost
money as well as time and it and
and I think you're maybe you're
saying Mister chairman Senator
it's it's unnecessary is that
right.
No I believe that we're missing
a step up.
The still not all the schools
there's there is a machine that
are at some schools like and the
bland school district they just
got it this last year they
didn't get to use it due to the
COVID.
and it is a spot vision screener
and it is another tool that the
school nurses get to use and it
helps getting closer to a
composition I of comprehensive
of vision yes so but not all
school districts have that
so.
I believe you know if we can use
the optometrist or
ophthalmologist the optometry to
do this they can help the nurses
and they can pinpoint the
problem with the the young
children that have these are you
deficiencies or a lazy eye or
need a set of glasses.
Mr.
So Mister chairman Senator so
you're legislation requires all
schools to have this this
device.
Yes like previous states that
have have done this illinois'
Kentucky and Georgia have done
this is the last few years have
made this a law a state law for
a comprehensive vision I yes and
you know if the parents choose
to opt out of it or they don't
want to do it there is a
possible in the in the bill that
they can
they don't have to participate
but if they feel that their
children needed and this is you
know.
Yes again targeting you know
rural areas tribal areas where
they can have this done.
Then but if they don't want to
they can opt out of.
So can I ask you Mr chairman I I
I I I and senator
so what what drew you to bring
this legislation I'm just
curious because that sort of.
Pretty specific specifics when
line if you will for the
legislature what what drew you
to do this.
I was a kid sitting in
kindergarten I can see the book
the blurry vision and I to get
you know help to later on and
you know as a kid you don't have
confidence to say the books Lori
wanted to you know a blurry
means so you kind of just go
through the steps and you go
through second third fourth
fifth sixth grade seventh grade
then you become a freshman the
state in a lot of that book kind
of doesn't of those words look
right so then you say Hey I need
to go get my eyes checked mom or
dad you know and.
So.
That's why I brought this
legislation to help others that
you know Mr chair Senator.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
and then you grew up and became
a senator came to fix it and
that's what what what a lot of
us do so I think that's that's
really good start I'm just a
little bit more I'm kind of on
the fence on this one so I hope
to hear some more stuff on why
this is you know after all these
years and decades in time that
we're we're suddenly bring this
I'm just trying to figure out
what what the the the end of
well I guess the motivation is
yes that's correct correct catch
those issues very early on and
maybe they can be corrected
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I and again we
have a long list of the people
and we got it one more bill that
we hope to get done so please
keep your questions tight
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I just need you to
clarify for me.
But the real intent yes so you
talk about that spot vision
screener who operates that
machinery within each school so
I think you're saying those are
actually in the school building
is that correct.
Yes in the end the head nurse of
the school does those checks and
that's not in my bill that's
something that school districts
are applying for and getting
other monies for but it is is it
if the school district does have
this spot vision screener it is
one step closer to helping them
identify it's not a total
comprehensive vision the
comprehensive vision takes care
of everything that's done by
optometrists and you know the.
They take care okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator your bill really Mr that
that final step when you
actually go to the optometrist
for screening is that correct.
Mr chair Senator yes.
So let me just what is your
briefly the situation in my
community and and I've lived in
Lake County we have I think we
may have three maybe four
optometrist and I don't think we
have an ophthalmologist at all
of the county right now and so
is specifically related to
children who are on Medicaid
they can certainly go get a
vision screening and Medicaid
will pay for that.
Problem is in my community and I
checked around with some of my
providers if if they need
glasses I'm that's really not
the they're not gonna find
anyone in Lake County who's
going to provide that service to
provide the glasses and that's a
real problem because and and and
I found out why because those
children that are on Medicaid
through whatever in seo whether
it's Presbyterian Blue Cross or
western sky at this particular
child.
The optometrist said that the
third party payers this is
getting into the weeds a little
bit basically they won't
contract with because the the
payment is so terribly low so we
have some problems here first of
all we have four thousand
kindergarten through third
graders and and pops that
doesn't include the other school
districts so even if half of
those children at opt in and
half opt out you've got two
thousand kids Justin Hobbs that
would be required to go get a
screening bond optometrist and
frankly I I don't see how that
could be accomplished I don't
think we have the people out
there to do it I'm really like
the idea at the spot dition
screener yeah that's a bill that
I could I could get on board
with I think I'm in that could
be funded through some
appropriation from the schools
and once you have it you have it
a nurse can do it.
To me that makes a lot more
sense than requiring thousands
of children and to go out into
the community and trying get a
screening from an optometrist
which may or may not be in that
particular community I don't
think we have the providers to
cover this bill I think that the
cost it's not clear the bill
who's gonna pay for that because
we don't have everybody on
Medicaid image Medicaid will
cover for those children but we
have a lot of people that are
outside of that system his
parents probably cannot afford
to pay and I don't see an
appropriation with the bill that
would cover that cost so for
that reason I would really like
to to maybe encourage you to go
back and into the chief what
you're trying to achieve which
is absolutely correct is that I
do need to know they had such a
thing as a spot vision screener
and to me that is absolutely the
way to go something that I think
that that I could support and
I'm and hope that we can get
these kids at least at that
level of the screening.
So with that out I'll give
someone else that I want to
thank you for caring about kids
just want to make sure that this
is something that's doable and I
know in my community it just
simply would not be possible
thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan center
pope.
Thank you Mr chair and that
senator Sanchez thank you for
bringing this bill forward you
know I like you struggle the
same way in preschool I was
having trouble seeing the the
chalkboard and things like that
any kindergarten I got screen
and I've been wearing glasses
and contacts Eversense it's just
my concern is I guess just power
This screenings now and and I
guess the question I would have
or the screenings that they have
now are those adequate.
For students.
Mr chair Senator.
Yes Sir adequate and they
probably do a really good job
but they do still miss.
Of quite a bit
that's why I came up with the
competition vision it kind of
just it eliminates everything
out of it and we don't have a
little spot screener of small
business for years and every
school yet so maybe you know
what Senator gase said of the is
something that maybe I should
look at but the the screen they
do now yes it's it's just a it
is just on my screen that the
nurses to do with the school and
I believe it's the one that
probably mean you got years ago
you know and love yes they have
the the machine to to do that
one step forward Mr chair
Senator.
Well thank you senator I'm
assuming it's the block when I
check in for color blindness
things like that we we would
look at I I guess my only
concern is by sending every
student to see an optometrist I
just don't know if that's the
need for it I've got a lot of
emails from folks in that in
that field who said that as well
but I think I would kind of
agree with Senator Kernan maybe
the way to address this is
shoring up the screening to
maybe put this system in or
maybe add more testing within
the screening because I just
don't I just don't think it's
viable for us this every
student of Tom address for
screening and if that's
something you're interested in
doing I'd be interested in
working with you on something
like that because like you like
I said I share the same vision
issues when I was young.
So thanks again for bringing
this I'm I will not be able to
support the bill right now the
current form but I do want to
some so thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator thank you
senator pope Center Pinto.
Thank you senator thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you senator for
bringing this bill forward I
think it is a
Comprehensive thing but do you
know if there's teacher
training.
Mr chair Senator teacher
training for they get trained if
if they do have this machine
they do they do get a training
Mr chair and members of the
committee I need in the realm of
noticing that the child has is
struggling that big you know
squinting in the classroom
having trouble you know seeing a
but is there training for these
teachers.
Mr chair
Senator.
I would believe there is but I I
can't answer a hundred percent
of that I would say yes each
teacher should be able to.
Ten point that out of the
classroom but I'm not a hundred
percent sure.
And I the reason I say that
because I think we're being a
little bit reactive that we are
being proactive when we talk
about the whole child and that's
that child's the students health
especially now with COVID that
we do understand how important
it is that schools play a role
in noticing the child's health
and any being the risk for the
high risk students and within
classrooms and I don't know if
it's kind of micromanaging when
we talk about building
classrooms for children in which
the equipment and the equipment
that we incorporate into the
classroom is economic is
something that is built so that
the teacher can adapt to the
child needs I did have a child
in a student that tatted did
degenerative eye disease and
what she was gonna end up being
buying probably by the time she
got to high school
that was all the way down from
the lighting to happiness the
special equipment every time she
came into the classroom to
reading to even in the context
of the.
Supplies we gave her or the the
work we gave her to do and even
being outside they tried to put
it on teachers cars being
needing sunglasses so I think I
appreciate what you're the
intent but I think it is a hold
health of the child that we
should be approaching not
excluding there T.
thank you know that health
screening is very important and
Medicaid in some areas does not
cover
even dental so when kids come in
out the you know the.
It's like more of just pulling
out their teeth is the cheapest
way to do it and kids come in
with broken glasses and the they
have to wait until that budget
year end of fiscal year comes up
so they can
wait for IHS to have the money
to replace the broken glasses
and we want children to
participate in sports we wanted
to do all these things but we're
unable you know something's our
hands are tied I really
appreciate the intent of the
bill and you looking out for
children but right now I think
we should I think it's a
discussion that needs to be at
thank you Mr chairman members
of.
Thanks center Palo Santo Brent.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
singer
thank you that's just a couple
of questions so this bill
is requiring that all kids
starting school.
Go to actual home address for
optimal just to have the exam
correct.
Mr chair Senator test from
kindergarten starting in
kindergarten not anything about
fourth grade.
And Mister chairman Senator so
how would that be paid for with
the parents have to pay for it
would be covered under Medicaid
will help with the cost of that
be taken care.
Mr chair Senator most of this
would be covered under Medicaid
I think that's why there was no
appropriation for the ones that
individual insurance it would be
under their insurance
don't have any insurance at all
you know there's the groups the
yes P. and there's the other
children's
Not exactly sure but there's
another company with the VSD
that habit for ones that don't
have any insurance to get I
exempt.
Thank you this gentleman
I know that and I can finish
your some of the concerns and
share some of them
I'm wondering if Sir pope
mentioned the the screening
machine thank what you mentioned
in the Sir pope talked about it
and morning if you if you would
be amenable to maybe coming
back.
The committee set up that would
would maybe require that and and
so have a look at.
During that into all the schools
thank I wonder if if Mr around
snows whether or not those
already in the schools.
Senator I would be up for that.
Mr Chairman is surrounded around
yes I each trying to need their
goes Mr Chairman can I I'm sorry
I'm I'm on three Committee
simultaneously would you mind.
A miscarriage Senator Brandt
read stating the question Mr
Chairman mistranslation no do
all of our school districts have
those I screening machines or do
most of them have do you know
what the status is of those that
are schools
are Mister chairman Senator
Brandt they are not fully
throughout districts I think
that's something that is being
brought up in an individual
basis I think school nurses and
others are critical to that to
that span up I think during this
time of COVID I think all of our
attention is gonna look
elsewhere and I don't believe we
have momentum there at this
point in time Mr chairman miss
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman
mistranslated your you have vast
knowledge do you happen to know
how much those cost.
Mr chairman I'd have to go back
and look but it's it's several
thousands of dollars per I
believe but I don't I don't want
to be quarter not I will do the
research Mister chairman Senator
get to the members.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
stress for chairman.
I'm sorry I'm senator Sanchez
did you know the answer on that
one sorry yes Mr chair Senator
all for bland schools this last
like almost eight thousand.
Mr Chairman served some of the
smaller districts they really
only need one for district and
they can you know taken from
site to site to do the
screenings so there's maybe some
some ideas in there that we
could accomplish some of the
same goals another
recommendation that was maybe
just a minute ago from another
senator in my office is maybe
you know students that are
behind in reading
they could be referred out for a
a comprehensive test to make
sure it's not there by that's
the reason they're behind in
reading so that there's some
ways to to get that what you're
looking at so my recommendation
after hearing everyone would be
maybe just hold this in this
committee so we can discuss a
little bit further and look at
maybe seeing if we can bring
back a committee so later on
that would would deal with some
of those issues and not be quite
as prescriptive thank you Mr
chairman percent.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator chance to census.
Senator interesting summations.
This morning and
The I think one that we haven't
talked about is what a
comprehensive eye exam is and if
you'll remember.
You gotta get your eyes checked
particularly when you're older.
There's dilation.
There is you so our with
magnifying glass looking in the
eyes so for the that's kind of
overkill for our child usually
if there are reading
difficulties they do have the I.
charts and secondly
if there I I think adding a
reading exam along with the I.
charts school nurses would solve
the vast majority of the issues
and then we are the machines but
a comprehensive I.
Are way too much usually serious
problems children very young
children in the eyes become
apparent within the first couple
of years and that's why the
pediatricians are potentially.
posing as bills well in that
sticks it goes too far so that
the costs are not being
appropriated for are there is a
problem with.
Medicaid not paying and not for
the optometrist I mean that's a
huge barrier in the south with
needs to be addressed R. as well
as potentially be screening
machines that nurses can do in
the school so overall I think
it's it's a dressing issued
requests there but I think there
are a lot less expensive but
equally as effective ways to
achieve the aims are this and
that I'd certainly welcome as
well on some sort of substitute
for perhaps the machines were
again are the fact that we don't
have a whole lot of school
nurses
have one per district in many
cases I'm wondering if those
machines are going to be if they
were purchased for every school
district
would be affected for years
thank you I'm sorry my voice is
shaking and washing all right
tries to break through a mask
and talk at the same time thank
you Mr chairman and senator Jeff
sentence.
Thank you is senator
Just my comments I think we've
already talked about it what's
there yeah there is a money to
pay for this we don't have the
drive to do this in most of our
communities of there isn't
really any evidence that we're
missing a large number of
children through the normal
screening process so I guess I
would go to my committee what's
pleasure the committee.
I move to table.
Have a motion to table that's
not debatable manage your call
the roll please enter Brandt no.
Senator Hickey.
This is a motion to table to
table yes yes Senator Kernan
yes.
Senator Novell no.
Senator Padilla okay.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Center pope.
Yes.
Senator souls yes.
your motion has been tabled and
Senate education.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee I appreciate the
opportunity thank you thank you
Sir and I think you are lots of
people understand and appreciate
your concern for our young
children move Indian but this
this just isn't right and ready
yet so thank you Sir Mr chairman
thank you.
I know you want to move on I'll
take it up with Senator Sanchez
thank.
Okay thank you we have one last
one we had about ten minutes of
if we don't get all the way
through it we do have a hard
stop Representative at ten
twenty because of caucus
meetings prior to our floor
session if we don't get to a
vote by then yeah we'll just
pick up where we left off today
on our meeting on Friday I do
believe we have a floor session
on Friday it so it could get
read out that and continue on
its way without much delay if we
don't get all the way through so
Representative welcome you are
the very first house members
need for us to your a bill in
the Senate Education.
And it has Representative Gaydos
please thank you Mr chairman and
I will be as quick as possible I
see that both the I think all my
witnesses are in the in the
room I would like to introduce
and before I start Clarke
Faulkner John Hummer and bill
correct is that is.
If we can double check that they
are all in.
Representative I think several
of them and again reminder with
this is that if we go on too
long we won't get done today
okay now I'm just going to read
it out and I'll wait to you just
as questions of thank you Mr
chair our house bill twenty
three as amended
set standards that will ensure
the quality of medical training
programs it ensures that new
schools coming into New Mexico
are aware that they will be
partners with hospitals doctors
and the state of New Mexico it
gives hospitals and doctors the
ability to help pace and
training programs and residency
programs and are best suited
that are best suited for New
Mexico house bill twenty three
as amended does not have a
fiscal impact it does not have a
negative impact on growth or U.
N. M. and it does not prohibit
new schools from opening in New
Mexico finally this legislation
has been endorsed by the interim
and health the intern health and
Human Services.
An Indian Affairs committees as
well as in New Mexico Hospital
Association the New Mexico
Medical Society and the New
Mexico department of Human
Services and when that Mr
chairman I will stand for
questions how quickly is that.
Thank you Representative
appreciated that I like when
people get right to it so we can
get to the meat of it instead of
going on and on
I feel comfortable take as
quickly through is there any
public but.
Do you have any members who are
registered to speak in
opposition to house bill twenty
three but we do have
one who has registered to speak
in favor and that is share
information.
Sharon Berman.
Right going back to those who
wish to speak in opposition
either any members of public who
wish to speak in opposition at
this time.
And there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
favor of house bill twenty
three.
That concludes public comment at
this time thank you.
Thank you to a car that was very
efficient
normally I go back to the
Sanchez your date comments after
public comment but probably not
of members of the committee.
Looking for hands going up I
don't see any yet.
I'm hearing anything Mr chairman
I will do passed we have a
motion for it to pass Senator
Padilla.
Seconded by Senator Pinto very
avid you'll call the roll
please.
Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes in the bill yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator pope.
Yes.
Yes revenue pass
congradulations Representative
and that's how we do things in
the Senate.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for being our purchase health
bill and glad to help move
things along thank you and
committee with that we will be
that are I have I believe we
have a floor session scheduled
on Friday and so provided there
is a floor session on Friday we
will start at eight thirty if by
chance the leadership changes
that we will be at nine o'clock
we should get word on all of
that in the next little bit we
will continue to have a few
health bills every day as we
continue to work through our
list of of Senate bills we have
a couple that work ready today
it might be on the next one
hopefully within after we get
any read out of house bill's to
date I will put out the schedule
for Friday's agenda anything
else many one on the committee.
Seeing nothing then thank you
all for participating in Senate
education that up one last thing
I should say today was of.
But Martel as last day with us
she is moving on to bigger and
better things I think she's
there helping kill Carl I will
stand up.
Your location you have been
wonderful in for our committee
you actually set the standard
for all of the other zoom
operators and help train the
others and it certainly shows as
things continue to up to move
smoothly and other committees
and partly because of your your
training in leadership and and
following the model that you set
up here in Senate education so
part we're gonna miss you thank
you so very much.
Thanks I'm gonna miss you guys
too I really appreciate the
recognition.
And with that we are adjourned
until Friday.
