The that changing orders at the
request of the Sanchez for those
three or the sponsor in sponsors
for those three bills
Senate bill one seventy
financial literacy school credit
which is Senator Hemphill of
that is going to be postponed at
the request of the Sanchez deal
she tells me that she is ready
so that will be an indefinite
sponsor request to hold that as
we get down further than just
the one seventy seven Senator
Williams has to build so we'll
try and staff those too so he
doesn't have to come and go
so if the if there isn't any ask
questions or concerns about that
that'll be the order we're going
to attempt to follow as always
but Senators happy to be another
committees and things like that
we could up I'm surrounded move
around a little bit more with
you what's there but that's the
plan for how we're going to to
schedule and run things to date.
Students comments or things
before we get started provided
the committee members.
What remind people who are
watching and such that people
who are in the the zoom beating
which means that you have
contacted Martel Arzu Bob Rader
when we get the public comment
we live public comment to two
minutes you go beyond that it
causes you to get muted and
you'll be set with your mouth
moving and hearing nothing so
please keep your short and
concise typically we don't have
a problem with with any of that
but please make sure that your
comments are short and concise
and the always we try and and
work towards respect for
committees members of public and
everyone in education I don't
think there any particular other
particular issues or things that
we need to chat or talk about
and so without further ado
senator Neil SB one thirty five
opportunity scholarships Act.
Thank you Mr chairman we.
Your.
Tell me your move the meeting
from nine a car.
I mean no longer eight o'clock
eight thirty nine o'clock.
Meetings started off being.
So that was your decision I'm
sure now it anyway it's good to
be back in front of my old
Senate committee I know you've
missed me terribly and all my
wise cost.
But anyway so let me talk about
the opportunity scholarship
Senate bill one thirty five Mr
chairman members Senate bill one
thirty five creation New Mexico
opportunity scholarship act to
provide tuition and be
assistance to students in New
Mexico post public post
secondary institution and tribal
colleges.
This legislation provides for
tuition assistance for recent
high school graduates enrolled
full time as well as tuition
assistance for returning adult
learners enrolled part time.
The Senate bill creates a pilot
for students who have lost
eligibility for the lottery
scholarship turn support for up
to thirty six credit hours to
complete bachelor's degree it
creates the.
Appropriates twenty six million
dollars from the general fund
for two year opportunity
scholarships and four million
for returning lottery students
eligible for the pilot.
So Mr chairman members I believe
I'm joined by by hopefully by my
house co sponsor joint Garrett
is she on.
This issue there and then at
acting secretary Stephanie rod
Regus are they both on.
I am hearing this is Stephanie
or the great one Stephanie you
taking over for Americans you
can explain as much better than
me absolutely thank you Senator
o'neill Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
us the opportunity to present
Senate bill one thirty five I
promise I'll keep this create
opportunity scholarship renews
the promise of a tuition free
education at our public colleges
two year programs across the
state this callers your program
bills the gap left over from the
lottery scholarship and other
state programs and still allow
the student to use federal aid
such as Pell grants to cover the
cost of attendance including
books housing and child care the
three items I will point out
today include the eligibility
requirements the eligible
colleges and universities for
each type of students and the
funding request there are three
types of students who are
eligible for this scholarship a
recent graduate learner a
returning student learner and a
new edition of returning lottery
student which will benefit the
for your secretary let's start
with the recent graduates
learner this student will be
eligible for the lottery
scholarship and potentially
other state aid and the
opportunity scholarship will top
off the remaining tuition and
fees.
I'm page three section two
subsection K. lines three three
twenty three a recent graduate
learners must be in New Mexico
high school graduate enroll in
an eligible college within
sixteen months of graduation
enroll at at least twelve credit
hours per semester and maintain
a two point five GPA
additionally the student may
complete up to seven semesters
board until degree completion
these requirements are identical
to the lottery scholarship
eligibility a returning student
learner is typically an
untraditional students in the
sense that here she would like
to enroll in college to reskill
or retool or repaint a
certificate or associate degree
to receive salary bump or
invention we travel transfer to
a four year college on page
three section two subsection
else starting on line twenty
four a returning student learner
must be an adult and in New
Mexico residents have a high
school diploma or equivalency
enroll in at least six credit
hours per semester and maintain
a GPA of two point now this
student must not have an
existing associate bachelor or
graduate degree and may have up
to ten semesters of support or
until degree completion the
eligible institutions for a
recent graduate learner and a
returning student learning
include colleges and
universities with certificate
and to your program these are
independent community colleges
grants campuses comprehensive
colleges and tribal colleges.
Opportunity scholarship has
impacted nearly five thousand
full time students last semester
and we can make the decision to
enroll thirty thousand part time
and full time students in
certificate into your program
with the twenty two million
dollar investment we anticipate
that the students would bring a
return on investment of a
hundred and fifty million
dollars as graduates and
contributing citizens to New
Mexico now the last part the
last eligible student is part of
a new addition to the spell Mr
is referred to as the returning
lottery student this will be
part of a pilot program how many
times is public officials have
we heard I lost the lottery and
I only had one year left to
complete it.
We have heard this many times
for New Mexicans with that being
said on page eleven section
eight subsection K. starting
online twenty returning lottery
student is a student who lost
his or her lottery scholarship
eligibility but only has thirty
six credit hours remaining to
complete a four year degree
program the student must be in
New Mexico residents enroll in
at least six credit hours per
semester and maintain a two
point five GPA returning lottery
student may have up to six
semesters of support Rachel
degree completion the eligible
institutions for returning
lottery student include colleges
and universities in four year
degree programs these are
comprehensive colleges research
institutions and tribal colleges
to establish this pilot program
and the study of the returning
lottery students in New Mexico
our thoroughly we're asking for
four million dollars
appropriation as you know
governor Michelle lu Han
Christian Health worked hand in
hand with legislators such as
you all in state agencies to lay
a strong foundation for early
childhood education we have
maintained consistent funding
and public education.
I mean opportunities in higher
education to improve outcomes
for New Mexicans from cradle to
career is the next logical step
New Mexico was the first in the
first state in the nation to
offer tuition free college
through the lottery scholarship
and we must restore that
promised on New Mexicans no
matter their path thank you for
your time Mr chair will send it
back to you I also have the
committee amendments that I will
touch on those when you're
ready.
Thank you acting secretary end
up do we have joined over
Garrett on.
I I don't think I we do know we
do not but I okay send the link
to her one more time US top of
for email in case she's looking
for it okay that's fine thank
you mark out so with that Mr
chairman members of we we stand
for questions.
Okay Senator souls you're muted.
there we go okay
That we do have an amendment
that I think is mostly technical
fixes and so I think it's
appropriate at this time to if
someone would like to move the
amendment for discussion
commitment for discussion Mr
chairman thank you etcetera but
the.
And seconded by Senator
renewable is waving up at
presume that's what that means
we have now we put the amendment
UP I think everybody was given
was that the amendment their
email but we are now on
discussion of the amendment and
Senator if you'd like to explain
it does what it takes is what
changes yes I'd like to turn it
over to us secretary rod Regus
to do that thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank you senator o'neill thank
you Mr chair we are submitting
amendments for Senate bill one
thirty five the amendments are
as follows the first amendment
ensures that the language
surrounding a student with a
disability comports with that of
the lottery scholarship so we
fix that the second amendment
and just the total appropriation
to agree with the executive
budget recommendations twenty
two million dollars for the
opportunity scholarship in four
million for the opportunity
scholarship highlight for the
returning lottery student for a
total of twenty six million and
the third amendment will help
shore up the lottery tuition
Fund in the event that the full
appropriation is not fully spend
within the fiscal year rather
than reverting to the general
fund.
You talk about like there are
three amendments I think there's
only one amendment that does the
job it does all of that or do we
have multiple amendments and
I've got a gift for my staff.
We have to do them separately
okay.
Mr chair number one is shoring
up the language for a student
with a disability so that it
comports with the lottery
scholarship.
When you talk about number one
number one on this amendment.
Or.
It amended.
No number one on this amendment
that I'm looking on the screen
it's.
So after review insert both
definition of full time in.
Number number two has some
commas in it on full time three
then remained there I'll be
transferring the lottery tuition
Fund in my correct on following
all that and then we deal with
the The appropriation amount.
It is my address on the.
Following Mr chair I'm so sorry
wanting to is the one that
comports with the lottery
scholarship language for a
student with a disability.
Okay.
Which fewer than six credits
okay
amendment and so discussion on
the amendment from the
committee.
Mr Chairman.
Yes Senator Padilla.
Address I didn't raise my hand
virtually I just thought I would
so I just Mr chairman and madam
secretary and senator so the
three items that you were
talking about that would amend
your original bill are all
wrapped and rolled into this
document we're looking at okay I
just want to make that clear
okay and then can you help me by
going through a little different
way of explaining well maybe
maybe I just was slow on the
uptake but I'm item number four
because I thought I heard you
say
twenty six mill was struck
twenty two was inserted but then
somehow you got back to twenty
six now I might be that I'm I
heard that wrong.
Mr chair representative by the
act yes it's a little confusing
so I apologize the overall total
appropriation for the bill will
be twenty six million both the
opportunity scholarship to your
certificate and the pilots.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
madam secretary and center after
the reason we're in this is I
have employees working in my
office with me so I'm trying to
protect them with my my masking
everything so trying to be a
stealthy here but so does that
get us anywhere near with the
funding at needs to be or is
this simply a stab at it or and
I'm concerned that if we're
gonna do this let's do it the
right way from the get go and
let's make sure that the thing
is funded appropriately.
Mr chair representative by the
act I wholeheartedly agree with
you this will allow us to do it
the right way as you know last
year after the special session
we only received ten million
dollars but if we do the full
twenty two million dollars this
Ms can ensure that we do it the
right way for both certificate
and two year degree programs and
allow the student the
flexibility to go part time at
six credit hours or full time at
twelve credit hours.
Okay well I appreciate that
settlement Mr chairman and madam
secretary so I guess the other
question I have is and it could
be once we get back on to the
bill Mr chairman so stop me if
I'm gonna veering off the road
so so what is going to stay with
so is the motivation now going
to be for students to go and
find every opportunity at a
community college before they
get into the four year which is
a little more expensive I guess
so what I'm trying to it and if
we do we need to discuss this
madam secretary during the bill
discussion I'm happy to do that.
Mr chair representative Betty
I'm also happy to discuss it now
but it may be more appropriate
for the bill discussion okay
I'll wait Mr Chairman until we
get that that's all I have for
now in the amendment doing that
earlier and now it's thank you
million you're you were live
right then and Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman if we
could look on point three on the
amendment I'm not reading and
understanding how the most read.
Senator Brandt we we are we
think very much alike I've got
your that on page seven that it
probably out of strike remain
also and then it reads a little
clearer if that is what you're
getting at but
I think just the re right
Show remain be transferred to
the lottery tuition Fund that
consent right.
US seventy if you would please
but I think on the one hundred
part three page online twenty
that the word remain should be
struck along with the others.
I think you're right Senator
souls.
Yes that is I'm sorry Senator Mr
chair Senator Brandt yes.
So I guess you know and Senator
I'll Neil and Stephanie is that
all right to make that change on
the amendment that we also are
striking the work remains so
that it reads grammatically
we're just that yes the main
grammatical sense for sure good
good catch.
You could just after remain put
after shell.
Sh.
Mr chair I'm going to refer to
the doctor on who helped me at
this amendment Dr Rommel will
that be fine.
Yes apologies to the chair of
the committee for that
grammatical error and that is
correct we should strike remain
and it should follow after
shall.
So anything else Senator Brandt.
That's the only thing I caught
so far
Well again.
Jumped out at me that lots of
people trying to notice that and
so if it's okay with the
committee the amendment has been
change we're not going to amend
the we just are changing the
amendment
technical way of doing that but
straight remain as well and then
I think it reads properly any
other questions about that
particular change or the
amendment.
I don't think I have any other
questions on them thank you Mr
okay we have an amendment in
place without other questions
million if you would call the
roll this is on the amendment.
Senator Brandt.
Yes on the.
Send me.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes.
The Pentel.
Yes Center pope yes Senator.
Yes.
Bill now Sir we're back to the.
On the main bill anything else
Senator o'neill no no we're
ready to to hear input from the
public and answer your
questions.
Okay thank you I see etcetera
but the it with his hand up.
Mr Chairman did you want to have
a public comment before we do I
just want my hand up CS on a
week in North.
This morning yeah we're all the
work and I get a copy rolling
out Mr chairman if he was saying
ignore the public comment Normie
ignore me good lord you all well
there goes your vote
Darn right one we're we're gonna
go to the public input and my
kids you'll help me through all
of this I would remind people we
do the public you put to two
minutes.
Okay do we have anyone from the
public who would like to speak
in opposition to Senate bill one
thirty five we're only hearing
opposition at this time I only
received support email so let's
give the opposers a moment.
Not seeing or hearing any
opposing ones let's move mark
hello to those in support okay
first we will hear from Becky
rally thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
senator o'neill my name is Becky
rally and president of Santa Fe
community college Senator well
it supports this bill we have
done extensive surveys that we
know for a fact that the
financial need is the single
most important reason that our
students have struggled this
semester we have received about
five hundred thousand dollars
the opportunity dollars shipped
we've been able to spend about
half of that if the bill were
changed to allow part time
students.
The funding and we know that we
could easily spend what we're
allocated and then more so we
know that this would be an even
greater asset to our students
and it has been so far thank
you.
Thank you thank you thank you
now we will hear from Tracy
Hartzler Tracy.
Sure.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee and Tracy Hartzler and
the president of central New
Mexico community college we
stand strong support of the
opportunity scholarship bill as
amended so SB one thirty five as
amended so you know this
academic year the first year the
scholarship bill or discussion
program we awarded over three
thousand five hundred students
that his total more than three
million dollars we absolutely
appreciate the X. the changes
that the bill makes to the
current program particularly
with the definition of returning
students we estimate that that
would allow us to award up to
forty to four thousand seven
hundred students most of our
students as you may know are
part time students so we know
that this expansion to be very
helpful for students and that
would cost that would generate
about another two and a half
million dollars for us so we
know that that would absolutely
be such an important need in our
community and we also appreciate
the Sanchez consideration and
and the governor's consideration
amending the language to allow
students with disabilities to
attend part time we know that
many of our students about ten
percent of our lottery students
have some disability and they
take advantage of of my say take
advantage of the exercise their
use of a waiver to allow them to
attend part time because we know
that that helps them succeed
more are clad in their classes
and so the allowance of the
lottery language that allows for
that disability waiver for
students we really appreciate
that language again will help
more students particularly our
adult students are returning to
college to complete their
programs.
We also support the provision
that allows for that last thirty
six credits for students going
to achieve their bachelor's
program we know that supports
many of our students go on to
four year institutions or those
are the four year institutions
so we really appreciate that
that change as well so thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Hartzler we will
now hear from Kathy you look
very miss you a very.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
very happy to be here to speak
in support Senate bill one
thirty five.
Community college students in
particular are are more likely
to be adults they are likely to
have families of their own and
they're likely to really suffer
from the gaps in existing aid
programs the number one reason
nationally that students do not
persist in community colleges is
financial it is that emergency
expense that we don't often plan
for a car that breaks down a
child they get sick at cetera
those are the reasons that
community college students don't
persist and this bill provides
that safety net it fills in the
gaps from other aid programs
that allow students to continue
that is especially important for
our state right now as we are
working so hard to build a
workforce that can grow and
expand and diversify our economy
thank you very much.
Thank you ms you look very now
we will hear from Mr GT
Bollington if he's available.
It doesn't look like he's
present to we want to Tracey
Bryan this Bryan.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee The Bridge of
Southern New Mexico supports
this bill you may be very well
aware that at as of recently
worst.
Delahunt seconds who are
receiving unemployment benefits
due primarily to response to
comment and we as a state in
order for their economic
recovery and all of ours will
need to help as many people as
possible reskill and upskill so
this bill plays an incredible
role in helping people who will
need to change industry as you
know from the LFC report over
the summer the university of
Chicago is predicting thirty two
to forty two percent of jobs do
not come back and so we really
have this wonderful opportunity
and well named scholarship to
help our our New Mexicans to get
access to the education the
training the training programs
that they'll need to be
economically successful and to
be employed in re employed in
new industries so my thanks to
the committee for the
consideration of this bill.
Thank you Mr.
Good morning Mr good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Missy
career and I am a registered
lobbyist for strategies three
sixteen on behalf of our client
western governors university we
stand support of Senate bill one
thirty five western governors
university is a nonprofit online
university founded by the
western governors in nineteen
ninety seven New Mexico is one
of the state's founded W. G. U.
W. G. U. has entered into an
interview with western New
Mexico university to expand
online education opportunities
for New Mexico students
therefore we support any
opportunities to expand access
to higher education thank you
for the opportunity to testify.
Thank you Mr years now we will
hear from me up I'm in.
The cement.
Yes thank you good morning Mr
chairman and senators my name is
mia I mean on the undergraduate
student body president at the
university of New Mexico I'm in
your presence today to support
this bill but also to urge you
to include for your research
institutions to the opportunity
scholarship bill.
When the opportunity scholarship
was first introduced I promise
to provide the much needed
financial assistance to students
seeking higher education in its
first year the opportunity
scholarship covered two year
institutions and tribal colleges
in the interim you provided
students with the first year
promise scholarship this
scholarship was struck provided
with the hope that the
opportunity scholarship will
include four year institutions
and second year as promised
without this amendment four year
institutions will have to fall
back on the legislative lottery
scholarship however I would like
to point out that currently
there's no proposed allocation
to the lottery tuition fund
which is facing a six point nine
two nine point seven million
dollars shortfall from last
year's total.
Last year the legislature
allocated an additional nine
point seven million to the
lottery tuition Fund bringing
the total amount to forty four
million dollars this forty four
million covered about sixty six
point seven percent of tuition
at UNM without any additional
support to the lottery
scholarship this tuition
coverage could drop down to as
low as fifty three point five
percent of four year research
institutions thank you amendment
and I miss you and New Mexico
tech with that being said I urge
you to consider an amendment to
include for your wrist research
institutions in the opportunity
scholarship bill without this
amendment combined with no
additional support to the
lottery scholarship thirty
seconds these like you and I are
faced with a lose lose situation
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr then and now we
will hear from and we will Dow I
apologize if I mispronounce that
no problem I thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name's Emily will
doubt I'm here representing New
Mexico voices for children to
stand in support of SB one
thirty five I want to thank
senator o'neill street bringing
this bill forward today New
Mexico voices supports this bill
as both an issue of economic and
educational well being we really
appreciate that includes recent
high school grads returning
adult learners and now the
returning lottery students and.
Most of the students are unable
to access higher education
because of cost of attendance
outside of tuition and because
of the way this bill is
structured it allows for
students to use their Pell
grants to cover those additional
costs such as housing and food
and which I think is really
important and
Particularly with the COVID
nineteen pandemic affecting
family income this financial aid
is more needed than after so we
ask that the committee support
this bill today thank you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who would
like to speak in support of
marks of that there are go ahead
yes hi thank you hi good morning
members the committee this by
March of the executive director
of the New Mexico County arson
presidents Representative the
seven four year institutions in
New Mexico I'd like to start
with your support the opt to
scholarship
for New Mexico should Senate
bill one thirty five we we
support the governor's original
concept that allows two year and
four year degree seekers to
qualify for the scholarship
that's that's what we do support
we also support that the bill
that the that that option is
funded appropriately with that
said we like to make sure that
our institutions of higher
education receive receive fully
restore or C. receive the I
fight total funding swap that
was take others reduce the
special session in June
Representative would like to see
that was started a hundred
percent in terms of making our
operating budgets of these as
well as possible then on top of
that like to reiterate with the
student body president and you
mention is that the new make
were concerned about the New
Mexico lottery we did receive a
one year in fusion general fund
money for this fiscal year that
were currently and that will
expire June thirtieth so that
will actually reduce the New
Mexico lottery's to charge a
police on an average statewide
to sixty three percent from
seventy five percent to sixty
three percent for students that
are for and all of our
institutions in New Mexico I'd
also like to just reiterate to
we'd like to see the for your
students be part of this and so
we do support the amendment in
terms of adding for your
students to this or actually the
concern is we support as much
financial aid for students as
possible but there is concern
that you have a student wants to
transfer from state C. N. M. T.
U. N. M. and they have the
opportunity callers shipped when
they transfer your amendment
there were no longer receive
that for the last two years of
their of their lorded over there
other undergrad program so
that's only keep in mind as well
so with that Mr Chairman can we
do support the options for
shipping we support as much
financially for students
statewide as possible that goes
for for two years thank you Mr
chair.
Members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Senator now we will
hear from Mister Johnny Montoya
Mr Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Johnny Montoya on the state
government affairs director for
New Mexico State University
as Mister operator said we stand
strong support of this
legislation and really any
legislation that helps our
students
are well the legislation does
allow for two and four year
institutions and the language
only the two year institutions
are funded are currently in the
current form of this bill so so
again we stand instructable this
legislation would like to thank
the sponsor and the higher
education department for taking
the leadership on that thank
you.
Thank you Mr Montoya are there
any other members of the public
who would like to speak in
support of Senate bill one
thirty five.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone this concludes public
statements for Senate bill one
thirty five thank you.
Thank you for always very
smoothly handling that portion
of our our meetings we now we're
gonna go to questions from the
committee and I first have a
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and so
yeah back on on the question I
had originally when we were in
the amendment phase just trying
to figure out I'm fully
supportive of what you're up to
and I'm glad that this is going
to be funded appropriately based
on what we heard during the
amendment appeared Mr chairman
and madam secretary and senator
but well with regard to
motivation the motivation for
the student what I guess the way
I'm looking at it why wouldn't
they just only go to a community
college for the first two years
and then go on to to the four
year institution for the
following two or more years
I'm just trying to figure out
how what will the motivation be
now so that we don't you know
because rob Peter to pay Paul
and then try to make them all.
Yes.
Mr chair senator by the I'll go
ahead and take a stab at this
first listen the for your sector
has a very healthy balance right
now nearly seventy percent of
all lottery scholarships go to
our research institutions of
law on top of that students
still qualify for other state
and federal aid to stack on top
of that so that they can be
successful in a four year
college career now the two year
program that we're proposing
typically the students are
nontraditional students may
start later in life may have
families to support have been
impacted by this pandemic so I
asked the committee to really
look at this nontraditional
student as a way to support them
and the opportunity scholarship
and also let's be honest
community colleges have seen a
decrease in enrollment why are
we going to support the
community college sector in this
to help team that enrollment
within their institutions by
offering the opportunity
scholarship not only to the
traditional two years program
student also this new
nontraditional student a student
who may be impacted by
unemployment who needs to
reschedule reachable and then
enter the work force in a new
industry that has been coming in
New Mexico so I don't foresee
that for years will be
completely blindsided are
impacted rather eight yes having
a new support system for a new
type of student and in New New
Mexican going into the community
college branch campus
comprehensive to your program
after.
Senator would you like to add to
that.
No I think your answer that very
well thank you.
Wonderful I appreciate that Mr
chairman and madam secretary and
and senator
I was hoping you would say that
and and I really am excited that
we're going to be able to.
see a robust enrollment in the
community college system here in
New Mexico because they're just
doing such phenomenal work and
they're they're they're really
working hard I think to develop
programs that are timely for the
economy so I think that's
wonderful too I just wanted to
hear that because I was just
concerned that you know while we
would be assisting one area of
higher education in New Mexico
in a big way and and the users
on the consumers of the service
but also don't want to created a
hole or a gap for the four year
institutions because I think we
sort of heard maybe a little bit
of that I'm gonna listen some
more and but I I I do at the
moment intend to vote for this
thank you.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation I'm well I
actually like to be a little bit
better than I did before this
morning but I still have some
questions I'm it it's clear that
this is really an opportunity
for students that number one
have lost the lottery
scholarship correct so you so
you have the lottery then you've
lost it and then you come back
and you can take advantage of
the opportunity scholarship at
doesn't opportunity apply as you
go into a four year school so so
either two or four year you can
get assistance with the water at
through the opportunity
scholarship.
Secretary Rodriguez you have to
that yes Mr chair Senator Kernan
thank you for the question so
yes the opportunity scholarship
pilot focusing on the returning
scholarship the returning
lottery learner will be for them
to obtain a four year degree
program at any of our
institutions offer for your
programs.
Thank you Mr chair so
that the threshold to retain
your lottery scholarship is two
point five but for the
opportunity it's to point out
correct.
It is two point oh only for the
returning adult learner however
are returning lottery learner we
have to do that to point I
threshold after their first
semester.
So what is the motivation for a
lottery student to really strive
for that two point five if they
know what the end of the day if
they lose that then they can
move into the opportunity
scholarship.
Well remember the opportunity
scholarship what I'm calling the
one point out Mr chair senator
current thank you for the
question I'm so sorry I got a
little informal there and
excited.
The opportunity scholarship what
we'll call one point now which
is returning graduate learner in
the returning adult learner that
student is somebody who just
enters the to your secretary or
certificate program a brand new
student to higher education
whereas the opportunity
scholarship to Plano returning
lottery learner is somebody
who's been in the system before
the lost their eligibility it's
been years that have passed they
want that salary bomb and the
only have up to two semesters
left to complete it so then they
come back re enroll in a four
year program and get degree so
that they can be successful in
their content and their career
and continue to.
Okay well I'm still trying to
figure out all the different
qualified students but I'm I
think I'm getting there I'm just
stand looking back and volume
three of the LFC Reports and
you're UNM students exactly
bright with regard to the
present
of the lottery scholarship based
on funds available has been
dropping and that you know they
started it
gosh if you if you look at it
it's pretty significant it's.
A higher percent and then
gradually I think it was eighty
seventy eight seventy six
seventy two and now sixty three
percent without an infusion of
dollars from from through the
appropriation process.
It just keeps going down so.
I really have a concern about
funding and and I've said this
before this committee and until
I see
the current revenue forecast
that that reaches out three four
years down the road at as it
states in the bill they
allocations will be made based
on funds available and so we
could start a program and in
about three or four years find
ourselves in a very same
situation as the lottery with a
diminished percent rate on
behalf of the students so I'm
you know of course everything we
do is based on revenues and
sometimes we have to do cuts and
and I understand that but I'm
really uncomfortable at this
early in the game to to make a.
Operation at that level knowing
that we're going to have many
other issues down the road
regard Medicaid and trying to
fund other things I'm worried
that we're gonna start a program
at at this level and not be able
to meet the requirements down
the road until we until we get
that revenue forecast and why
are they not said this before
the committee but maybe you
haven't heard heard my comment
in light of the many bills have
been introduced in this
legislature in addition to the
executive orders from the
federal level that will have a
huge impact on revenues to the
state of New Mexico and so I
just want to be prudent I want
to be careful I certainly
understand that our community
colleges do a great job in
re training and training and
getting people going in looking
at the average point certainly
the lottery scholarship when you
look at which universities
receive the majority of that U.
N. M. receives forty two percent
of the lottery dollars and in
total dollars they receive
almost half of those lottery
dollars so I can understand you
know as we we want to make sure
that.
that the the dollars for the
opportunity are certainly spread
maybe a little bit more
throughout the state to some of
our two year institutions which
I support that I'm so.
It's not that I don't think it's
a great idea and I I do think
that it has some great benefit.
I just I'm not sure we can
afford it so I I look forward to
more discussion I know this bill
is going to move on and I'll
probably have an opportunity on
the floor to to make a decision
on whether to support I think
it's it's certainly has large
support across New Mexico but I
am concerned about the dollars I
want some sort of assurance I
think that we are going to have
the money going forward to
continue to support this effort
and at this point I don't think
it I don't think that's going to
be out there that maybe after we
get an updated data revenue
forecast I'll be more
comfortable with regard to that
and as we see how Billsponsored
this session so
That's my statement and and I
certainly hope that we can
resolve some of my concerns
going forward thank you very
much thanks.
If I can't thank you Senator
Kernan of as always very well
stated and I I hear your words
as my dad used to say so but
hopefully we can you know get a
little firmer sense of the
future it's just so uncertain
right now but well said but
again as you know this is so
important and so what I'm sure
will all come to a really good
our consensus hopefully on this
bill and the and the numbers
thanks Senator.
And if I can Mr chair Senator
Kernan thank you for that
statement I do understand some
of your concerns I want to note
with our amendment that any
leftover funds will be then be
reverted to the lottery tuition
Fund rather than going straight
back to the general fund and
then the other thing to consider
is twenty two million dollars is
only two percent of the overall
higher education budget this is
a drop in the height of
Insurance vestment that has a
one hundred fifty million dollar
return on investment for New
Mexico thank you for your
comments.
Thank you Senator Kernan I have
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
o'neill thank you for bringing
this bill I have a couple of
questions so does this tie in
our fund vocational training in
anyway.
Senator I mean Stephanie.
Yeah.
Just yeah Mr chair Senator
Brandt absolutely many of our
two year programs of the leaders
in New Mexico for vocational
education and it would
absolutely tie into those
programs and I say.
So Mr chairman
Senator member secretary is that
only though if it's through a
two year at a community college.
Mr chair Senator Brandt the
qualifying institutions would be
an independent community college
a branch campus a tribal college
or comprehensive university with
to your programming or
certificate programs that are
tied to vocational education.
So Mr Chairman center or
secretary wouldn't count for
just a.
School that does just vocational
that correct.
Mr chair senator graph cracked
it would only be for those right
those institutions.
Thank you and the other question
I have is is there any
any connection to any specific
to Greece so you know we have
some very specific.
Degrees that we need in New
Mexico nursing is one of the of
elektrische and this is one of
the certificates we need in our
state
plumbing is one of the
certificates we really have a
great need for our state is
there anything tied to requiring
that it actually be something we
need in our state and not what
my favorite I always get left
out about it is not underwater
basket weaving and and senator
of souls knew I was gonna say
that.
Mr chair Senator Brandt you know
right now no it doesn't limit
the type of program that you can
do you just like the lottery
scholarship we don't limit those
programs for those lottery
scholarship recipients however
what I will tell you is that at
the end of the legislative
session we've brought a new PO
into the higher education
department and we will be really
a specifically hounding and on
health care educators I think
coming location on education
programs that are tied to
certain industries in New Mexico
so although our marketing will
have that focus in general it
comports with the lottery
scholarship to allow students to
study the degree program of
their choosing.
Thank you Mr.
Sir chairman and madam secretary
sorry I'm a little that it's I
only on one Cup of coffee so far
today service also I need at
least two to get going
I appreciate that although I do
think that that's a mistake
hi in fact I think one of the
ways we can get a grip on what's
happening with the lottery
scholarship is to require.
Certain degrees it only be used
for and I and I understand that
I get the argument.
I've heard the argument a
thousand times at least that any
degree is good
but we're making an investment
as a state and it really should
be our greatest needs as a state
if we were doing it that way
that probably support this bill
quite frankly because then we
would be addressing what are the
greatest employment needs in our
state and not just a shotgun
approach.
but we're not we're just okay
for anyone to go to college to
get any degree whether it's
going to benefit us or not or
whether they're gonna leave the
state or not and so I think
that's the wrong approach
We we need to be making this
kind of an investment this isn't
the lottery scholarship it's a
separate scholarship we need to
be making this kind of an
investment very specific to the
job needs that we have with our
state thank you I appreciate of
the impetus behind the bill
appreciate what you're trying to
do we do have the lottery
scholarship and a lot of people
have a great opportunity my
oldest son and my daughter both
use the lottery scholarship and
benefit from the lottery
scholarship and actually made it
out of college without any debt
so
You know they're pretty unique
We already have that that we
offer in the state of their own
meals made it where you didn't
have to go immediately after you
could take one year
of a break before you started
that was a good change I
supported that change so we have
a great program already in our
state for kids to go to school
and so I would I would support
this if we changed it to where
it was very specific to the
maybe the top ten career means
that we have in our state
because those are real huge
needs that we really need to
focus on and nursing is probably
the number one that you can get
a two year degree and that we
need to focus on so I appreciate
it appreciate that can be used
for that but the fact that it
doesn't have to be used for that
I can't support the bill thank
you Mr.
Thank you Senator Brandt and I
don't see other committee
members put their hand up I do
have one question a particular
question is we have a number of
students that go through early
college high school programs
they finish with an associates
degree would they be left out of
this way they're going on to the
for your school because they
already start with an
associates.
Thank you for the question so
you're talking about these dual
credit students and what happens
is once the financial credit
they're more than likely going
to go.
Mr chair I'm sorry did you say
something.
My internet seems that everybody
frozen or other people having
the same thing.
Mr chair just only you are
frozen.
We can hear you.
Okay thank you.
Right back so I apologize.
Capital and I'm not sure what my
went down but it looks like
things are back I'm sorry if you
could please secretary.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
the question now remember these
dual credit students as soon as
they finish their associate
degrees they're actually going
to enroll in a four year
institution so that maybe the
comprehensive college or the
research institution which
already gets the bulk of the
lottery scholarship funds so
they would not qualify for
opportunity scholarships only
because we're focusing on
students we're getting
certificates for completing that
associates degree remember It
qualify for lottery scholarship
it could potentially qualify for
other state and on top of that
they probably will qualify for
federal aid as well.
Thank you and yeah kind of for a
specific type of student assume
a student is at one of the early
college high schools in complete
C. N. at degree C. at eight
degrees certified nursing
assistant with the plans are
going on to getting the two year
bursting program at a community
college would they be eligible.
Thank you for the question I may
have to refer to doctor Ronald
that may believe is a certain
way but Dr Rommel technically
with that student be eligible.
The the Mr Chairman thanks for
the question yes they would
cause the that the scholarships
for up to an associate degree
for this two year program.
Yes but they already got an
associate's degree in a
certified nursing assistant
through the early college high
school they graduate high school
with an associates in a CNA and
we have students that do that
they have an associates they are
now when you get an associate's
in nursing instead of just a
nursing assistant are that
you're telling me they would be
eligible because they haven't
finished associates I'm not sure
I understand.
So Mr chairman I I have to
apologize that I'm not clear on
that and associate degree F. and
C. N. A. R. the same thing I
would have to defer to maybe one
of our of community college
presidents but I my belief is
that a C. N. A. is not a two
year associate degree.
So.
I guess I'm Tracy I just maybe I
should've asset trees you're on
mute in your we're trying to do
it if you could answer please
help so I would I say I want to
defer to Becky but it's not
always see an eight students
often get that's part of the
credential in part of a longer
degree path so it is possible I
believe that the students would
be able to complete a scene and
also continue wanted the
associate reform like Kerry.
I'm sorry like Dr Rommel also
referred to earlier so in
addition if that student did
complete a scene as part of an
associate degree program I
believe that's who also could
continue as part of a lottery
scholarship students so there
are certain pathways are there
certain as a secretary and
others have described I think
they're many pathways for
students to continue to receive
state assistance not only
through the opportunity
scholarship for that program in
those degrees.
Thank you I think my concern is
we are encouraging students
through early college high
schools to finish high school
with an associates degree and
some of them may want to go on
to a two year college to maybe
you know headed towards their
for your program to pick up
their basic requirements that
were not part of the full
associates high school this
looks like it would cut them out
because they already have an
associate's coming out of high
school and would be almost
required to then go to a four
year degree to continue to get
support and wouldn't be able to
get the support for a year or
two years to pick up basic
requirements that it to your
school am I not understanding
something.
Mr chair I I see what you're
saying.
Insane and what I'm going to do
is go back to my colleague that
the higher education department
to study this more thoroughly so
that we can go ahead and give
you more appropriate response
and maybe some pathways forward
for the state.
Thank you and if you would look
at it and see and I I don't know
exactly what on to read or where
it ought to be but possibly as
it gets to the next.
Then that that might fix that
particular part of it so that
those students that are left out
to be able to to continue on or
move on hello.
Sen rounds wanting to speak.
But instead are you able to help
with this particular little
conundrum Mr chairman I believe
and I apologize for bonding and
Mr chairman I'd I believe that
this is an issue that does need
clarification I've been
institutions they figured out a
matrix to get through that but I
think it is still awkward and I
think that Center reduces
planned to meet with colleagues
is probably appropriate for
guidance okay.
And so Senator o'neill if you
would be forgets on to the next
committee at you don't see it
there is an appropriate way of
putting an amendment and so that
those students that we've
encouraged to get assistance as
part of the high school program
aren't left out if they want to
continue to community college
where tuition is often less or
they may need to pick up other
requirements for the particular
degree that they're planning on
on following once they get to a
four year school I would
appreciate that we'll do that
chairman good good catch.
Thank you anything else from the
committee I don't see other
hands up and if not I would be
open for promotion.
Committee.
I'm still what I can make a
motion and.
Mr chair I'd like to make a
motion for a do pass on amended
Senate bill one thirty five
thank you senator pope is there
a second.
If not I will second.
I
will call the roll please.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Well.
I'm sorry Sir what did you think
Okay.
I'm going to apologize now I'm
having an issue with the speaker
on this phone I mean.
The monitor.
Senator Padilla yes then we can
hear I can hear you clearly
thank you okay Senator Pinto.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
We have a tie vote we have a
four four vote
We would like to make an
alternative motion.
Number to know REC Mr Chairman
I'll move a do pass no
recommendation.
So do passed in a no record
different motions I tried to do
what I can Mr chairman.
I'll do a no rec Mr chairman
thank you Senator we use their
second one no rec motion that
can.
And secondly I think that was
Senator Hickey your call roll on
it no REC.
Motion.
Is the Senator songs are we
doing a no recommendation yes
ma'am we are on a boat or no
recommendation I'm just having
such a terrible time hearing so
I'm I apologize.
okay Senator Brandt so.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Senator Neville no.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto.
No.
The pope.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
We have.
You're still stuck at a at a
four four hi.
Doesn't it sound like we are
going to break that at this
point the this bill is going to
just hang out here in our
community okay chairman.
Chairman.
So I'm not sure when the
are updated revenue forecast is
going to be available and
certainly it might be
appropriate to leave this bill
here with the understanding that
once that is made public and we
can come back and from my point
of view find out if if we're
gonna be able to afford this
going forward I certainly would
be open to that that I'm not
sure if maybe staff could reach
out to LFC and see when we're
going to hear that forecast.
Thank you Senator Kernan I'll
and for the time being that this
bill will just hang out here in
the Senate Education Committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the discussion.
Thank you senator at this point
we you will now go to SB one
seventy one Senator guy a goes
in current and we just finished
SB one thirty five it was not
able to get a positive motion to
move out of education after one
seventy one Senate bill one
fifty one one fifty nine
Representative people watching
Mr Chairman so yes Senator
Padilla just just ask for your
permission first grade Michael
Padilla needs to run the party
real quick I'll be right back.
I'll be right back thank you
thank you Sir we understand if
anyone ever up terms there the
picture off that they are
temporarily indisposed you don't
have to tell us why our raise
one finger or two fingers as to
what you're doing Senator Kernan
laughing because she remembers
when you had almost indicate
what kind you what why you were
headed to the bathroom
and.
So at this time Senator Gallegos
if you are here present the one
seventy one if you will please
start your presentation.
Mr chairman and committee I
appreciate the opportunity is
with you as just wanting a hall
pass that all get it later so
sure center Kernan will give me
that opportunity later but I
want to start with the one
seventy one just a you know
review the acting here minute
we've gotten a lot of comments
from parents and grandparents
and
for the the children in New
Mexico of really taking a hard
hit trying to do other education
virtual in one seventy one it is
requiring this local school
boards to determine the public
schools should be open for
online campus instruction during
the time when the state has
public health emergency order
I'm currently on the in the
school board and we look at
things
in what we do to protect our
students and our staff in we've
got some really good
Witnesses this morning we've got
the June tenth to date parks
from Hobbs schools and also the
superintendent Dr R. O. Richards
who was a superintendent and
Texaco and currently is
superintendent Muleshoe and I
was hoping that he would be able
to give us an explanation of the
difference between the two
states they they've had a very
good progress on their education
and I know that you we show our
state has really repressed or or
not progress for our students
and that is typically why
brought this bill forward well
we've got a lady in Hobbs area
that came to us with really
eager to get her to dollars back
in some type of in person
education and I don't know
Senator Kernan would like to
jump in before we go to our
experts but I appreciate her
wisdom her being an educator
always brings a difference of
opinion to the table but
in a nutshell that's what we're
trying to do is you just get
yeah our students back to
sometime in person education.
Thank you Mr chair if I could
so I would like to begin my
remarks by first acknowledging
the seriousness of COVID
nineteen and of the pandemic and
the many lives that have been
lost both in our state and
nationally Senate bill one
seventy one is not intended to
diminish the tremendous loss
that many of us have experienced
over the last year many of my
own family members and close
friends have experienced COVID
nineteen and they'll all have
recovered I know that many of
you have family and friends who
have not had the same outcome.
The discussion today is about
our children and how do we begin
to minimize the devastation that
they have experienced since
March of twenty twenty just in
my community we have lost three
young people to suicide and
there have been numerous
attempts over the last few
months.
The L. A. S. C. analysis states
that in the lancet medical
journal pro long black it's in
person contact with classmates
friends and teachers as
problematic and in during
affects on the mental health of
students the American academy of
pediatrics say according to the
LFC analysis.
I strongly advocate that all
policy considerations for school
COVID nineteen plan should start
with the gun.
Of having students physically
press than in school.
Current research according to
doctor said Dr and secretary
Scrase confirms that the
transmission of the virus does
not occur at a high rate in the
school setting and children
typically did not spread the
virus to adults we know the LFC
report on learning loss is
somber reminder of what our
students.
Will face over a lifetime with
regard to the loss of learning
and if members have not that
report Bill we encourage you to
go to the LESC site hold on that
report because it's very very
critical that we as members of
the Education Committee
understand that report so far we
bring this bill to you today
well I believe that we can all
agree that New Mexico is a very
diverse state in many ways and
my constituents in southeast New
Mexico have different views than
some of my friends and
colleagues in Santa Fe
Albuquerque in Los crucis we
have all known this to be true
but never more so.
Then as we go through navigating
this pandemic in my County fifty
eight percent of our workers are
essential one of the highest
percentages in the state and Dr
Scrase and I continue to debate
that issue but we didn't know
that many of our central workers
have continued to work out in
the oil fields to wrap this year
bringing needed revenue to the
state of New Mexico.
So our communities are strongly
in favor of returning full time
to in person instruction we have
watched as hundreds of families
from our area have left New
Mexico to rent and buy homes in
Texas in order that their
children can attend school and
participate in athletics our
experts will say more about the
differences in school attendance
in New Mexico versus Texas as
well as a frustrating challenges
districts are experiencing under
the PED guidelines.
The CDC data tracker reports on
COVID cases by county and so
last night I did a quick review
and I compared Lea County in
southeast New Mexico with gains
county in West Texas and quite
frankly there's very little
difference in the reporting and
in the the data that you see
online.
I also compared it with Lubbock
Texas a much larger community
and all cases are decreasing now
I'm I think it's an interesting.
Piece of data that everyone
should take a look at and look
at your own counties I sent the
email to the members of the
committee data compiled by
education week showing the very
surprised just states are
utilized in with regard to hit
determines re opening.
What guidance they must follow
and whether the districts are
under a statewide order such as
New Mexico we're not you will
find that most states are under
no order most states allow
districts to determine when to
re open along with guidance on
how to do so in our bill we
utilize the CDC that information
and guidelines which is very
similar to what our public
education department has put
forth however the CD C.
guidelines are very consistent
with that updates as needed much
easier to follow and so this is
the reason that we believe that
our districts should look to the
CDC for guidance on reopening in
the alley S. C. analysis it
noted in our bill that we did
not have any information with
regard to the need to close in
case of the spread or in case of
an uptick that if you follow the
CDC guidelines they clearly
given that demonstration they
clearly tell you what to follow
if that should happen.
So I guess the with regard to of
this bill I don't think Senator
guidance and I are under any.
Elution that we're going to get
very far successfully find this
bill find its way through the
session but I think this is a
really important discussion to
have I have looked across the
state for who is advocating for
children.
The medical team that have done
their job they were not charged
with the responsibility of
advocating for the children they
were charged with developing
models that would identify
potential spread they had work
to do and they did their work
that there is not one educator
who sits on the medical team so
all of their decisions that they
have made have not taking into
consideration the increase
suicides that have occurred
across the state they have not
taking into consideration the
social and emotional damage
that's being done to our
students I think it's time for
local communities to have that
responsibility rather than a
medical team or one individual
in the state making those
decisions so I just would just
that everyone have an open mind
and as we listen just our expert
and I hope Dr Richards was able
to get on the last step
information I received yet not
received a link so we will hear
from Matt superintendent parks
and if Dr Richards is on we
would like to hear from him
before we go to public comment
thank you Mr chair.
Mr Chairman if I can follow up
just minutes before we go to our
expert witnesses.
Yes please continue.
So Mr and I believe you guys
receive this of the there is a
Ryan center offer holders done
statewide in in that it talked
to parents grandparents and
guardians in the overwhelming.
The state to that poll was our
students need to have some type
of of in person learning and I I
appreciate the governor you
today our schools and how it's
going to be the starting point
force the only difference that I
would say between the governor
opening that and our bill is I
truly believe that it needs to
be at the local level you know
the school board is entrusted
with by the state or by our
communities of the education
safety and welfare of our staff
and our students and I think at
that level they can look at it
from a different point of view
I've used this units has around
seven hundred fifty children in
our care.
Hobbs has two thousand plus in
the we're talking about our
local area right here the way we
treat our students or in the
facilities is different.
She should park will be speaking
in in a moment but we just need
to look at this instead of a
statewide view down to the local
area to see you know R. seven
hundred fifty students we want
to care for them we we know what
we have as far as our assets in
our facilities in order to
enable that it's different as
you step up into the water the
school board first of school
districts and so what happens in
Eunice is not the same what
happens in Albuquerque and in
other places around the state so
this this bill gives us the
opportunity to bring it back
out to the local level and and I
can tell you Mr chairman and
committee that the so we talked
to Joe came from school board
association Jason Espinoza for
New Mexico kids can Dennis Roch
from super dense Association
general from New Mexico
collisional education leaders
and if PED aired on this with
APS and we support statewide
from a lot of different entities
that are ready for kids to get
back to some type of normal
education and I noticed a
stepping stone I don't perceive
that tomorrow we'll go to
everyone back in class because
that's not safe and that's not
if you go back to CDC guidelines
it Senator Kernan brought up
there already are restrictions
in place that we need to take
this slowly.
We had a a really good yesterday
on how few I believe is four
hundred and some of students are
a.
statewide had come up with COVID
the trend is going down and and
we want to be able to be
prepared to educators students
as that continues down but in
reality we want to be able to be
reactive if they do strike up we
want to be able to protect our
staff and our students so with
that Mr chair if you're ready I
would yield to my expert
witnesses I hope that doctor
Richards is on but we would
start with some ten digit parks
superintendent parks if you
would please and I understand
you announced your retirement we
are going to miss my friend.
Mr chair members of the
committee that thank you and I
do have to tell it it's great to
see my good friend the doctor
Richards on this committee as
well that goes back a long time
ago I I will tell you.
So far back I remember when he
was Ritchie and he was actually
a grad student whenever I was
doing my student teaching so
it's great to see him I wrap
high respect for him.
Mr chair committee members I I
am DJ parks superintendent of
Hobbs municipal schools I've
held this position for eleven
years I also serve as the
president of the New Mexico
activities association and I
fully support Senate bill one
seventy one today is our one
hundred and seventeenth day of
school in the first day that any
fourth grade student or older
has been in our building at
Hobbs school since March
thirteenth twenty twenty.
M. S. forty eight days a face to
face instruction last year even
though Lea County did not record
a single positive case until
June.
Then we did not meet the
criteria set to return face to
face on August twenty seventh
and had to remain remote until
today even though Lea County
have a lower positive right then
many counties in November
December and January.
I believe the local elected
officials should be given the
authority on opening schools as
well as the level of opening I'm
a native New Mexicans my father
owned a Mobil gas station on
route sixty six and to compare
New Mexico and one of the things
that I love about New Mexico is
our diversity I don't think we
can hold each community under
the same standard because each
community has a different set of
beliefs and values this will
school set for different service
to our parents from August to
January the surveys range from
sixty seven to eighty two
percent with eighty two percent
being the most recent of our
parents wanting their children
back in school based effects
seventy two percent of our
teachers are willing to be back
thanks to based learning.
Therefore eighty two percent of
our parents see the policy of
forcing us to be remote learning
to rich I do believe we have a
responsibility to remote to
offer remote learning to those
families who preferred that mode
instruction remote learning it
showed a tremendous loss of
learning is observed by the LFC
report I believe the families
who live in poverty and suffered
the greatest loss of learning.
Families who have the means have
adjusted well and will continue
to work our families who live in
poverty especially the modeling
will families have suffered
irreparable damage to their
learn.
And Hobbes we've seen a decrease
in our enrollment by over nine
hundred students many of them of
rented apartments are moved to
Texas where their children have
not missed a single day of face
to face instruction.
Our families attend doctors in
Lubbock and literally drive by
Seminole high school who has
been based of based learning
since day one and the high
school parking lot is completely
filled with students cars they
completed what wall ball the
ball and now basketball in our
students have not begun one
sees.
The current current policies
still set us up for failure
close contact definition
everyone in the class from being
considered a close contact it
defeats the purpose of Hobbs
municipal schools spending a
hundred forty five thousand
dollars on filters for every
classroom.
As of today our band and choir
still cannot practice yet our
football team can resume
practice February twenty second
the state of Washington set the
limit to seventy five per one
hundred thousand to return back
to remote learning we're New
Mexico set the bar at five per
one hundred thousand.
We will when we talk about
caring for the safe and well
being of our children please
keep in mind that three children
that we lost in Hobbs due to
suicide.
We had other students attempt
suicide hi to depression and
abuse kids need to be in school
academically but also socially
and emotionally returning to
school should be a local
decision made by board members
who are elected by their local
constituents thank you Mr chair.
Thank you superintendent
Senator drag us.
Mr Chairman are nexus the
superintendent.
drive our own Richards from he
started his well when I knew him
from school work point I was in
Texas so now he's in Muleshoe
and for some reason they don't
let The New Mexico school board
members so to Texas to see what
they're about what they're doing
but I've got a lot of respect
for our bridges I did not know
him as Richie well that's a a
new issue for me but him and his
brother have always done
incredible work for our students
here our state so I would turn
it over to Dr Richard just piece
online.
Dr Richard are you there are
here with us.
Yes Mr chair can you hear me.
Yes Sir Mr chair members of the
Senate committee appreciates all
let me visit with you today I'm
also a native New Mexican
groping Rossell my grandparents
with the custodian and
maintenance people with Dora
consolidated schools my dad was
a superintendent at Travis
county schools back in the early
sixties when they had County
schools and my brother and I
were superintendents in New
Mexico I had twenty five years
of service as a superintendent
New Mexico and I care for New
Mexico very very deeply and so
it's with the troublesome hard
that I even present at this time
because I don't quite comprehend
some of the situation they're in
yet are read about it in the
papers and and concerned about
it so in.
Moving from New Mexico to Texas
I've only been a we're about
five years as a superintendent
but the of the philosophy is a
little different where they
allow the local school districts
to make decisions and local
school boards to make decisions
in fact the as we were preparing
for school this year
the school board talk to me a
little bit about what they'd
like to do and I was saying well
I think we need to go a little
bit more this direction and the
school board said well would
like to vote as normally as
possible.
And I said okay let me make a
few adjustments we hired extra
nurses the screen our kids we
even went so far as making mask
optional because it doesn't work
real well in pre K. and
kindergarten and first grade to
teach kids reading without them
being able to phonetically see
how your lips in your Tom move
as you pronounce a of syllables
and onyx so we did a lot of
different things but our parents
were excited about starting our
students we're excited about
starting our teachers were
excited about starting in that's
what made it so needs to be able
to have a local decisions now
school districts like Dallas and
Houston they were having a whole
lot more trouble when they were
half as the we did it by county
so we're here they were have a
lot of struggle we had very few
cases and so the school board
said let's go ahead and open up
and will spring the kids family
with a temperature another kind
of criteria and so we were
excited about opening up I
thought it might cause a problem
I I even started school a few
days early in case we had of a
big.
Spike and I had to call school
off the but that never happened
yes we have a few students with
a COVID
Some were isolated some had to
be quarantined but in the whole
of it it all went well our
students continue to learn in
our students are not that far
behind they missed some in the
last year with April and may but
we're not that far behind in our
academics and that's one thing
I'm excited about we did receive
students from New Mexico on a
seminal received a lot of
students from New Mexico.
Coming from Hobbs in in fact I
just filled out two forms of
students on email this before I
came on the zoom.
That is to say we're going to
Denver city from New Mexico so
there are students leaving the
state of New Mexico.
And coming to Texas and we have
a lot more discretion and local
districts the difference even
down the road just maybe fifty
miles they do it different than
the doing Muleshoe but my school
board took an oath of office
that they would do what's best
for our students and hold the
constitution of Texas and so
they decided would start early
and that's how it went so we
just haven't lost that much
academic over here it is local
decisions of the everyone was
ready to come back we've made
some criteria to make sure work
for kids and parents and
teachers and it has and so we're
just tickled to death about the
progress our students of May
thank you Mr chair Austin pretty
questions that the committee
has.
Senator guidance that you.
Thank you and thank you for both
for witnesses expert witnesses I
want to talk a little bit about
the psychosocial age that up.
Participated and brought up in
and I think as a school board
member we look at educating the
whole student not just the
grades and I just wanted to let
you know that we as you know if
we keep it on the local level I
know everyone's got of a certain
lane of expertise they work in
but I think the school board
level we look at the broader
view of the health and safety of
that child in our staff and I
think that cycle social of that
they have not had this last year
is really part of the problem
that we're seeing expression the
suicide rate New Mexico is one
of the highest are of the
highest in the country for
suicide rate in and I just
wanted to to point that out
because I think it's important
that we look at the whole child
and I just see
whether it's through the zoom
or or however they're being
educated I think it's more than
just a
Education point of it but it's
the interaction with their peers
that really gives them a full
view of of life the other thing
I wanted to ask bring up is Dr
Richard just put out about
people leaving the state and my
problem with that is it's more
of dealing with people that are
leaving because they can afford
to get that how diversity and
and move their kids there were
the lower.
Income individuals cannot and I
just want to bring that up
before we go to the public
because I think you're gonna see
a lot of discussion from Paris
and and grandparents in on how
hard it is you know even the
guardians of the they they're
just limited with the resources
we have a really hard time with
wife I statewide you look at
what happens on the.
Navajo Nation no court or they
are just patchwork quilt of good
technology throughout the state
I think we owe to our children
to be able to give them a great
education and I still go back to
the in person priest being very
vital to that so with that Mr
chair I would yield in to
Senator Kernan she has any other
comments and then would be ready
to go to questions from our
discussion.
Yeah we're ready to go the
public thank you.
What.
Senator Kernan.
Mr chair thank you know we're
ready to hear from the public
thank you very much thank thank
you mark if you'll step in and
assist us with public comment.
Absolutely first we'll be
hearing from Mr actually hold on
are there any members of the
public who would like to speak
in opposition.
I'm sorry Senator solve this
Maryam.
Yes.
I I think that we have an
amendment on this bill.
That could be discussed first.
Mr Mr chair we are not going to
put that in that on in less
there is one I'm not aware.
Okay.
Our job is to Marian thank you
thank you so with the amendment
just trying to to sit dormant
until us in our continued you
choose it it to put it on thank
you thank you more.
Thank you for public input okay
at this time and if any members
of the public would like to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill one seventy one now's the
time to raise your hand this is
an opportunity for those in
opposition to speak.
And it doesn't look like we have
anyone so first we'll be hearing
from Mister Dennis Roche Dennis.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
here before you as president of
the New Mexico school
superintendents association
one of the tenants in our are so
citation platform this year is
local decision making
particularly around the design
of instructional delivery
instructional content in
calendars
as a school leader myself what
we were authorized to returning
hybrid we were I was certainly
aware that there were some
families even in my community
that would decide not to return
hybrid choose to stay remote my
job as a school leader working
with my local school board was
to honor that choice there too
those who chose to stay home
because they were truly
legitimately fearful about the
virus in the so many unknowns
about it there were some that
had
sort of concerns about the the
limitations of a mass
requirement or social distance
requirements for whatever the
reason without judgment on our
part we are honored those
families choices like why is
this bill moves that whole
decision up a level and says the
state needs to honor the choices
made by locally elected school
board members you know that the
thing about it is cabinet
secretaries in Santa Fe make
policy don't always have the
same opportunities to rub elbows
with community members the way
local school board members to
school boards see their
constituents at the grocery
store and at church on Sunday
and that the post office very
often the same way legislators
to but those who have been
making the decisions here to for
and if they don't have that same
perspective and so we've
definitely would like the the
choice locally to be honored I
will also point out before I
conclude two positives about the
bill the local school board in
this decision shall consult
school officials all console
health officials and to follow
consistent the guidelines
developed by scientists thank
you so much for allowing us to
stand in support.
Thank you Mr Roche at now we
will hear from die more maker I
apologize if I missed protester
name ma'am.
Good morning that's okay that
happens quite often good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dan Marie
maker and I'm a member of the
Lovington school board currently
serving as president I also
currently serve as vice
president of the New Mexico
school board association.
I appreciate the opportunity to
voice my support for Senate bill
one seventy one I firmly believe
that the decision to return to
school and class should be a
local decision based on both
science and community.
A school district should reflect
the community it serves and as a
board member I way all of the
pertinent information when
choosing to supported decision
that affects the children in our
community as well as the adults
who work on their behalf.
Our district is working
diligently to prepare a safe
learning environment for our
students and staff people who
are members of our community we
recognize that despite continued
efforts by our teachers the
widening of the learning gap is
in equitable is students do not
have the option to return to in
person learning.
With that in mind I cannot think
of a single adult who works on
behalf of the children in our
community that would make the
decision to send them back to
class without the sound evidence
to support that decision.
As you know state statute grants
to the people the power to form
school boards which under the
law are in power to legislative
authority over the public
schools within their respective
districts.
As representatives of the people
the school board accepts the
responsibility to identify
community attitudes and opinions
and district needs I ask that
this committee support this
legislation which will grant
that authority to the local
school board thank you.
Thank you miss maker now we will
hear from grade four to Ford.
Go ahead and start over right
and I think you got cut off
there.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is great import I'm sixteen
years old and I'm a junior at
the sue Cleveland high school in
Rio Rancho it's not very often
that you hear sixteen seventeen
year old say that they can't
wait to go back to school to see
their teachers even deal with
the ridiculous amount of
homework on top of balancing
sporter club that is what I've
heard from every single one of
my peers every day for the last
eleven months.
Where kids able to go back to
school in most other states but
not us it makes no sense that my
friend in Texas is in the middle
of this football in the middle
of the school year and is
already wrapped up this football
season when I having been able
to meet my teachers in person.
Many of my peers given up hope
and it's rare that I see a smile
on the faces of my normally very
charismatic friends.
We've been up to us to choose to
be in school we were up to the
parents local leaders my school
district that works with kids
day in and day out to choose.
It is not the governor's job
parent every single kid in the
state it is my right to receive
an education and right now me
and every other student in the
state is being denied that
right.
Online school simply does not
provide the adequate tools and
environment that students need
to be successful I pride myself
on being a great student I've
been able to maintain straight
days as well as playing sports
but on my screen has certainly
made me struggle I'm not getting
the help I need and I certainly
not I'm not the only one the
care cannot be worse than the
problem in the lockdown to done
more harm than good since last
March we have lost numerous
reckons they decided to take
their own life.
There are many adolescents
they're dealing with mental
health issues with no help for
them this is so much deeper than
just a virus the guidelines by
the state that have been placed
upon schools are making it
impossible to re open and that's
making it impossible for us to
play sports.
Mexico kids are being driven
away to other states we're
school sports can be played
where they can be successful and
have fun.
We time for all these
restrictions but it is certainly
not now.
Thank you Brandon and now we
will be hearing from Joe again.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Joe again with the
New Mexico school boards
association we stand in support
of Senate bill one seventy one.
One of our three guiding
principles for the New Mexico
school boards association also
on the lines of local decision
making it's one of the most
important comments up campaigns
of of a successful public
education system.
And decision making we believe
that local control must be
preserved and when possible
expanded we also oppose any
legislation that attempts to
diminish or take away local
decision making and we support
legislation like this that
maintains or expands local
control and decision making
authority.
just this year during our
legislative process we received
several of resolutions that are
the basis for positions we
received two that were approved
unanimously by our membership in
December at our annual
conference.
The first one calls for an
agency be a recognizes that's
low that school reentry planning
decision should not be a one
size fits all proposition and
supports legislation and
flexibility to allow local
school boards to make decisions
about reentry and small group
instruction based upon relevant
scientific data.
The second resolution that we
passed.
the reasons follows NMAA BA
believes all pandemic related
scientific evidence and data
thirty seven should be shared
with school districts to
strengthen and local making
decision making authority so we
stand and support we do have
questions along the we'd like
for the bill to clarify what
Sanchez to clarify though
specific role of the department
of health in New Mexico in the
pa department of public
education and also to address
any increase the liability that
school board members would have
with this decision making we
have had of.
Sorry about that Mr Qian your
fortune your time is up we will
now go to Mr stand rounds Mr
rounds thank you very much Mr
chairman members the committee
I'll be very short I was going
to speak because Dennis Roch
spoke on behalf of one issue
that requires me to comment is
the decision making question
really is at the heart of this
and I'd like to reflect just
back Mr chairman I appear before
the alley just see a couple of
times during the interim and
discussed this decision making
issue and indeed the as was
stated the decisions made to
this point have been absent the
education voice the education
management boards now the the
at our art organization college
of education leaders has the
eighteen organizations of that
educational management we've
been unable to comment guide
suggest or does that are
developed for the decisions made
what the best plateaus and I and
and the best decisions might be
this bill really attempt to
correct that on the other side
of the equation as you heard we
stand in support of this and Mr
chairman we hope as we move
forward we can figure out what
the decision making matrix in
New Mexico looks like to include
the voice of the educational
leadership thank you.
Thank you Mr rounds are there
any other members of the public
who would like to make a comment
at this time please raise your
hands.
It looks like it looks like that
concludes all of our public
statements for Senate bill one
seventy one thank you.
Thank you let me go back to the
Sanchez there for any other
comments that may make before we
moved to the committee.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to make the comment with regard
to liability and I did reach out
and basically
Risk is covered by
And
it mean it's districts pay for
coverage it doesn't matter who
are in my opinion makes the
decision to go back whether it's
at
from the governor's office or
from from the school board that
decision and the risk that is
incurred should be covered and
of course currently in this
legislature there are bills
working their way through that
could affect that risk and I
will just have to wait and see
how those bills turn out the
currently covered should be
there regardless of who makes
the decision to to return and
what that will not be glad to
answer questions from the
committee.
Okay what will now head to the
committee I don't see any.
Ends up at this point.
The one on the committee.
The.
Senator Padilla I see your hand
up okay thank you Mr chairman so
I want to thank the sponsors I
want to think there's been an
awful lot of effort Mr chairman
as you know around this
particular piece of legislation
have been contacted by phone
email carrier pigeon any number
of other means to get a hold of
me on this thing and and I will
tell you that I'm I'm.
I woke up torn on this matter
this morning because I knew were
going to be discussing this and
my good friend decade Kernan I
know she's her heart is
absolutely in the right place
always and I don't have a long
standing relationship with
Representative sorry Senator
Chiygoz excuse me but we have a
along we've known each other for
a while.
So now that we're in the
situation we're districts were
asked to re open as of I think
today and and and a number of
other deals please help me
understand what why we're still
having this particular tonight I
I think I know why because of
the future right we don't know
what's going to happen around
the future so can we get a
little more on that please Mr
Chairman.
Mr chair if I could respond to
that so it is mentioned the
other day and committee how this
pandemic will become endemic and
I don't know if you know what an
ended the kiss but endemic is
where we have a situation that
will be with us for some time
maybe that not at the level of a
pandemic or epidemic but it
intimate kiss something very
similar to the other comment
health issues that that surround
us every every year we have the
flu which is a COVID different
number but it's COVID and we're
gonna have to deal with this
going forward as an endemic and
so I'm the reason that I think
it's important for local
districts to make to make this
decision is because we are going
to have to learn to live with
this and I think every region of
the state probably has a
different view on how we did
that and I mentioned that in my
statement that that people in my
part of the state of probably
will do the endemic a little
differently than other areas of
the state and that's okay I
don't have a problem with that.
If something should occur that
requires us to take another look
and say you know what what we
gonna do we need to be able to
be sure going forward that those
decisions are made locally
rather than from from from the
top down and that would be my
response that's why even though
kids are back in school down in
a couple of weeks something
occur and that we get this shut
down again based on something
that happens in another part of
the state so as we live with
this endemic going forward I
thank each local area should
have the right to make the
decisions with regard to the
endemic thank you.
Thank you Sir for the thank you
Mr chairman I don't know if the
co sponsor wanted to say a few
words I don't want to step over
him.
Mr chairman and sentencia
appreciated I would ask to let
my carrier pigeon all of go so
they can return home but the I I
do want to say that I look at
this as we codified into statute
that up I think our.
Our parents and our grandparents
would understand the two things
we heard them and we'll do
everything we possibly can to
protect our children and our
staff I I think this of this
bill goes through and people
realize that it's it's it's
really not trying to take a from
what the governor did I think
she did everything she possibly
could to educator for children
during this time but it brings
it to the new point that of
those of us on the school board
would have the where with all to
try to do the right thing for
our for our our.
Our districts not you know we'll
go back to the statewide you I I
still think that what happens in
Unisys different than what
happens in Albuquerque or
Farmington so I'm hoping that
this is the bill goes through we
do requirements as needed that
the just make sure that of our
constituents know that we are
hearing them we're trying to do
our very best for our students
and truly believe that the local
level.
I appreciate that Mr Chairman
into the Sanchez I'm just trying
to also get my hands around
where does the science and and
the.
I'm medical
Expertise land into what you're
what you're trying what you're
attempting to do here I I
understand and I hear you loud
and clear on the reasons why you
brought the legislation could
talk to me a little bit about
where the science and all that
because the pandemic and the the
the virus in the vaccine that
Sattar are are the same and
unis um versus body bill versus
lost this and the areas in my
district in the south valley the
southwest makes the bills are
the same some trying to figure
out.
Why we would lift that overall
data gathering the ability and
analytical ability why we would
want to remove that from a
statewide effort to control the
side of.
Mr chair and and certainly I
appreciate that and that brings
me to solve our problem so
during this regular pandemic the
the school board regions tend
for not brought into the
conversation so I think it's to
face up I would hope that the
department of health and PED
would work with provided we we
need to be able to have a
discussion with them we will
always have discussion with PED
because they have oversight over
the education process what we
look for is the CDC if you look
at the PED's paperwork they
mimic what CDC already have so
as a CDC changes for whatever
reason well they get more
lenient or more stringent we
would abide by that because that
gives us a science gives us the
detail that we would need to
know in discussions with PED to
be able to know what we need to
do for students I think it's a
global approach on getting good
detailed of Science Center but
it's a local approach on how to
use that science the best
accommodate our students and our
staff.
So if I could just add one
little thing you know you talk
about how the virus is the same
in Lee County yes it is in Santa
Fe County or Bernalillo county
and and so it's the same as it
is and games County and what the
county and so when you look at
the CDC tracking information and
you look at those counties and
you look at that have those
counties are impacted with
number one hospitalizations and
number two positives they don't
do as much testing in those
counties but I look at
hospitalizations and deaths and
you did not see a significant
difference in Gaines county and
Lake County and so if if that's
the case you have to balance
with the threat of this virus
with what damage is being done
to our children and I think from
a state perspective I do not
think that we have seen the
actor gets for our children
expressed that you so the
medical team though they are
very up
Successful in developing models
that have done their job that
there has been no.
Effort to include the balance
into the decision making with
regard to what's best for kids
so we had no we had to get on
that medical team I've not seen
much in the way of advocating
for our children from a state
perspective so I would ask for
school boards to have that
ability but the science is the
same no matter whether you're in
Lake County or gains County the
results have been pretty much
the same with the exception that
their kids have been back in our
sap.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
and I appreciate Senator
Gallegos and the gentle lady
from Hobbs should I had a very
lengthy conversation the other
evening when I was get my steps
and I was freezing and she was
in a warm house and but we still
had a very healthy conversation.
You know I think something else
we need to consider in this
particular scenario as we just
didn't know you don't know I
mean I I.
I also feel like you know it's
it's folks last young I come to
the Senate chamber as a complete
moderate I'm not on the far left
I'm not on the far right and
right in the middle the place
and boy do I get a lot of grief
over that let me tell you but
and it's it's very painful for
me and and others that are in
the middle of the chamber
sometimes but but what I would
say is you know where the
governor's concerned I don't you
know.
Constantly always agree with
everything that she's doing or
whatever but on this matter
leadership is lonely and I would
much rather our governor
overreacted and significantly
under react
If she over reacts we'll never
quite now we'll just never know
if she over reacted on this
matter but we would sure know
right away she under reacted we
had your students you know
having to the following L. and
and and and Martel and death and
this and that so I just feel
like you know at this point you
know we we need to see this one
through we need to come up with
this policy well we're not in
the middle of the thicket of it
all and ended everyone's
emotions are running high and
trying to figure this thing out
so maybe you didn't have
comments on this Mr chairman
because the right the left on
the committee knew exactly what
they wanted to do I being in the
middle I like to listen
everybody like to hear it what
everybody has to say and I
appreciate the Sanchez for
working so hard and diligently
on this thank you Mr chairman.
Center for the Mexico to Senator
Hickey.
Thank you madam chairman and
thank you madam senator
I really I like this bill
and I am.
I'm struggling a little bit up
here and and burn away all about
school opening and some
resistance from unions around
that I mean I kind of understand
it but I agree that the sciences
definitely demonstrating that
particularly eight through J..
There is much less transmission
for whatever reason we don't now
but there's no question about it
which is that the CDC and
Tony Dr Fauci yesterday to and
when he was on meet the press to
encourage the opening of the
schools
and there certainly needs to be
local decision making around it
R. I. to in somewhere worried
that as my friend Senator
Padilla I'm kind of in the
middle of this district here
and and hear things both ways
but I am concerned about I know
that there is science to look at
but do you have a scientific
interpreter for the the school
boards
And the reason I say that is
that that my good friend Dr
Scrase survived and grew up with
them healthcare administration
and health care in New Mexico
these last thirty years and has
done just an outstanding job
Alex Stadio assisting him in
doing the research and every
Tuesday he does a thirty minute
conference for physicians on all
the latest that and update in
that to me is really compulsive
and very very thorough research
and I'm I'm looking for some way
not just for the CDC because CDC
tends to make recommend demi
that there are national
organization they make
recommendations nationally
they do recognize that each
state has its own situation I
think there part of the judgment
developing criteria
but I also
would like to see that there is
hi consultation with
the health experts right now
with Dr Scrase is in HSD and
then there's the department of
health they do this they work
together but I'm I'm trying to
find some import there to be
sure that there is a solid
scientific.
decision being brought in but I
also really do support that the
medical management team are that
he has a with a lot of
clinicians that there should be
teacher input into that because
you're absolutely right we are
talking about the mental health
the well being of of our
students and I think that's a
really excellent observation and
I will personally make that to
Dr Scrase they reached out
somehow get educational import
but I'm just I'm a little maybe
maybe I'm not misunderstanding
but
I'm I'm hoping that
there is some scientific not
just import but someone at the
table with the science medical
background who's helping to
review the decisions were made
by the school board and and with
that I yield the floor but again
thank you for bringing this bill
I think it's very very important
and
I hope we can get it worked out
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I could
respond on page two line twenty
three and twenty four in the
bill it clearly requires the
school board are shall that's a
word a term for requiring us to
to talk with health officials to
determine that safety issue so
it's in the bill and they are
required to do that and and I
agree with you I think Dr Scrase
in the role that he played was
exactly what he was asked to do
and they looked at the science
with regard to the spread that
somewhere along the line we've
missed the boat on including
educators and so the result of
that is we want to take back
that decision to the local level
using CDC guidelines of the
American Association of the
theatrics they certainly support
kids being in school thank you I
don't know where else to look
for scientific data I think that
we have proven that that kids
need to be back and I worry
about going forward they're back
now that I can tell you the
superintendents I'm sure are
worrying that just the slightest
thank could reverse that based
on on that some decision by the
medical team so
it is in the bill they do have
to consult with health officials
and health officials in my view
certainly would be the state
department of health and and we
could we could do that so thank
you.
Thank you.
Your current very helpful.
Thank you senator Paul.
Thank you Mr chair have some of
the same concerns laid out by
Senator Padilla and
Senator thank you as well and
I'm just concerned with this
bill that if it was implemented
would we be better off today we
were and will it help going
forward so what those concerns
I.
I I would just I just think more
work needs to be done on this
bill and
I'd like to make a motion to
table Senator.
Get the.
Center if we might typically you
don't get to make comments and
that make up a motion and so we
can get back to you
there with and it lets you add
other comments at this point we
would go to senator Neville.
I'll you'll be sure.
Senator bill.
Thank you Mr chair you know back
in the fall and.
In the in August I guess city
Farmington of the schools in
Farmington made the decision to
open the great schools up for
six for six rates are K. through
six and are within like a day
before we were going to start
school the or the weekend that
was in between there the
secretary decided that there
were some technical issue with
the the way they computed the
square footage in the density
and the filters and then
whatever that change of mind so
they got delayed for a week or
two and they fixed whatever all
that was redid the mass and the
re opened and they're open for
thirty days exactly and then the
kids were required to go back to
virtual learning once then
there's an option parents can
choose to either doing in in
person or not.
thirty days this is Dale
elementary kids but that thirty
days didn't yield any
significant COVID infections or
any problems in his decision
made by the local school board
of local administration.
and it was very successful and
then we had to go back to
virtual learning up until about
three weeks ago I believe we
started up again.
Just the six through six for.
Again we've been in for six
weeks or three weeks for those
of sixth graders and blow and
again no problems with the with
COVID or any issues that have
cropped up that although I'm
aware of and I keep checking
these things from time to time
and less it's happened last
couple days we don't have a any
kind of a major problem we're
gonna open up I understand of
the the more advanced grades the
junior high up
I think is that today I believe
they start that and so we'll see
how that goes but these were
local decisions that got trump
by the ministry
And there was no reason for
again everybody agreed that the
K. through sixth grade kids
didn't spread didn't have any
problems and yep so we have had
these younger kids the most
critical kids have suffered
the probably the most damage
when it comes to learning
because they're the ones that
are going to be are there going
to be looking at life time of
lost lost learning so anyway we
want to make sure that to.
We do what's best for the locals
they're entirely capable Dr
Schmidt is entirely capable of
administering schools and doing
a good job and keep your kids
safe and keeping teacher safe
again would not have any
problems with that small
produced the of the schools open
so anyway just my comments and I
appreciated that my
granddaughter wants to crash
zoom so.
We're we've been doing that
she's off on Mondays that we've
been doing the virtual
and she's here a lot and we we
know a lot about what happens at
that level she's a first grader
we keep track of the notice it
and monitor it and I can say
without any hesitation that are
local folks can do a good job of
keeping the schools open and
safe thank you Mr chair.
Your needed Mr so the Senators
alternative.
Thank you we're all still trying
to keep up with this we're we're
trying not to interrupt other
people with money out local
noise while still and keep up
with what's going on thank you
at this point I think what I
next see is Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman pursuant
to I was trying to decide
whether to get on and say
anything on this bill but.
Yeah I I really.
That I struggle with the fact
that we continue to say follow
the science.
Intel the science says what we
don't want.
And you know we've been accused
of that both directions right
and so the other early on most
of us said
you know because we were
actually following the CDC that
early onset not were Mexico.
And then about three weeks later
they came out and said we're
mask.
We were told of all the science
so I start wearing a mask.
But we see the CDC is saying and
actually the CDC has never once
said to close schools from the
very beginning actually
recommended the schools not be
closed why because they weren't
just looking at the medical and
they knew it wasn't spreading
amongst children and the
children were very very low risk
so they said you shouldn't close
schools because they were trying
to look at the whole health of
the child.
And the problem is.
That.
In our state at least we're only
looking at the physical health
but we're not even looking at
the health of the child.
You know I tend to provided a
pure especially on Education
Committee thanking about the
student I get attacked a lot
because I don't put as much
thought into the teachers Idaho
I try to think about the
teachers but my number one
priority is to students.
And after serving on the school
board I absolutely support this
bill I think that school boards
just like they do with any kind
of legal advice that they need
they will seek out the advice of
the professional.
To come in brief the board.
On what to do with the also look
at the CDC who's always
recommended the school stay
open.
We have had a massive increase
in suicides in this state
amongst young people.
Among school age children.
Sir renewable can tell you about
how many kids in San Juan it's
last time I checked it was
around twelve this year.
Madam had more than one in the
year for the last four years and
also in the past twelve the only
thing that changed was we shut
down schools.
Really caring about the health
of the child the health of the
student we tell they can't be in
school.
We have study after study.
Currently that is just come out
from North Carolina from Norway
from Sweden I think for Michigan
if I remember the very latest
one.
That proves.
Without a doubt.
Children are not super spreaders
and that is not being used to
help children in school.
Yes we have some teachers who
are high risk for eviction are
states like thirty percent of
our teachers high risk.
Those teacher should have been
vaccinated six weeks ago.
So that our kids could be back
in school.
We need to start making the
decisions with the child in line
with the child education and the
child's overall health in mind
if we do that.
Then we will let our kids get
back in the school we will let
our kids get back into sports
and we will let our kids learn
they're already behind and
they're only getting more behind
every day so we truly care about
our students.
Then we will our school boards
to do the right thing and open
up schools thank you Mr chairman
I appreciate the opportunity.
Thank you senator Mr chair I
like to make a motion to table.
We have a motion to table from
Senator pope it is non debatable
merry and and if you will please
call the roll on a table in a
vote of yes is to able Senate
bill one seventy one.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Hickey.
Now.
Senator Kernan.
No.
Senator Novell no.
Senator Padilla no.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes.
We have a.
A table that failed.
Ably motion failed I believe it
was five to three we are back on
the.
The bill I would like to.
Ma'am I know brick.
we can get to it I know REC I've
got some other questions and
things first if that's alright
Senator.
This and I got serious problems
what forces are anyone else on
the committee.
Okay as I look through I mean
we're making law here
this is up it's going to be set
up and I think there are some
serious concerns and problems
with the work the language that
are in this bill
first go at on page two one
seven on the it's got a number
of things that read very much
like a memorial not like a bill.
you almost didn't input in the
warehouses that says the
legislature finds that public
schools are in the central
business to take care Senator
not a problem with that
But you know it's essentially
saying that the legislature
finds of students across the
state are not.
Only losing academic momentum
but are suffering from a lack of
structure the legislature hasn't
found that there's a committee
that has found that the finance
committee
there are some others that have
stated that but I think it's
actually wrong to say that the
legislature has found that.
there are opinions that affect
but the legislature has not
taken a vote the legislature's
not.
Found that to be the case
am I missing something there
Senator Gallegos are Senator
Kernan.
Mr chairman and
Committee at I would just tell
you that in in in my view of
when we started this with the
drafter we gave arsenal overall
guidelines on what we're trying
to find I know that I've heard
that from Senate finance from
not Senate finance from
the finance group but it's just
a to me I don't know that I
would say that since the details
are out there the legislature
Should consider in.
I read the bill when I I
recently read it we I didn't see
anything wrong with the actual
wording I understand what you're
trying to say is it's not the
legislature but in her drafting
the bill she's trying to put it
in the overall what I would have
thought was New Mexico statutes
so it would read right so that
way you we wouldn't have any
drafters and and this may be a
director but I didn't read it
that way and I don't know
Senator Kernan took it that way
also.
Well I don't have a problem Mr
chair of striking be if that's
the.
Not necessary to get to the
point that we want to make that
school board should have the
authority so I think people
believe this but you're exactly
right other than the LFC report
and other national
of data and scientific reports I
think that's probably true but
we don't need that to pass
bills.
Thank you.
Thank you I know typically in
the Senate we don't put in
purpose statements are reasons
why your work things of that
sort and again this reads very
much like the warehouses of a
memorial rather than legislation
when I get down to see.
it says when public schools are
closed due to a public health
order the local board shopping
for with school personnel and
health officials.
Is that what kind are they
school personnel I mean are they
health official.
Mr chair on down into reading
that
I know that we are staff but I
would think that that would be
at the higher levels of so the
superintendent and
we went back earlier to talk
about
the CDC guidelines and what we
would have to do with shell with
the department of health and
with PED so I would think that
for that area of expertise would
that discussion would be you
know to.
The co sponsors you have any
other points on that.
We we would be happy Mr chair
did take the bill back in do a
definition for for each of those
and to clarify that in going
back up to be basically if the
bill passes then of the
legislature would potentially be
finding everything that we said
in the speaker of the I think
there would be support not that
needs more but with regard to
this is a school person the
service was not hospitals
reached out to all personnel to
to to get their input through a
survey at health officials to me
that could be anyone from your
local department of health and
most districts across the
country that are allowed to make
these decisions they identified
that local health department is
to that would confer with we
could definitely include that in
the bill and and to provide
health official says our local
department of health or even the
state department of health so
that would not be at something I
would object to we want to
rework that.
Again as we're looking logs you
on we it's set up your many
times work matter and as it
currently is confer with school
personnel could be confer with
the teacher there are school
personnel
local health officials doesn't
say local.
What are community help they say
it means anybody who is in the
health profession is a health
official of some sort and it's
very clearly very very broad
section see also the public
schools been closed.
The next day the school board I
mean what's the timeline to the
school board the next day
override the closing of the
schools.
Mr chair with regard to that it
stayed in the bill that school
boards would be at.
They would follow the federal
centers for disease control the
CDC and if you look at.
At that information you see that
very clearly
they offer guidance on when you
would open and when you would
close so following the CDC
guidelines I think that that
that that would be what school
boards would be our that that's
what they would do.
Senator yeah and I've got
questions when we get over to
that that's page three the wind
fifteen but it said the school
board shall be based on it
doesn't say they shall follow it
says that.
On those guidelines and those
guidelines often are much
broader than state level or
other kinds of things and it
very clearly does not they
follow says based on and so
would that allow the school
board as something different
than what they the city things
of.
I think Mr chair that's a good
point and again if this bill
should move forward we could
make those adjustments and
clarify that in the
recommendations really by the
CDC if you put them side by side
with PED they are very similar
they're not that much different
they're pretty stringent and
they should be so I agree with
you that should be something
that that they should be held to
and and would certainly be
willing to make that change as
well.
And you know a couple of things
and and senator and I think you
were part of that but during the
summer the public yet Department
had lots and lots of educators
on talking about re opening
plans as we got ready for August
I know you are Dr Scrase
presented to us of the rate was
there there were superintendents
on it I was there of there were
probably forty or fifty
different people broken into
separate smaller groups to work
out all of this.
Was that not consultation I mean
this bill is saying that there
wasn't any that young people
were left out of all of that
decision making.
Wasn't that part of the decision
making process on how to re open
schools effectively in August
when yeah we still didn't have
huge surges of that then there
were big senator the kind of
over talk that but they had set
up guidelines for each
individual district is about
what that was were you part of
that.
Now Mr chairman I was not so I
can't respond to that I didn't
know that of the secretary of
education is not been part of
the medical team and every time
I went to the secretary us.
About different issues related
to school re opening yes
response was well I'll take it
to the medical team so I think
the medical team this make the
decisions without educators at
the table we can make
recommendations that there has
we've not had anyone on that
medical team that has had any
experience or background with
regard to education even the
secretary of education does not
serve on the medical thank so I
think this is a frustration that
we all have felt throughout all
of this whether it's from the
school boards association of the
superintendents that they feel
we have not been at the table
that have not been able so I
certainly am willing to make any
changes that that that could
move this bill forward and I
agree with you that there are
sections that we could
completely back we need to
strengthen the the requirement
that that school boards respond
to the CDC we may even not
consider doing a side by side of
the PED guidelines with the CDC
and see which really would fit
best for New Mexico but I will
tell you across this country
school districts are making
these decisions and New Mexico
is one of about four states that
still has an order in place that
does not allow school districts
to make this decision and I'm
willing to work on the bill if
there are other areas that are
too weak not strong enough we
certainly can do that if this
bill should move forward with
the No recommendation.
I just want to point out because
I was part of an yeah we had
multiple meetings I think we've
that once or twice a week for
four five weeks to work out and
we did have direct input from Dr
Scrase and the department of
health at just about every
meeting and so the the help was
getting want to lots and lots of
input from the educators of
there were teachers
superintendent school board
members legislators all that
we're part of that decision
making so I don't think it's
accurate to say that the the
department of health to those
making it work hearing the
voices of educators that had
serious concerns about re
opening and and how that was
taking place of.
Information that we talked about
how your Texas hasn't had this
will Texas is had five hundred
sixty two thousand seven hundred
twenty three cases of school
COVID.
We're New Mexico has had a few
of them thirty indicate that
Texas is the model we ought to
be using.
We have had some young people in
New Mexico and across the
country there been some young
people have died as a result of
COVID it is much less of the
research that has recently come
out as come out in only the last
two or three weeks I think you
indicated the North Carolina
study that showed that there was
not transmission act with lots
of these things were set up in
in and even at the start of
school in August that research
was not out it was not included
and did not at that point who
now where the department of
health is clearly indicating
that COVID is on downturn that
our hospitals are not being
overwhelmed and New Mexico is
allowing the opening up of our
schools you know I just am very
concerned about taking away the
authority of the governor and
the authority of our department
of health to in the case of a
public health emergency where
people are dying whether it the
kids certainly are not as high
risk but they also live with
grandparents and we have
teachers who are having serious
problems you take that both for
of community health because this
is not just about school schools
are part of a community of
community health away from the
department of health and giving
it to an elected school board
that they have little or no
training or understanding of
health requirements but are
reacting only to the parents of
the kids that want to play
sports I get all of that I
attending classrooms and I'm not
sure about anyone else on the
committee but I probably have
been in a classroom were
frequently and were recently
than anyone else and was
teaching in the spring when
there was a shutdown nobody
denies that this is not as good
education that in person nobody
does nobody denies that we ought
to have our kids back in school
full time face to face when it
say this is a that help to
urgency.
And when we have health
emergencies I do not believe
that we should be taking
authority away from those who
have to make the very very
difficult decisions about how to
protect public health and that
includes protecting public
health as it relates to schools
which are integral parts of our
communities
so yeah what about point I I
just think this bill is you're
contained ill advised is is
going backwards trying to fix
what was of moving forward I
think our public health and our
governor have good plans we are
opening schools back up and I do
not think that local boards
should have the ability to
override the public health
requirements that our governor
and the department of health
equity in place regardless of
who is sitting in those seats
they have to make those very
tough decisions because this is
an area where our local emotions
and feelings do not always
cannot always make the best
decisions and I think it was
Senator but the a that made the
comment
now I lost what common it was
that that you had made but just
yeah we've we've got to make
sure that the people in charge
have the ability to make those
very difficult decisions
with that I think we are back to
the.
A recommendation from the
committee.
I think I made a motion for a.
No REC.
Yes you did Senator a motion for
no Representative.
Call.
End up I'd like to make a motion
for a do not pass.
Mr chairman I already have a
motion on the table and make a
level that you're.
Are getting complicated thank
you senator we have a motion for
a.
a no record of Marianna you'll
call the roll.
I need a second we'll send and
Mr chairman if I can.
Senator Padilla thank thank you
Mr chairman and at Marianne and
and those who've spoken I I just
would like to get a ruling on
this but I do believe you can
substitute motion for a do not
pass.
I'm sorry for table excuse me
is.
Wasn't a table table and crap
Politechnika.
We have.
Senator.
Can you please tell me who
seconded the motion again please
our servers okay.
Well I'm gonna make you the
second
and I will call the roll now
Senator Brandt yes.
Icky.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes Senator Novell yes Senator
Padilla.
Just.
Senator Pinto.
Cannot clarification on what
we're voting on and the staff
with the just sounds Senator
were sent we're voting on and no
recommendation to send this bill
Senate bill one seventy one
without recommendations to the
Judiciary Committee.
I'll pass.
All.
No.
I'm going back to Senator
Padilla.
Now.
Senator Pinto.
Are you on our story Senator
Pinto.
Sorry but no.
Sander Sauls hello.
We have a time so we have a tie
vote.
Is there an alternate or a.
Another motion.
So Mr chair provided there for
awhile and see if people let it
go back and read some of the
information that's been sent to
who knows maybe it'll revive
itself.
Okay thank you senator Colin at
this point then with the sponsor
of.
Request and it's under guy goes
I saw you nodding so I presume
you're alright with that also we
will just be that sitting here
in Senate education.
Thank you.
Thank you members.
and just for the public we have
had two bills today Senate bill
one thirty five which what did
not move out of the committee
but he did not die in the
committee are we had Senate bill
one seventy one on campus
education public health
emergency that also is going to
remain in the Education
Committee we're going to move on
the Senate bill one fifty one
all of by Senate bill one fifty
nine both Senator guy a ghosts
bills we do have a hard stop at
noon today we've got is that
some of us have other meetings
that start at twelve that
afternoon committees the on that
so we'll see where we get the on
those also for the committee and
public Senate bill one seventy
financial literacy school credit
has been rolled over I also
received a text message that
Senate bill one seventy seven
the UNM hospitals structuring
the sponsor is requested that
the holdover as well so we I
don't think we're going to be
getting are but if we do that's
where where the committee is I'm
not sure it doesn't look like
we're going to get the Senate
bill two oh six
through ten or two twenty five
today but will think our so
Senator Gallegos it will go to
Senate bill one fifty one which
kids education loan repayment.
Mr chairman and committee I
appreciate the dialogue the last
bill this is should be shorter
Mr Chairman what I'm trying to
do here when I was talking staff
about
Drafting this bill is one of the
ways that we could add this to
like the teachers loan repayment
plan where it would not be just
of certain teachers but it would
be all teachers this opens it up
Mr chairman for that.
This is a ten acting struggles
for provider in loan repayment
act of legislative powers and
duties creating the fund the
thought was Mr chairman and
senator Education Committee is
that we want our so we help them
with their loan repayment they
would stay in our state and we
want to be will have our
educators have the opportunity
not to be under the burden of
their loan structure to give you
some background here units we
have teachers because early on
we found that our teachers could
either pay their payments on
their loans for each.
Four ranked so the school board
went out and bought houses in
order to take some of that
stress off of them in this bill
would do that and what that'll
stand for questions.
Your thank you senator I I
didn't expect quite such a short
thing that I was getting.
Getting ready out we'll go to
the public input now on Senate
bill one fifty one education
loan repayment.
Hello.
So at this time if we have any
members of the public that would
like to speak in opposition.
I'll go ahead and raise your
hands at this time.
It looks like we have any.
What what.
It is having technical
difficulties on our side here.
it doesn't look like we have
anyone in opposition really are
you all able to hear me okay.
Okay I'm not not sure why we get
more kids back we may switch
over to public you what is it
alright with the committee at
this point we'll go to the
committee questions that will
come back to public what if we
get some of the staff back is
there anyone with.
Questions comments from the
committee.
I'm not seeing any go up.
Okay there is.
Thank you Mr chairman
Sergei also if you could just
just quickly is this open to the
other.
I'm sorry.
Frozen rolls I think the
technical issues on your end but
senator right getting in the.
Go ahead and continue Senator
grant.
Mr Chairman should we have Sir
hope takeovers chair for a few
minutes while you get your
technical difficulties that
you're.
Yes Senator poking you take over
for a few moments.
Mr chair you may proceed Senator
Brandt thank you Mr chairman
appropriates doing that Sir guy
go since just wondering on is
this just for teachers us open
it up for educational assistance
other educational support.
Very very good question Senator
Mr vice chair this does open it
up so you can look at it from
our districts you there it takes
a lot more than just actual
classroom teacher to educate our
students so it does give us the
opportunity so the educational
system to screen count for the
diagnostician social workers
school nurses are language
pathologist the psychologist not
do we have all these units but
would like to of the physical
therapists occupational
therapists recreational
therapists and even American
family therapist and interpreter
for the deaf and we looked at
what would it take to look at
addition the larger districts of
anyone that was in the
educational round that we would
already have of the the loan
repayment or you loan decked how
could we get them to say in our
state and not leave the taxes we
have a really hard time here in
Lee County because they make
more money in taxes and so if
they get their degree here that
I that'll there we need to give
them the opportunity to have
that loan repayment and there
again it's you know it's already
done for for teachers we just
wanted to go ahead and open that
up so that way we can keep more
of our staff here in our state.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
appreciate that so how does the
does the loan anyone just
student loans that they would be
helping pay back and is that
done with the payment directly
to the loan or to the
Educational support personnel.
So Mr chairman and and vice
chair thank you for that so the
the view was that hired by Jim
R. would looking to take careful
investigation so we presume that
it would go to the educational
facilities so you wouldn't pay
me directly we currently do with
this with CYFD so as the work of
with years through the state
their loan is paid back but it
doesn't go to the CYFD staff
goes to educational institutions
so that way we know that that
amount is directly taken off of
their of their loan balance.
Okay Mr Chairman center I didn't
realize that so it was done
because usually the loan when
you do a student loan maybe Mr
arrival could help me out with
that when you do a student loan
it's usually you got the was one
of the Fannie Mae or one of
those that does the student loan
and you're paying it directly so
does the department Mr Dr Ronald
you notice Department pay
directly to that loan.
Thank you for the question Mr
chairman Senator Brandt we pay
the loan servicers so that would
be the federal loan servicer
either department at or some of
the under contract department
that serves a lot.
Awesome thank you Mr chairman
thank you doctor all of it's
good to see you haven't seen you
in awhile.
But thank you for that that
really helps me.
Sir guy yes I think it's a great
bill really encourages people to
stay in the state and keep those
services in the state I do think
one of the things we need to
remind people is they may pay a
little bit more in Texas but we
find a lot better benefits in
New Mexico when it comes to the
retirement what comes to their
health insurance when it comes
to a lot of the benefits are
benefit packages much much
better than Texas is benefit
package and so we we either need
the lower benefit package to Max
to Texas's pay your dues are
just try to help.
Teachers and support personnel
understand how much better our
packages thank you thank you.
Senator Brandt do we have any
more comments or questions from
the committee.
Once again we are on Senate bill
one fifty one.
R. Taylor were you able to
you still have been difficulties
on here and I want to open it up
to public comment.
No I'm not having any technical
difficulties on my and at this
time we will hear from the
public as far as opposition for
Senate bill one fifty one please
raise your hands at this time if
there any members of the public
who would like to speak in
opposition.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone speaking in opposition so
we will hear from Melissa
Candelario Melissa are you here.
It doesn't look like she's here
are there any other members of
the public who would like to
speak in support of Senate bill
one fifty one any supporters.
Yes go head yes like I couldn't
find the weight but I'm sorry.
Mr chair members of the
committee of public charter
schools of New Mexico supports
the creation that structures
that make working in education
more attractive to qualified
person we believe that setting
up a fund for instructional
support provide providers makes
sense as social workers nurses
therapist assistance and
counselors are more important
than ever in our K. twelve
educational system we thank the
sponsor for this well and ask
for your support thank you.
Thank you and there any other
members of the public who would
like to speak in support.
It doesn't appear so that
concludes public statement for
Senate bill one fifty one thank
you.
Thank you mark a lot I will just
a couple of questions on my end
I notice in this bill that I
don't believe there's not an
appropriation
Senator guy able says is one
needed for a bill like this.
Mr vice chair historically I
would say yes but currently we
have the the teachers of loan
repayment plan and I would.
As we would look at how that is
funded and to be additional
supplemental to that to just be
added to that plans what my
original temples.
Thank you senator I I I I think
this is a a great deal you
brought forward in the other
question I would have is we're
going to hear that the teacher
loan repayment bill is that just
regarding teachers and then this
bill is regarding other people
in the education career feels
that provide support in schools
and make correctly yes all right
thank you senator I don't that's
all that I have before we move
on whether any other comments or
questions from the committee.
If not we are still on Senate
bill one fifty one and I'd ask
for any motions are.
Over the past Mr chairman again
with doctor we have a due pass
from Senator Padilla and the
second from Senator Brandt if
you could bake.
Start the roll call area.
Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto.
Excuse.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator pope yes.
Senator souls.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote
all right we have a due pass.
Senator
Chairman souls.
The only thing that I want to
explain is yeah this looks like
it sets up a fund without any
money going into the funding so
hopefully with the next bill we
will get some more understanding
as to how this is going to be
funded but I think it's a good
idea thank you.
Thank you senator souls we will
you have center guy go she would
do passing Senate bill one five
one I will now yield back to you
for Senate bill one five nine.
Thank you all for the one fifty
one both in
Centers Mr vice chairman centers
this bill is I consider even
easier than the one prior
because
Mr chair vice chair what this is
taking out the designated high
risk teacher positions so we
currently have the fund and the
legislature approved a million
dollars to the scholarship
program there's a house bill
twenty two that's out there
the
is a grow your own teachers act
and this is similar in there
except that in this we would not
want to
have it just a high risk teacher
positions this is trying to do
this year all all the teachers
in New Mexico opportunity to be
a have a have the to tuition and
fees cost cover.
Thank you senator diagnosis at
all that you have the store is
open The presentation yes
Center at west.
Great thank you I will open it
up to public comments once again
we are on Senate bill one five
nine.
Is there any members of the
public who would like to speak
in opposition to Senate bill one
fifty nine features your hands
at this time.
A reminder the hand raises under
reactions in case you're looking
for that.
It looks like we don't have
anyone for opposition do we have
anyone who wanted to speak in
support of Senate bill one fifty
nine now is the time to raise
your hand.
Mr Stan rounds go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee was that stand
around for the school
superintendents we appreciate
the removal of the language
restricting this course certain
classes of teachers all my
stress the fund we simply want
to point out that we are
on the imminent edge of a cliff
we believe will be high turnover
teachers and so these kinds of
actions on our behalf we believe
are prudent and appropriate
thank you.
Thank you Mr Reynolds now we
will hear from Deborah.
Mr chair Deborah Condit would
public charter schools again and
we appreciate as senator
diagnosis stop all approach on
Senate bill one fifty nine and
we believe that the flexibility
offered in the revision to the
current program will allow for
you could better impact on
recruitment and retention of
teachers we believe that
allowing each you need to work
with PED are part is station
insurance the program changes
along with teacher workforce
needs and the student loan
servicer provision provides for
more education for students
under different debt scenarios
and we think the sponsor for
this bill.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who would
like to speak in support.
Okay and that concludes public
statement for Senate bill one
fifty nine thank you.
Thank you Marcello I would like
to now open it up to committee
members.
You can.
Were you trying to get on
chairman souls.
Okay chairman sold for.
Thank you interesting things on
that zoom meetings and you can
kind of see what people are
struggling or trying to get
their finger up to get to the
right hander other types of
things that sometimes you can
anticipate what they're they're
planning on doing up the the one
question and that have been
brought up to some of the
analysis of Mr chair and and
senator is.
With loan repayment would
disqualify a teacher who already
has an outstanding loan only
people that are taking on new
debt at this point.
Mr chairman and.
Senator Mr chairman Mr
My understanding was would if
they had a loans are currently
now that it would qualify them
the original thought was because
it was so stringent on just
having the.
This isn't a high risk teachers
this would just and I know that
stresses the the current amount
to million dollars we have but
with the governor looking at of
being able to try to help fund
education for all that we're
hoping that this would add in a
piece so that the the teachers
so for not being considered now
but I understood it would be
those were already with their
degree plan plus those we're
going into education.
Thank you Mr chair came along
those same lines do we know how
many teacher loans are currently
outstanding in New Mexico.
Mr chairman Mr chair I do not
have that I just saw that we had
the million dollar corporation
in a large amount the.
we're sorry use the balance was
only three hundred forty one
thousand dollars.
Mr Chairman representative of my
my questions getting at is what
is the need how much of the
currently satisfying are we
increasing the number who
qualified and therefore each is
going to get a less lesser
amount how are we going to
prioritize who gets the loan
repayment if there is not enough
sufficient funds for all.
What Mr Chairman and Mr on page
three
of the bill it says it line
eighteen if funds are limited
than the party would be given to
applicants for teaching and
designated hi need teacher
positions in the state so that
gives you the cabbie out that
those were already
high risk areas we get first
preference.
Mr chairman and senator how many
of those do we currently have
that are.
One have student outstanding
student loans.
Mr Mr I have no number for you
on that I had asked if there
were some research on that and
never return
any kind of status on.
Mr chair and senator I I think
some of my concern is we don't
know whether we're over funding
under funding whether this meets
the need overshoots the need how
did you determine an amount.
Mr Mr the premises the governor
wants to be able to give
education to all so as we go
through that process we as a
state will find the funding to
be able to provide that I just
want these people included and
on that form.
Mr Chairman representative are
these recurring dollars or
nonrecurring dollars or as I'm
trying to put a new term semi
recurring that we hope that they
are but if things go bad this is
a place where people may not get
the funding in future years Mr
chairman I would hope that they
would be recurring but currently
they are not but I think as the
governor goes forward to looking
for a mechanism to be able to
fund all education costs.
So Senator I Mr chair and
senator I I kind of put these in
those so my recurring costs that
you know they they are one time
only we hope that they company
chair but you know it's a place
you can get pull back if the
budget goes goes south on us Mr
chairman Mr chairman I I would
like to give our staff hope but
in a bad year we would
understand the limitations of
our budget.
And that Mr chair just kind of
playing the other side of it in
a bad year when people have lots
of loans and they're going to be
struggling because it's a bad
year isn't that a time when we
got to make sure that we are
helping them with their
outstanding loans rather than
pulling back but that's just
yeah we're.
Yeah the ritual the rhetorical
side where you can ask questions
on both sides so thank you Mr
thank you.
Thank you Mr chair do we have
any other comments or questions
from the committee.
Not hearing and I'm not seeing
not seeing now and I will ask
the committee to we have a
motion moved do past center
right.
A second.
We have a due pass for Senator
Brandt and a second from
Centerville Marianne if you
could do a roll call vote.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Kernan yes.
Well yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Etcetera pope yes Senator.
Yes okay we have a due pass.
Graduation center guy goes you
have a two passed on Senate bill
one five nine.
Thank you all thank you for your
time of the staff.
Mr chair I will pass it back
over to you.
Thank you Sir and thank you
again for so very capable Lee
managing while I was getting my
technical difficulties I think
might.
My headset but the battery was
dying on me and so I was getting
part of it but not all of it so
I appreciate that the committees
up tolerance of of such things
with this I think we go on to
Senate bill one sixty nine
Senator Gonzales I want to
remind the community that we
only have fifteen minutes so I
the list we may not get an
opportunity to get all the way
to a vote on this particular
bill but I think it's
appropriate we can at least get
the the start on this one for
those watching we will not today
we get to Senate bill two oh six
Senate Bill to ten nor Senate
bill two twenty five those will
get rolled over to Wednesday and
we'll see how far we get through
with things on Wednesday and so
with that Senator Gonzales are
you today to present Senate bill
one sixty nine.
Yes I am of thank you all Mr
chairman and members of the
committee can you hear me OK.
Yes yes Sir okay thank you.
All with the Senate bill one
sixty nine of this creates a
higher education coordinating
council.
And the in two thousand
seventeen the legislature passed
Senate Joint Memorial eight to
address re current legislative
concerns about performance of
the college and university.
More specifically Senate Joint
Memorial eight task higher
education with examining the
structure of higher education in
New Mexico or there are thirty
one public colleges and
universities providing seventy
seven points of access
throughout the state.
The decision making.
Authority reciting a political
appointee to the board of
regents.
In October two thousand eighteen
higher education department
released a report detail it's to
your examination through
multiple public meetings with
national experts and
stakeholders from throughout the
state the report recommended to
general options either one would
be abolish existing board of
regents required at least nine
amendments to the state
constitution to create three or
four state college systems with
one board of regents at each
system or number to maintain the
existing governance structure
but created coordinating council
passed with a state wide focus
as opposed to the singular focus
often institution border
regions.
Senate bill one sixty nine would
implement higher education
department recommendations to
create a higher education
coordinating council the bill is
endorsed by the legislative
finance committee the bill
creates sixteen member
coordinating councils of experts
to guide the statewide strategy
on improving student outcomes at
the college and university.
The council will be chaired by
the higher education department
secretary including executives
from a four year university so
the two year colleges and would
include cabinet positions public
education department secretary
department of workforce
solutions and secretary
department of economic
development secretary the
council include three public
members the council who would
hold public meetings at least
quarterly would subject to the
open meetings act the council
agenda managed by higher
education department secretary
would address the developing
statewide strategies for
improving performance student
improve core collaboration with
among colleges and university
specifically the council will
find a form to discuss important
statewide policy issues the form
which does not currently exist
in conversation that not
happening routinely on items
such as college affordability
and student financial aid
program including lottery
scholarship program and revenue
to a dual credit program
effectiveness of those two
credit course being accepted at
the college and universities.
Number three the tried secretary
reform including common course
and consist of learning outcomes
taught at every public
institution the fourth would be
outcome based higher education
funding formula and it just
required to ensure improvements
student outcomes and I trained
to higher education nationally
to impact all of the state.
Competition for New Mexico
college bound students.
Eliminating.
Much of the bureaucracy in
current system of the council
through higher education
department will take the role of
the capital project approval and
graduate degree program approval
currently managed by the state
board of finance.
The background three point five
billion dollars.
Three point five billion dollars
educate sectors the best
educated more than a hundred
thousand post secondary students
at thirty one public colleges or
universities with more than
twenty thousand employees
throughout the state the college
in the university accountable to
the governor appointed board of
regents or locally elected board
who have authority to manage the
institution yes Tom in the of
the board then each institution
has credit liability for the
state the higher education
department is tasked with
practicing oversight over the
best enterprise and offered
statewide strategies mission.
to a college and universities
higher education department has
a very limited we sourced to
practice oversight many states
use similar coordinating bodies
to ensure public colleges and
universities are lined in their
efforts to improve student
outcomes white quality education
for its students Mr chairman of
members of the committee I also
have Mr mark well this well the
legislative finance committee as
an expert witness and I would
ask if he has any comments to
at.
All.
Yes if you would would like to
to add some comments and again
for the public we are on Senate
bill one sixty nine we are
having the the base The
presentation but and senator I
think you heard but we are not
going to be able to just hope
today just want to make sure
that I don't want to blindside
you with something that we're
going to end the meeting before
we get to that so Mr balance
please thank you Mr chairman I
don't have any comments I'm
happy to stand for any questions
that the committee may have just
as a way of background I serve
as the principal analyst with
oversight over higher education
on behalf of the legislative
finance committee so with that
Mr Chairman I'm happy to answer
your questions or those of the
committee members.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
anything else.
Mr Chairman at this point would
stand for questions.
Thank you and I think we've got
about ten minutes or so for
public comment and let me first
just Martel how much public
comment that we have signed up
for this for this particular
bill senator we have no
incentive for public comment
however marks a measure would
like to speak
Marjorie speaking in support or
opposition
Mr chairman members committee
honest I'm speaking in support
of the on legislation and if I
can just make a spree of COVID
Mr chairman.
And certainly you know it's part
of public comment you got at
least you've got two minutes Sir
thank you Mr chairman with that
the Cup I just wanna go back two
years were closely and with the
sponsor that time the LFC in
this for legislation and at that
time I'm in terms of and what we
really like about this bill is
that when it comes to our grad
programs and our capital outlay
programs that the approval
process stops at the secretary
of hiring department hired
departments and you know there's
so many different approval
processes and higher at that to
get to that point that we think
that's a sufficient level of
approval also died said I just
also want to point out to the
committee that imports is
expected this bill does either
it it removes the Department
advisory board meeting that that
doesn't you will see duplication
I also want to just point out
that under the Martinez
administration didn't really
activate the hired by report I
want to give credit to secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez because she
has a really good job of
activating this board and she's
been doing a lot of work so one
keep the committee in mind at
that there was a different time
at least two years ago when this
kid agency just legislation now
and now with this with secretary
Rodriguez we're seeing more a
lot more activity a lot more
work when it comes to a lot of
issues in higher education so
with that with the sponsor for
bringing the the bill session
and I and the council university
supports the council based on
the points I made today but also
recognizing the hard work that
secretary hired's too currently
so thank you for that Mr
chairman members the committee.
Thank you Mr.
Are there any other members of
the public who would like to
speak in opposition percent of
the one sixty nine at this time.
No are there any other
supporters who would like to
speak at this time please go
ahead and raise your hands.
And that looks like it concludes
our public statement for Senate
bill one sixty nine thank you
very much.
Thank you might tell us we are
good right up against our our
stop here I don't think we've
got enough time for all of for
questions from the committee we
will pick this up as our first
bill on Wednesday we are not
going to have additional public
input at that time everybody
knows someone wants to do public
input make sure that they send
us an email or something of that
sort for their input at this
time are there any comments from
our Committee as far as things
moving forward and we will start
at one sixty nine on Wednesday
followed by two oh six to ten to
twenty five will be our first
orders of business
anyone from the committee yeah
let me get over right to see
their hand raised Senator
Padilla.
Yes please go ahead on your mark
to have my hand raised for the
bill so you can call on me
personally come back at the
number on with I think senator
Graham had a question to your
your current.
Senator Brandt I don't end up
but please go ahead Sir.
Mr chairman thank you I just
wanna let you know that the
Senate Republicans will be
having a caucus meeting at ten
o'clock on Wednesday just for
your planning for committee.
Senator I understood I heard
that the I'm a little frustrated
this is our regularly scheduled
time and we're going to be
getting cut short on Wednesday
at eleven already for the floor
session you know I I'm kind of
frustrated that you're doing it
right when we're falling behind
on our numbers but you know I'd
not sure I got a whole lot of
control.
No Mr chairman I guess we could
always do it at a level and then
pulled up the floor session but
I think a server work would be
more frustrated.
Your buffering again center
sorry Mr Chairman.
We lost the chair yeah looks
like we've lost our the chairman
so I will go ahead and
Close out the meeting as a
senator said we will continue on
Wednesday I will start at nine
and Senate bill one sixty nine
and it looks like we will have
to make some adjustments to the
schedule
because we will be going to
Florida Levin and looks like the
Senate Republican caucus will be
having a meeting at ten so we
will get that information out if
there's any more comments or
questions from the committee for
the closing many.
Are you back chairman souls I
was about to close just want to
give you an opportunity.
Yes.
I don't know why my my stuff
going in and out today because I
didn't take my picture off and
didn't you they did but I don't
have anything else and so there
is any other comments and
everybody looks ice frozen so I
may be off again but we will
and.
All right thank you centers also
questions on this and.
Yeah I want.
