I didn't have my mic on for it.
I'm sorry. I don't, uh, good
morning, everybody. Welcome to
Senate Education Committee, um,
I think we've got a couple of
members out for sick and other
type of things, so we're a
little bit smaller today. The
also, as if you're looking at
the agenda.
Bill we rolled over from the
Wednesday meeting on school
building system innovations
Padilla's bill is gonna be
rolled over to next Wednesday at
the sponsor's request. So we
only have 3 bills today, uh.
I think they're they're good
important bills for us to talk
about. Uh, the first one, we're
going to go from SB 133, which
is education retirees returning
to work. Senator Stuart and
Worth, and then, uh, keeping
Senator Stewart in the hot seat,
uh, down to Senate Bill 242 and
then we'll finish with 235, the
bill I'm carrying on school math
changes. Um, any questions,
announcements or anything before
we get started today.
If not, then senator, if you'll
take us to Senate Bill 133, I
believe we have an amendment, so
if we move the amendment first
and then we'll just talk about
the cleaned up, ready to work
bill. Chair, if I can just talk
about the bill, then you'll
realize how important the
amendment is.
So we have a provision in our
ERB statutes that.
You can continue once you
retired.
If you want to come back part
time, you can continue to
receive your retirement benefits
and on page one you'll see this
as long as you're only working
quarter time.
So a teacher who is rehired, um,
we'll make a quarter of whatever
salary they were making when
they retired.
Uh, we have another provision
that really is for uh.
A strive for security personnel,
uh, people that the district
wants to hire a part-time basis,
and that is on page 4 for many,
many years we've had 15,000 be
the most they can earn.
This bill takes that to 25,000,
much more reasonable, much
easier to hire people with a
more reasonable salary.
So if you'll notice on page 4,
on line 15, 6, 1450 we uh.
Allow
people to continue to get their
retirement and come back to work
for 36 months. Uh, so in
conversation with many people
and Senator Ramos in particular,
uh, the amendment moves that to
60 months, 5 years, so we, we're
working on our teacher shortage.
We're working on being able to
hire bus drivers, etc. We think
this will really help, um, all
the districts this is kind of
out of date by putting 150.
to move home. That's the bill
and I'm happy to talk about the
amendment more or turn it back
to you.
Thank you. Uh, I think probably
the easiest thing is uh if
someone would like to move the
amendment.
Uh, they will vote on the
amendment, then we'll get to
questions on the bill. Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to move the
amendment 230406.1 for
discussion purposes.
year
We are now on the amendment, um.
And Senator, if you'll talk
specifically about the
amendment.
So Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee on page 4 lines 14
through 16 is our current return
to work policy where you have to
wait 90 days, uh, you can come
back, um, for 36 months, either
consecutive or non-consecutive.
All this amendment does is move
that to 60 months or 5 years.
OK, uh, just briefly out to the
audience, those in support of
the amendment.
Thank you. Anyone in opposition,
and do you need to say anything
or just your note your support?
Thank you. Um, did the committee
questions about the amendment.
The result
Mr. Chairman, oh.
President Stewart
I like what this bill is doing.
It is going to be very
beneficial to our rural schools
as well, and I think with the
Teacher shortage that we have
been experiencing, I think this
will be nothing but positive for
our school system, so thank you
very much.
OK, on the amendment, any other
questions, comments on the
amendment?
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
Seeing no opposition.
Your bill is amended.
OK, now back to the main bill.
Anything else on the main bill?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I think you've
heard it all.
Thank you, out to the audience,
those in support of
Senate Bill 133.
They would like to come up and
support, is there anyone in
opposition?
You'd like to come down
Make a couple of comments, you
have up to 2 minutes.
Mr. Chairman, Stan rounds for
the school superintendents of
the coalition of Educational
Leaders. We want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward. It's necessary, as
Senator Eel spoke, it will help
especially rural districts, but
all districts.
We have about 800 and some
employees that are currently uh
operating under the amended part
of this.
And it'll give us a chance to
continue their service, so we
appreciate that addition to the
bill, the raising of the of the
of minimum to $25,000 allows us
to meet a lot of the salary
issues now that are coming
forward, which will allow people
to come into work essentially on
a part-time basis, the one thing
we would say is this moves
forward is we need to be sure
that for the educational
retirement board side of it that
we had there may be some cost
implication.
that may need to be born in
hospital too in future years.
Thank you.
Thank you, Stan.
That
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico,
we support the bill, um, I'll
echo Stan's comments on the
rural school districts, all of
those um implications impact
charter schools as well. And
I'll also just note that the
return to work legislation and
what has been able to do for our
schools has largely been helpful
for transitioning leadership,
um, in charter schools, we have
a very thin administrative
layer, and so when a head
administrator leaves, it's, it's
moment
Um, and it's a big deal. And so
for them to be able to retire as
desired, come back and serve as
a uh as help in continuity for a
new leader. It's been especially
important for charter schools in
that way. So we think the
sponsor and support the bill.
Thank you, man.
Anyone else
He came down.
Good morning and thank you for
this bill and uh Senator Ramos
for the amendment. I believe
that this, uh, amendment will
help to bridge a gap between uh
the excess of substitute
teachers that we're seeing, and
that we can bring experience to
um teachers who will stay a lot
longer, and a lot of these kids
know these uh retirees already.
Thank you in the room in
opposition?
We went online.
Opposition either way. No. If
not, then committee we are on
the bill. Any questions, debate
on the bill.
It move or do pass by Senator,
seconded by Senator Ramos, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a unanimous due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thanks to the.
Thank you. Uh, we're now gonna
move on to Senate bill 242.
Is that right? 242, uh, which is
advancing the science of Reading
Act.
So Senator Stewart, if you would
please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
this feels a little more
complicated than the last one.
Um
I'm adjourned at the table with
Doctor Jackie Costal's, uh, PED,
uh in particular.
So.
I've been only working for about
30 years on trying to get the
state to move to uh the science
of reading how kids actually
learn to read, teaching them
according to that sign, 2019,
uh, we passed the bill, uh,
Senate Bill 398 that required
first grade teachers to screen
for dyslexia and then to uh
learned structured literacy to
get training and structured
literacy, structured literacy
is.
The name of uh what we call the
science of reading uh teaching
methods. It focuses on 5
components funquinas, phonics,
fluency, vocabulary and
comprehension and talks about
doing those with 4 adjectives
explicit and direct teaching
teaching of the alphabetic code.
Uh, so, uh, you've all heard
about the Mississippi miracle.
Mississippi miracle on the nape
scores, they always fought with
us for last. Well, we are now
thoroughly la, and Mississippi
is in the middle of the pack.
And how did they do that?
In 2014 they passed a law like
so uh in the past we've really,
uh, we've been doing that since
uh we passed Senate Bill 398.
This bill directs the colleges
of education.
Universities with the department
of the science of reading when
they're teaching teachers how to
teach reading.
Um, what they've done in other
states, it's what we've been
trying to move to in New Mexico
we're only teaching.
About 25% of our kids to read.
And the science around that says
about 5% of kids are learning to
read no matter what we do.
About 20% will learn to read no
matter what program you have as
long as you've got a good and
detailed program.
At least about 75% of the kids
who need structured literacy or
they won't really thoroughly
learn to read.
Structured literacy is developed
around mastering you have to do
in pre-K, then in kindergarten,
then in first, then in 2nd, and
if you have that kind of
seamless structured literacy.
Experience, then by 3rd, 4th,
and 5th grade, you're on track.
So we have about 75% of our kids
who are not on track.
And in large part because of the
way we've been teaching reading.
Uh, which is called balanced
literacy or whole language, it
doesn't focus on learning the
skills you need to read.
So this directs the colleges of
education.
To start teaching according to
this, uh, it requires two
reading courses, uh, to focus on
those 5 it um.
Requires alternative licensure
candidates to take those 6 hours
in their 1st 12 months of
teaching right now we give them
the first year without any
requirements. This uh requires
them to take at least 2 reading
courses in.
It requires high quality
instructural materials, and we
have over the last several
years, moved the funding for
instructural materials into the
stabilization guarantee.
So that districts have enough
funding and we've increased that
amount over the years.
So the only direction to the
school districts in this bill is
to ensure that they notify
parents uh twice a year about
reading progress, uh, and it
requires the PED to set up
templates to do that, so nobody
has to create their own
document.
So that's a really short overall
picture I'm gonna turn it to
Doctor Costello to uh mop up and
clean up after my comment.
Yeah,
yes, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, and I
doubt it will be a cleanup at
all, um, I just wanted to give
you um some additional
information that I think is
really important as you, um,
consider moving this bill
forward. Um, we have been
partnering the PED has been
partnering with HED and all of
all of the colleges um through
their association around
structured literacy. So this
bill, um, I, I wanna.
you will not be a surprise and
what's in it will not be a
surprise. There's an important
timeline you should know about,
um, in October of 23, a memo
went out from the public
education department requiring
that all EPPs must establish
signs of reading aligned
curricula.
They and we all of us have been
collaborating toward that goal,
but we're not there yet.
We have some of the colleges
that were, um, early
implementers and we have others
that will be coming on board,
they know it's coming and that
it's expected. This helps us to
codify that expectation, um,
with your support and with your
leadership. Um, and I, I will
say I've, uh, testifying at LESC
for the last probably 3 interim
sessions. I know it's been a
concern of the LESC.
Representatives in particular
that it felt like we were
working on the K-12 side for
training and teacher support and
we have been um
the LESC and some of you have
specifically asked us to
consider how we loop in the
whole pipeline and make sure
that the E preps are in
alignment. This answers that ask
that we have heard from you loud
and clear. Um, in December of
23, there was a letter
requesting assurance that they
were starting to move towards in
um January of 24, we developed
EPP pilots with those two early
implementers and we were able to
um
develop a curriculum that could
be used with the faculty so that
the faculty at the EPPs would
have training in January of 24,
we started to work with the Hunt
Institute, um, and, and other
national partners we have
consolidated and established and
collected information about
those needs, um, this January we
began an EPP literacy audit so
that we can actually be checking
to see what is happening in the
EPP programs regarding the
development.
of literacy for our teacher
candidates and then that brings
us to this bill, so I just
wanted to share that it's been
many months, um, of
collaborative conversation, um,
in, in, um to move our EPPs in
alignment with what we've been
doing in K-12
since.
we do have some technical
amendments. Um, I can go over
those now if you like.
Uh, senator, I, I think that
would be good so that we then
are working on, on what the bill
is rather than.
Having to work around that at
some point.
So if you'll lead us through
what those
We need to move an amendment
first.
242.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator
Zel for helping with the
technical parts here in the
committee. I appreciate it.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
on page 7.
Uh, strike the word student and
put preser pre-service teachers
that we're talking about, uh,
not necessarily on page 8.
Line 8.
Oh we strike, uh, work with
stakeholders too, because this
is the department's uh job to do
this paragraph, the stakeholders
come in at a later time.
On page 8 lines we we call, we
call these preparation programs
by tunings teacher preparation
programs and educator
preparation programs. The next
1234 amendments of strike
educator and put in lie there of
teacher and we're doing that
because that's what we have
currently in law, we call these
teacher preparationation
programs. And finally, um, so
that is, that's what we do on
page.
line 15 and 20 and on page 10.
Uh, line 12 and 25. It's
replacing and on page 13.
Line 8 after the word
reciprocity.
Page 1318 after reciprocity and
assert and alternative license.
Thank you and anyone need more
time on just catching up with
where those changes are.
Make sure everybody's got a
chance to do that. Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. President Stewart, there
might be a grammatical problem.
On your amendments on the 2nd
Amendment on page 8 line 8.
But I'm seeing on the amendment.
make sure that it's what I'm
putting down.
You are striking the word.
Excuse me, never mind, that's
not, I forgot to cross out work.
So now it makes sense. My
apologies, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, but that's
exactly why I kind of want to
pause at everybody's caught up
and able to update their drafts.
Anyone else? Very good?
OK.
Anything else on the amendment?
No, Mr. Chairman.
OK, um, out to the audience,
this is just technical amendment
and fixes. Anybody have
heartburn about?
Changing things from
Educator to teacher prep
programs or things of that sort.
I don't think this is overly
controversial if anybody wants
to speak, we'll let you, but
Thank you all for understanding.
I appreciate that. It's kind of
same there, um, committee on the
amendments and discussion about
the amendment.
I would like to make a motion to
accept to adopt the amendments.
I move that we adopt the
amendment for the amendment,
seconded by Senator Nava. Is
there any opposition to that
amendment.
Be no opposition, your bill is
amended.
Trying to remember to turn my
mic off when I hit the gavel so
I don't blast people.
Uh, back on the bill, Senator.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Up produced, I've had a number
of people come and talk that
there are a few areas where a
PED will need to write rules to
make sure this works. I'll just
give you one example.
And this is a complicated
example because it's, it's not
true in some areas, but it is
true in one area and that is
that we have deaf students.
Don't hear phons.
And where Phonics doesn't really
work.
Uh, except for one school that
the PED is working with on a
curriculum.
Uh, so their rules might be
looking like, you know, teachers
of deaf students, they truly
deaf and deaf students really
this doesn't work very well for
them. That's, that's one part,
but these type of issues are
always here in education, and
that's why we make rules to uh
make sure that we take care of
the exemptions that we need.
So, uh
We are ready for questions.
Thank you, Senator, and if I, I
might kind of add to a little
bit of what you said is it's
nice that we can make rule for
the minor exceptions where
clearly
Phonics for a deaf student is
ridiculous and, but you
shouldn't, we don't have to make
a whole law around that area
because, you know, I, I don't
think many people would argue
that there ought to be an
exception in rule for those
kinds of things. Um.
So we're out to the audience,
uh, Bill is rather it has some
large sweeping things, mostly
around teacher preparation
programs, a little bit around
what schools they need to do as
students are identified with
issues. Uh, first, to show our
hands, those in support of
Senate Bill 242.
Thank you. Those in opposition.
A few, um, we'll take those in
support first as well as some
that may that are online, uh,
and then we'll take those in
opposition. You have 2 minutes
to, to speak.
Good morning
I
I, I think I'm loud enough, but
I'll deafen everyone.
OK.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Maya Sandoval. I'm the mother
of two children with dyslexia,
and I'm honored to be here today
to share our family story and my
son Francisco's story. Francisco
is 17 years old.
A junior at New Mexico School
for the Arts and holds a 4.1
GPA. Next month, we'll begin
visiting his college prospects
and at the top of that list is
Stanford.
I say this today not to
celebrate where we are, but to
shed some light on where we've
been.
His journey has been filled with
challenge, heartbreak, fear, but
also resilience, learning and
triumph. Francisco was diagnosed
with profound dyslexia in 3rd
grade. After years of
struggling, years of being
bullied, falling behind, unable
to cite, recite the alphabet,
unable to write his name. Our
experience in the public schools
was nothing short of painful.
Teachers untrained in the
science of reading, wanted to
hold him back, a special
education teacher.
Someone who was supposed to help
him ridiculed and humiliated
him. My son, a bright and
curious child, had lost his
light, and then we found the
educators at the May Center who
were different. They were
trained in the science of
reading. They gave him his
confidence, his voice, and his
future, and they taught him how
to be an advocate and ultimately
to advocate for others. I
recognize how fortunate we were
to find them, but I also
recognize that so many children
are not so fortunate, and that's
why I'm here today.
Every child deserves teachers
who understand how the brain
learns. Every child deserves a
chance to succeed when we train
our educators in the science of
reading, we don't just train
kids to read. We save them. We
save their self-worth, their
potential, and their future.
Thank you guys.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dominica Chavis,
advocacy manager at New Mexico
Kids can. We strongly support
Senate Bill 242 and ask you to
vote yes. After significant
investments in structured
literacy training and the
success of the New Mexico Summer
reading program, Senate Bill 242
is the next step to advancing
the science of reading in our
state and building on existing
literacy policies. Currently
only 39.
% of New Mexico students are
reading at grade level, and NAEP
results show that more than half
of our 4th graders lack the
foundational skills needed to
achieve reading proficiency.
These numbers prove we must
continue strengthening literacy
instruction and ensure all
students have the resources they
need to succeed. Senate Bill 242
incorporates best practices that
have led to meaningful literacy
gains in states like Mississippi
and Louisiana.
Mississippi, which ranked
forty-ninth in 2013 rose to 20
seconds in 2022 and now stands
at 9th in the nation for 4th
grade reading. Similarly,
Louisiana climbed from 50th in
2019 to 2016th and 4th grade
reading and from 45th to 29th in
eighth grade reading. This is
New Mexico's opportunity to
follow the lead of these states
and ensure that our students
have access to high quality
literacy instruction. Please
vote yes on Senate Bill 242.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Caitlin
Trujo. I am a teacher at the May
Center. I teach 1st and 2nd
grade.
I earned my bachelor's degree
from New Mexico Highlands
University, and it was a great
program. I learned many
wonderful things. However, I was
not taught about the science of
reading. I was fortunate that
when I worked, started working
at the May Center, I received a
lot of information about the
science of reading, and I pretty
much earned another degree while
I was working there.
I also completed my master's
degree in curriculum and
instruction also at New Mexico
Highlands University. And again,
while it was a wonderful
program, and I learned so many
things. Very little was talked
about the science of reading and
structured literacy. While I was
doing my master's, I videoed
myself teaching in a structured
literacy format, and even my
master's level professors were
blown away by the techniques
that I was using. It was
challenging
to teach full time while taking
this college level course at the
same time. And while I'm so
grateful for my experience, my
educational experience.
Teacher preparation programs
should provide this since it's
the most fundamental thing that
we as teachers are asked to do.
If we want to improve the
education in New Mexico, we have
to have teacher preparation
programs that provide teachers
with the skills and tools that
they need to teach and be
successful. Thank you so much
for your attention and your,
your attention to this critical
issue.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Linnea Montoya,
Associate Director of government
relations at UNM on behalf of
our College of Education Dean,
we look forward to working with
the sponsor and our wonderful
partners at PED on this
initiative and urge you to vote
yes and support this bill. Thank
you.
Good morning, members of the
committee. Um, I'm Mandy Torres
with New Mexico. I think New
Mexico's stand in support of SB
242, and we think that many
people who have worked to get us
to a point where our new
teachers can feel fully prepared
to help all students learn to
read no matter their level or
struggle. When I think back to
my own teacher preparation in my
clinical practice that took
place in Brookline,
Massachusetts. I remember that
the master teacher whom I worked
with thought Lucy Caulkins hung
the moon, for those of you who
know who she is.
My mentor with more than 30
years in the classroom, using an
activity called Guest the
covered word every morning with
Fidelity as part of her morning
meeting. Um, as you can assume,
guessing, uh, when you're trying
to learn how to read is not the
best practice.
I was reminded of this kind of
queuing recently. When my 2nd
grade daughter was doing
research for a biography project
on Dolores Huerta. She tried to
read the city name Stockton and
said Scotland instead. She tried
to explain, well, it looks like
Scotland. My teacher voice came
out and I had to remind her that
guessing by sight is not how we
learn to read words. After
giving me that look like, why
does my mom always have to make
me do extra. She then started
over using the skills I knew.
teachers had taught her,
because, of course, they had all
completed letters training.
This bill will help ensure that
teachers will not have to use
personal days and weekends to
complete training that they
should have had before they were
handed a teaching license. One
concern we have, which we've
already voiced the Secretary
Padilla, is that the requirement
to notify parents is pretty
vague. We would like to see a
firm date of when parents have
to be notified, such as within
the first day, uh, 1st 40 days
or earlier. Some districts have
parent conferences as late as
November, and sometimes that is
the first contact parents have
with the teacher.
about their child's performance.
We are confident that this bill
moves us in the right direction
for helping our teachers feel
confident about their skills on
day one. It also helps to ensure
that our students will have the
high-quality literacy
instruction they deserve. And
luckily for my daughter, her
class does Hegarty in their
morning meeting, which is
explicit phonics instruction,
and I know her teachers won't
let her get away with guessing
at words either. Thank you.
Hello, I'm Francisco Sanball.
I'm a junior in New Mexico
School for the Arts. I can't
speak on the more technical
terms, but I can share my
experience.
Uh, growing up with dyslexia in
the public school system, at
least how it was set up.
Going through my time in school
was pretty terrible. Uh, I
wasn't given support by special
education teachers that they
were.
Pretty much legally bound to
provide me. So just hoping to
get out that.
People with my disability can
get the sport they need younger
because the younger you help
them, the more likely they are
to have success in their life.
Luckily I got mine caught pretty
early, so I got lucky there. But
having people that actually know
what they're doing does really
help. Going into the May center,
they did really help me.
When
They knew what I had and knew
what to do around me because
everyone's dyslexia experience
is different.
So it doesn't apply to.
one person, so that training
could help them understand the
array of dyslexics.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
I know we have some support.
Online
We could have Vanessa Hawker.
Out there, uh
Jesse Shenman.
You have 2 minutes.
Morning, everyone.
Uh, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. OK,
Senator So, thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak. My
name is Jesse Chenin. I'm the
associate Dean in the School of
Education at Central New Mexico
Community College. Um, I'm
joining online today CNM
supports the work of the state
PED and the efforts of Senator
Stewart to improve the
illiteracy outcomes of New
Mexico children. CNN's programs
have for over 6 years fully
adopted uh literacy curriculum
aligned to the science of
reading. And while we support SB
242, we were asking for
collaboration from the public ed
department and Senator Stewart
in addressing some
questions and concerns we have
with this legislation as
written. Uh, one concern is the
absence of inflammation,
implementation timelines, there
are, um, many, uh, different
components to this bill.
As those of you who have read it
know, and the lack of timelines
in terms of what comes first and
what comes second, um, is
concerning for um institutions
of higher ed, in terms of how it
works with our own internal term
uh timelines around, uh, catalog
and curriculum development and
implementing coursework and
program changes. Um, a second
concern that CNM has with regard
to this bill is that although
CNM does not use balanced
literacy or related content in
our programs, the bill's
decision
to ban it outright in statute
that's a concerning precedent,
um, across the country. Similar
legislation not having to do
with literacy, but uh having to
do with bands of what can be
taught in a higher education,
um, are restricting educational
content in ways that extend far
beyond their original intent.
Um, we're not aware of other
legislation in New Mexico that
bans content in higher
education, and, um, also
recognize that the PED does have
policy measures in place to
control, um, what gets
hot, um, but are, are concerned
about the use of, of an actual
ban on content, um,
The third thing is that, um, we
agree that 6 credit hours in the
teaching of literacy around uh
based in the science of reading
and structure, literacy is
great, um, and also the
alignment to the five critical
areas of, of the science of
reading, um, but would like more
opportunities to work with the
PED in terms of how they are,
um, developed. It's not clear
why exactly the decision was
made to put 3 of the components
in 1 course and two components
in the other. And then the third
part of the, sorry, the 4th
part
Is concerns regarding funding.
funding, um, uh, we're concerned
about this creating an unfunded
mandate, especially uh we
support the the addition of
literacy coordinators, um, but
it's not clear how that will be
funded or what the requirements
for those literacy coordinators
will be. Thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you. Uh, next, uh,
Elizabeth at least. Thank you,
everyone. Can you hear me?
Yes, please go ahead.
Good morning senators. My name
is Elizabeth Utley, and I serve
as senior director of teacher
education at San Juan College.
As a former alternative licenger
program participant, I know
firsthand how challenging it is
to step into a classroom without
sufficient preparation,
especially for teaching
literacy. That experience is why
San Juan College created a 3
year pathway to provide
candidates with structured
support, mentorship, and
classroom experience before
becoming a teacher of record
because of
this, San Juan College does
support Senate Bill 242,
particularly its commitment to
structured literacy, science of
reading competency and
accountability for educator
preparation programs. However,
we urge consideration of how the
bill's timelines and reliance on
the praxis exams may impact our
3 year pathway, which was
designed to increase teacher
diversity and retention in New
Mexico. Our residency-based
model currently serves
indigenous and Hispanic
candidates and
provides a full year of
co-teaching before candidates
become teacher of record. This
allows for gradual skill
development under experienced
educators, though in its first
year, this model is already
showing promise and aligns with
national best practices for
stronger student-teacher
participation. Additionally,
making the practice exam a
primary measure of competency
creates unnecessary barriers.
Research shows that standardized
tests like the Praxis do not
strongly predict and educate
' s ability to teach reading
effectively and often
disadvantaged indigenous and
Hispanic candidates. San Juan
College is committed to creating
pathways that set indigenous and
Hispanic educators up for
success. If we truly want to
improve literacy and teacher
retention, license your policies
must support, not create
barriers for diverse and well
prepared educators. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you. Uh, next of all
Westfall.
Good morning committee and Mr.
Chairman. I'm Deval Westfall,
executive vice president of
Policy and Programs for the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and I'm here to happily
testify in favor of a really
smart bill sponsored by a career
educator designed to address one
of the big proficiency problems
in New Mexico schools, and
that's reading.
It requires all current teachers
seeking licensure renewal to
complete coursework on the
science of reading, it
establishes additional
requirements for new teacher
candidates, and its foundation
is the letters program that was
part of the Mississippi Miracle
School turnaround, which is part
of training our PED has been
scaling up.
The Bills FIR lays out the
studies that support this
approach, and after Mississippi
adopted it, their 4th graders
made the largest score gains in
reading and math on the nape.
And 64% of their students
performed at or above the basic
level of proficiency, beating
the national average.
Once again, this bill gives our
teachers the training and the
tools they need. In this case,
to give the gift of literacy to
every student in their
classrooms, and we urge you to
give it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. And next, Alison
Riley.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, and we're standing in
proud support of Senate Bill
242 and thank the senator for
her important work on this bill.
New Mexico's literacy crisis is
not just an economic, it's not
just an education issue, but an
economic issue. A skilled
literate workforce is the
foundation of a strong economy,
and right now, too many students
are leaving school unprepared
for the demands of the job
market, when nearly half of a
4th and 8th graders.
are below basic reading levels,
we know we must act.
We appreciate that the bill
takes a research-driven
approach. Other states that have
adopted similar reforms like
Mississippi and Louisiana have
seen significant improvements in
student outcomes. Senate Bill
242 helps create a stronger
talent pipeline, boosting both
individual opportunity and
economic growth, and we urge
your support. Thank you.
Thank you. I think that is all
of the, the ones in support in
the room and online, uh, we'll
now go to those who are in
opposition. If you are in
opposition, would like to come
and say a few words if you'll
come down to the microphone,
please.
Mr. Chairman, stand rounds for
the school superintendents
coalition of Education leaders.
We're not standing in
opposition. We're standing
neutral.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank
the sponsor number one for
bringing a thoughtful piece of
work here to you in this
legislation.
I want to thank her for the time
we spent yesterday evening.
Going word by word, space by
space.
a full understanding of the
impact of this bill.
I've not had time, Mister
Chairman, since that.
To fully inform my
superintendents.
We are in favor of moving
reading forward in New Mexico.
We have supported the
legislation heretofore, that
Senator Stewart has brought
forward, so please don't
misunderstand.
It's simply a very critical
matter.
As we began to stack this in. We
need to be sure of the
implications it has at local
districts fully and completely
this chairman without her time
last night.
I would not be as prepared as I
am now to talk with my folks, so
thank you very much.
Thank you, stand.
Good morning, committee members.
My name is Loretta Trujillo and
I'm executive director of
Transform Education in Mexico.
I'm here to speak in strong
opposition to SB 242. I'm also
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
Association of Bilingual
Education.
Let's be clear, this bill is not
about improving literacy.
It's about pushing a narrow one
size fits all approach that
undermines decades of research
and ignores the lived
experiences of students in our
state.
It also overlooks the
hard-fought legal and
legislative progress made to
serve these students.
Let me remind committee members
that 6 years ago, Yay Martinez
versus the State of New Mexico
made it very clear. Our public
schools have systematically
underfunded and underserved
native students, English
learners, and those in bilingual
programs.
If passed SB 242 would undermine
the court's mandate, which
ordered the state to develop a
multilingual and multicultural
framework.
It also disregards the bilingual
multicultural Education Act, the
Indian Education Act, and the
Black Education Act, all of
which were designed to uphold
students' linguistic and
cultural rights.
Now let's talk about the people
this bill doesn't consider
students.
We listened, transform education
in Mexico launched the Freedom
Dreaming campaign.
An initiative that brought
together students across the
state to share what they need.
Schools that honor their
languages, their cultures, and
their unique learning styles.
Committee members SB 242
steamrolls, the multicultural
and culturally diverse students
in favor of a restrictive model
that doesn't work for bilingual
students.
To really improve literacy, fund
bilingual educators, invest in
curriculum that meet students
where they are and honor the
commitments already in statute
on behalf of our state's
multicultural and multilingual
students are coalition
respectfully asked this
committee to to vote no to SB
242. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, committee members.
Uh, my name is Susanna, Doctor
Susanna Barra Johnson and I
represent the bilingual
multicultural education advisory
Council regarding um uh how a
Senate Bill 242, uh, today our
BA stakeholders, which are
Spanish indigenous language, um,
bilingual educators trying to
make sense of biliteracy
education, and bilingual
education programs embedded in
structured literacy instruction
or context, I should say, with
increasing
dates for teachers to follow the
science of reading. Research is
needed to understand how
bilingual educators negotiate
monolingual English, or I should
say English views of literacy as
they strive to develop by
literacy. One of the BIA
advisements this year uh um
presented to Secretary Padilla
is to look at how do Spanish and
English language arts teachers
in bilingual education school
enact and make sense of their bi
literacy by or literacy,
instructional practices.
within a uh district promoting
monolingual understandings of of
sore based literacy instruction.
I present to you uh the research
of sore and by literacy is
different though. Uh, uh, uh,
just a white paper that came out
from Renaissance in 2025. 0,
titled by literacy trajectory
Supporting literacy Development
in two languages by scamia and
associates from University of
Colorado Boulder, uh, talk about
the development in each language
such as Spanish and English, and
the interaction with the two
languages as we are assessing
achievement and progress, and to
make a note, Senator Stewart
just talked about ASL.
American Sign Language which is
a different language, just as
Spanish is, just as indigenous
languages are, uh, clearly
Spanish is a very transparent
language versus English, a very
opaque language, so we have to
keep that in mind. Uh, one of
the things that we do recommend
as a BA we talk about delivery
of intervention or structural
literacy instruction should be
in accordance with the program
model, the student is currently
receiving and by literacy method
and so I respectfully decline
Sen a bill.
you
Mm
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Adrian Sandoval,
Center for the Education and
Study of diverse populations.
I'm here to express a specific
concern, um, when we look at the
bill, um, I noticed right away
that uh there's only two areas
where linguistic and cultural
responsiveness is mentioned. One
is in the definition of high
quality instructional materials,
and the other, I believe is on
page 2 specific to special
education.
Um, I would hope that when we
think about high quality
instructional materials is
really being on the forefront of
the rollout of SOR, the science
of reading that the very same
teacher education programs would
be supporting individuals to be
very well versed in culturally
and linguistic responsiveness
and sustaining principles and
practices. If we don't do that,
then we're creating a potential
gap in future educators and
their knowledge.
And their ability to apply those
specific skill sets when
teaching literacy. Thank you.
Anyone else in the room in
opposition. If not, uh, online,
I have one in opposition, uh.
James Burns?
You would, please. I understand
he is not on anymore in
opposition, so we
OK.
Not on this bill.
So with that, uh, senator, if
you'd like to make some comments
and then we'll go to questions
from the committee.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and I would also like a
Doctor Costels to respond. I'll
just have a few.
We're spending about $20 million
a year to retrain teachers, 20
million every year since 2019.
And when uh after these teachers
take this letters course that
letter stands for language
essentials for teachers of
reading and spelling.
They first say this is the best.
Professional development I've
ever had. I now I am going to
change my teaching practice, and
the second thing they say is I
didn't I learn this in college.
This bill is narrowly focused on
what's not happening in our
colleges of education.
Teachers are not learning to
teach reading. This requires
them to follow the science of
how kids learn to read. Now the
science of reading is in every
language.
It's not specific to English. We
have dyslexic students in every
language.
So this way to teach the
alphabetic code to everyone
works whether you're teaching
Spanish, it doesn't work with
sign language for very, uh, for
very good reasons, so.
Um
Uh, let me just say a few other
things, um, the idea about the
time of these colleges have been
in collaboration, you heard
Doctor Costel say about that,
they've also been given these
instructions for the last
several years. That's why we
didn't put a timeline in there,
but a specific timeline to the
CNN person saying we need to
know about things. That is all
worked out in rulemaking and
PED.
Does that will bring in
stakeholders, etc. so we can't
put every little tiny bit in the
spill, it's very focused on our
colleges of education and you
know the bilingual issue in
Spanish should be taught with
the science of reading. If we
use the science of reading in
that, as she said it's a very
transparent language, Kis would
learn to read that much faster
when you can read in one
language, whatever it is, it's.
Easier for you and in other
languages.
So I can turn to Jackie about
the what the PED is doing on
some of these issues.
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Senator. Uh, I, I do want to
talk about the bilingual
multicultural um education
pieces, uh, and I wanna be
really clear with the committee
this.
Uh, structured literacy.
Does not is not uh um in.
Difference
To multicultural education.
It's not even close. When we're
talking about structured li
literacy, we're talking about
reading in particular.
The language arts standards,
which New Mexico has in Spanish
and English, they encompass the
entire language arts, listening,
reading, speaking, writing.
Uh, and teachers, uh, use all of
the language arts in their
instruction to build those
multicultural.
Um, and, and linguistically
responsive.
Um, resources, um, classrooms,
etc.
So when we're talking about here
is specifically learning how to
read.
Now, um, the New Mexico public
education department, we have
put out guidance that clearly
shows how learning to read in
English and Spanish are
different from each other. One
is transparent, one is opaque,
one focuses on syllables, one
focuses on sounds in particular,
how, how the brain.
Learned to
Read and um decode and encode,
which is writing.
Um, language happens the same
for every single human being.
OK, so we are talking
specifically about when they're
teaching reading, but when
they're teaching writing and
speaking and literacy and um
language and oral language
development.
The other language arts
standards support the
multiculturalism that we all
cherish in New Mexico for both
uh Spanish, indigenous or
whatever other language it might
be, and I also wanna say that um
in our coordination with the
Albuquerque Sign Language
Academy, they are actually one
of our literacy support schools,
we work with a coach there, and
that coach is working hand in
hand to really work on the
writing pieces because again,
how the brain learns.
To read and write happens the
same for everyone. And so going
back to what the senator said,
we can address the needs of
students and collaboration with
those educators that are closest
to them.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, kind of along
those lines, just want to put in
a little, not sure, a plug, um
learning to to speak and
understand language is very um
We've, we've had millions of
years of evolution that have
taught that. Reading and writing
are artificial. They have to be
taught specifically, unlike
speaking and listening.
Uh, we're now questions from the
committee.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chair, um,
senator, thank you for bringing
this bill in front of us. I, I
really value your, your skills
because of all the experience
you've always had and, and
again, this is a a tough deal
that uh I think uh I think it's
a good deal that's gonna really
help out. But I do have some
questions. What's gonna happen
with the schools that are
already using phonics and
decoding for
teaching reading.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, so this.
This is not focused on schools
or teachers. This is solely
focused on higher ed, on the
colleges of education.
But we're celebrating those
schools that are using the
science of reading. We have
model schools, um, I have 2 in
my district, we, we have model
schools all over the state that
get more funding to try to learn
how to uh so uh we're we're
celebrating those schools.
Um, Mr. Chair, also, what, uh
Will schools receive additional
funding for retraining teachers.
And acquired uh compliance.
Instructional materials.
So, Mister Chairman, we went
through our letters program that
we've been using like grades
since 2019, but we are going to
be continuing that training, uh,
we've now trained K through 5,
but there's always new teachers
every year and there's there's
teachers that didn't uh didn't
get to training.
Really need to train every
special education teacher in
this state on these methods, uh,
so, um, we're already putting 20
million a year into that
training, uh, so that's what
we're doing as a state to try to
retrain teachers so that they
can understand the science of
reading, so we can teach
everyone this really focuses on
having our colleges of
education, teach the science of
reading instead of.
of the what they're doing now,
which is not really focusing on
the directed at the colleges of
education.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, how much
time do schools or will they
have to transition to structured
literacy.
Before penalties or
non-compliance begins.
There's and Mr. Chairman, that
we've been doing this now for a
number of years, they have to
transition. There aren't
penalties. There's only help.
You know, if your school is not
doing well, you get put on a a a
a reme remediation plans to help
you do better, um, we have
several different levels of
that, uh, once you move out of
those designations, then you get
less help, but by then you've
already implemented so, um,
remember this isn't about
individual schools so some
people are thinking
but it's not, it's really to try
to get to that source.
of where teachers learn, which
is when they're trying to become
a teacher.
And um
Mr. Chair, Senator, what um what
tools are gonna be used by PED.
To major, major.
Success or
Not or
Success in our, in our schools.
Um, so success in our K-12
schools is already being
mentored by our New Mexico, um,
summative assessment, the, um,
MMSA, um, and also we use um our
interim assessments, schools
use, um, uh, whatever they've
chosen based on their curriculum
as well, so those same measures
will continue in K-12 for higher
ed, the measure will come when
we are working with them to
establish if their program has.
um met the requirements for um
changing things like their
syllable syllabi, um, they might
have to change some course
taking patterns, um, and reorder
the courses, um, and so we, we
will continue to work with the
deans and directors on, on that,
um, and those would be how we
would measure whether or not the
higher ed um colleges of, of
education have begun to
implement.
OK. And Mr. Chair, um, senator.
Will smaller districts like mine
in my district received funding
or resources to higher literacy
coordinators.
And specialists in this in this
area.
So the
Coordinators that are listed in
this bill are actually not
related to the districts,
they're related to the higher ed
institutions, but in the
districts, um, that we have um
since Senate Bill 398 and 2019,
we have developed what we call
literacy support schools and
model schools, and those, uh,
any school in New Mexico, any
district can apply for their
school to be in that program,
uh, and then they get coaching,
they get a small dollar amount.
They get um thought partnership
collaboration, etc. So any
school is eligible to apply for
that each year.
Thank you very much.
Senator. Thank you, Senator.
Other questions?
There
Mr. Chair
Senator, thank you for bringing
this bill forward. I actually
I'm glad to see that we're
finally getting serious about
making changes uh for our
students here in New Mexico.
I met with some folks yesterday
and I
I said I'm new to the education
committee, new to the Senate,
and I'm, I, I, 4 years from now,
I don't want to be hearing that
we're 50th in the nation.
So I'm, I'm really interested in
making seeing these kinds of
improvements.
I just had a couple of questions
with regards to
Uh, some of the issues that were
brought up by this and uh you
already mentioned that the
absence of implementation
timelines we're gonna be done by
rulemaking.
So I'll, I'll accept that, but I
would like to see some timelines
with regards to the
implementation just because I
think it's necessary that we
move forward.
this, and we move forward as
quickly as possible.
Um
He also, he also mentioned that
there were some bands and what
can be taught at uh higher
education institutions.
And I'm, I'm assuming you're,
you're trying to make the
science of, of reading.
The, the standard.
And so you want to eliminate any
other way of teaching, the way
we read for.
I personally have no problem
with that. But um,
Maybe calling it a band is
severe, but I
How can we enforce this, uh, if,
if we're having some pushback
from our higher.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, so I
literacy is not a content.
You know, he says that we're
keeping uh the.
The uh higher ed from teaching
certain content.
It's, it's a method.
We're talking about teaching
methods, Science of reading is a
teaching method based on decades
of research on how everyone
learns to read.
Um, and I'll I'll turn to uh
Jackie for a few more.
you, um, the methodology, the
science of how human beings
learn to read. So the banning
again is not on any content. You
can teach students to read with
any content.
As long as you have the
methodology behind it.
And uh and an understanding of
how the brain learns to read.
So I just want to be really
clear, we're not and uh I agree
with the speaker, we're not
trying to ban condom. It's we
want.
Methodology that's based on the
science of reading.
Very good if I can answer a
little bit more on the timeline.
So the colleges have been under
a directive by the public
education department for several
years to actually do this, so
they've already supposed to be
doing it and you heard from CNN
that that's exactly what they're
doing.
Um, so, so this is not new. It's
nothing new, uh, essentially.
What we're being told by some of
the higher ups and higher ed is
that.
Well, you'd better put it in
statue.
As some of us are just not doing
it.
No matter what work you've done.
We've been working on this for
you. I'm with you, I don't want
4 years to pass, and we're still
50th, but we're really solidly
50th now. I will tell you that,
uh.
Not this year, but last year,
our Native American students
increased their reading
proficiency by 5%.
Um, the rest of the state uh
elementary increased by 4%.
The Navajo Nation Council was in
my office yesterday in
preparation for today, and they
remarked about the increase in
their native student uh reading
proficiency, and they are
totally on board with this and
we're thanking me for all the
work that I've done on this, so
there are improvements that we
can point to, it's not enough.
Uh, really needs to start at the
college level, we're we're tired
of having to retrain teachers
with this, it's, it's not fair
to our students. This is a human
rights issue in my mind.
Uh, and the Yasi Martinez, the
600 pages of data were almost
all based on the park test
scores, which tests reading and
math and science. So yes, the
multicultural aspect has been
incredible for us to expand what
we're doing to ensure that
teachers are looking at those
watching reading is very
specific, and you do it? If you
do it right, anyone can learn to
read, and I am focused on those
75.
uh percent of our kids and they
are the Yasi Martinez kids.
They're not learning to read,
and this will help.
Sorry,
got on my soapbox.
Thank you. You you prevented me
from getting on the soapbox, so
I appreciate that.
Uh, just one other question with
regards to um
So you have requirements for the
teachers who are going through
the teacher prep.
Are there requirements?
For the
Uh, I guess it's called your
literacy coordinators, are the
requirements for them to be able
to teach the teachers
at higher ed is to help higher
ed do it right.
So are the professors teaching
what's their syllabi look like?
Are they teaching the science of
reading, are they teaching those
five components, um, our
teachers struggling with that
are the systems aligned at the
higher ed institution. Um, so.
That that's where those literacy
coordinators are is that the
higher ed is that the deans and
directors of our College of
Education, um, have been very
clear that this isn't needed.
Mr. Chair, that answers my
questions. Uh, thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, kind of
fun watching the uh translation
up there calling it the the fire
ed department. So
If you heard a little chuckling,
it's cause it uh translated that
as fire ed is gonna be working
on this, so, um.
Senator Figueroa
Thank you, Mr. Chair, let's get
those fire ed teachers trained.
Um, I really appreciate Mr.
Chair and sponsor this bill's
focus, it is crucial to making
any substantial and long lasting
change for our students.
Um, so I'm gonna go through it
page by page with my questions,
um, and I, I, well, not quite in
order.
This is very focused on higher
ed.
Um, and a teacher training with
the exception of page 11. I'm
gonna go there because that does
affect school districts and
what's happening in schools.
Um, regular K-12 schools.
Um, and I will ask the broad
question, Mr. Chair, um, other
than at the top of page 11.
Educator preparation programs
are gonna ensure that our
candidates are trained to
that's the teacher training
part.
Um, but then,
Additionally, school districts
and charter schools are gonna do
number 12, and so on down the
line, and I just wondered, Mr.
Chair and sponsor, why you
included, um, all of that in
this.
Mr. Chairman, I'll, I'll take a
step at that and I'll turn over
to Jackie, so, um, this is still
part of what has to happen in
the educator program.
Uh, they still need to know how
they notify parents and the PED
is going to create this
template. If you look on page
12, a lines 6 through 8. The
department is going to design
and provide parent notification
templates. And right now we
have.
teller told a story at a movie I
was at 2 weeks ago called Right
to Read.
Um
That he was tested in 2nd grade,
uh, to be dyslexic, and his
parents didn't tell him, so he
didn't really know he was
dyslexic till he was in his
early twenties.
So, you know.
I, I, I've been in here a long
time.
Uh, 20 years ago, we didn't want
to say the word dyslexic. We
still don't want to talk about
it.
Um, because
Really structured literacy is
the anxia.
Uh, so now that we're working on
structured literacy, we started
to talk about it more, um, but
we have to let parents know.
Uh, early on, and that's what
this is, um, and you know, I
mean, we already do this through
reporting report cards, they did
ask about the timelines that
again can be child that's not
reading on grade level, you need
to be given things to do at
home, that's in here and you
need to be, you need to know
what kind of interventions are
happening and that's in here, so
it's a little bit more uh uh.
It's a little bit more expansive
because it's it really lacking
now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, sponsor, this, this is an
outline of what we are expecting
to happen.
At schools.
Um, and teachers do need to be
trained how to do it, but
schools also need to implement
it. I'm gonna be a little
nitpicky on page 11 line 11.
The dyslexia screener has been
administered and then they have
15 days to notify of any reading
difficulty, and I guess my
question is, does the dyslexia
screener.
Identify any reading difficulty
or does it identify dyslexia.
Mr. Chair and Senator, that is
an incredibly important
question.
A dyslexia screener is not
diagnostic.
So we are not trying to and
teachers aren't qualified to
diagnose dyslexia, a student who
has dyslexia will go through it
through a thorough diagnostic
process.
What the dyslexia screener is
designed to do is to
specifically identify
difficulties that any student
might be having and gives the
teacher a guide on what to focus
on in that instruction. And so,
um, this, uh, the hope.
And the intent is that with that
focused instruction based on
what that screener said at that
early age, the parent knows, the
teacher knows the student knows
what they're working on and we
can eliminate students who may
have in the past been um gone
through diagnostic testing for
special education, something
like dyslexia.
When they didn't need it, what
they needed was instruction when
they were having difficulty.
So that's, that's the
difference, and I really
appreciate the question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for clarifying because that
is crucial.
All right, now I'm gonna go back
to kind of chronological order
and look at page 3.
Um
There is a difference on page 3.
Section 3, Part A.
A licensed teacher for in all of
these categories.
And it is different.
And the definition on page 13,
page 18, page 19.
And I didn't know if it was
intentionally different or if a
couple words just got left out.
And the words that are
different, if you look at page
13.
Um
Page 13, line 13.
If we're talking.
Secondary licenses.
In language arts and doors,
that's specific.
And that that clarification is
also on page 18, it's also on
page 19, and I wondered if it
needed is the intent here for
the secondary teachers.
To set these requirements if
they're getting a language arts
endorsement.
Because I, I wasn't sure if you
were intending for a high school
math teacher or science teacher
to.
At all these and
the hope is that every licensed
teacher.
Understands how human beings
learn to read and have
coursework in that.
Um, and that, that's a
fundamental shift, but I will
tell you without being able to
read.
An 11th grader who's struggling
is not gonna access any of the
content.
And so every teacher needs to
understand and then be able to
use the multi-layer system of
supports to get that student
what they need to learn how to
read so it doesn't block them
from all their learning.
So yes.
OK.
Mr. Chair and um sponsor, then I
think you just have to put the
consistency in in all of these
places to target what you're
really after, and I'm gonna
suggest that 100 hours.
of field experience.
In the secondary level.
For a secondary teacher doing
their student teaching.
Supervised teaching.
In their specialty area.
It's gonna be really hard to add
100 hours to that, even if you
say 50 hours or planning and 50
hours are teaching, that's 10
weeks of teaching structured
literacy.
When you were trying to get a
license in.
Um
OK.
Biology, you know, secondary
science or any secondary PE,
physical education. I 100% agree
with you that from PE to what to
science, to history, to even our
math classes and our CTE
classes, literacy is essential
in all of them for exactly the
reason, Mr. Chair, you said, if
they don't have literacy, they
aren't picking up any of the
knowledge from reading that is
necessary.
I just
I'm not sure.
that this is logistically
possible as written.
Um, and I'm throwing that
question out.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for that. um, I am.
Trying to follow all the chain
uh where there the differences
are, but I, I'm gonna just speak
broadly, the licensure or the um
grade bands that are listed here
correspond to licensure levels,
language arts endorsement is not
a license, it's an endorsement.
So they have expertise in that
area.
Um, what we will do is, as the
senator has said, is there will
be a clarify the differences
there. I, I suspect that they're
different in the different
places because we're trying not
to um put the um
The onus on ours, but we are
trying to say and we, we have
said that there will need to be
um some changes to licensure
rule to get this all aligned in
the right way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Senator, also the
100 hours is not new, that's
already a requirement, I almost
forgot to say that, that already
exists.
The 100 hours in structured
literacy.
The 10.
Mister Chair, the 100 hours in
clinical supervision.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Tarrant
specialist, well aware, um, I
just didn't know if this was
gonna be added on top, which
should make it a couple 100
hours and that's hard to pull
off.
Um
And
I will skip, sorry, Mr. Chair,
the, the funding question for
the.
Um, literacy coaches, literacy
coordinators that the higher
education institutions need.
I'm really glad that it's in
there because that's an area of
specialty where they are gonna
need support.
To do this fundamental shift in
how they train teachers.
Um
My question, I think is.
The funding, sufficient funding
shall be provided.
Um, is that
Specification in statute saying
the legislature is going to
fund.
Add this funding into what we
give to HED.
Or to the institutions by
formula or are we just saying
the institutions are now
statutorily required to fund.
Well, Mr. Chairman, Senator.
The institutions have been
required to do doing it.
So, that's the need to have
someone in charge of this at the
ins.
It's not needed right now.
So this could be later and that
will be part of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you sponsor.
Um, those are the core of my
questions, I think.
Um
When you look at page.
Well, we'll leave it at that. I
really appreciate the work
potential.
I am gonna because I read it.
6 times and I still don't see
it.
What is the difference?
Between section 5 on page 18.
Except section 6 on page 19
section 5.
is within the 1st 12 months.
It's like, what is the
difference in these two sections
where they have different
target.
Teacher candidates.
What's, what's the requirement
here?
Mr. Chair and Senator, great
question. One has to do with the
number of hours, the total
number of hours is 12.
The difference is that um for
alternative license teachers.
The 6 hours in reading needs to
happen within their first year.
Of being the teacher of record,
if you will, rather than having
the whole two years because then
we've got 2 years of students
that had an unchatter of moving
that up in the course taking.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsor for the
clarification. It might.
Well, double check that it goes
where you intend it to go and
that is the extent of my
questions, thank you for your
patience, Mr. Chair and sponsor.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Novi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Stewart, for bringing
this bill forward and I'd also
like to thank everyone who's
here with us, um, standing to
give your feedback as well, and
I'd like to simply say that as
an English language learner,
going through the APS uh system,
uh, learning to speak English at
Mission Avenue.
I can attest that.
My oral language abilities in
Spanish, which is my first
language.
Played a critical foundation in
my literacy instruction.
And I hear the concerns of folks
and I respect it very, very much
because I
I fully believe that cultural
competence is very important
across the board.
And especially when we talk
about instructional programs.
Teachers hold so much power and
I am incredibly passionate for
their commitment to students and
the well-being and the growth of
our of our state and our
communities, um, and I would
like to certainly ensure
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Stewart, that linguistic and
cultural responsiveness is
acknowledged, um, and I think as
I'm as um understanding the
cohesive, uh.
Essentially the
The overall structure by which
this is presented, I think I
understand, uh, the primary
focus, but I know that cultural
competence is important to our
state. It's important to our
diverse communities and as an
English language learner, it's
critical, and I know it matters.
I know it matters how they teach
us. I know what they tell us
plays a critical role in
understanding or not
understanding, and I just wanted
to uplift that and um ask one
question, uh, in regards to
I'm wondering if there's parity
in English and Spanish, um, high
quality instructional materials
for bilingual classrooms to
better understand.
um, by parody, I think you mean
when books, uh, materials are
being selected. Are we, um,
using the same high standards,
uh, regardless of the language
of the book, the answer
regarding high quality
instruction materials is
absolutely.
So there are high quality
instruction materials, um, that
we review and identify as such,
um, and we do that, um, with
level 2 and level 3 teachers
from across the state. So they
are there to talk and lift the
voices of um any culture of
student, any language of
student. But yes, that is
accounted for when we're
reviewing for high quality
instruction materials.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
President Stewart and your
expert witness.
This is an evolving bill that
you do have here, I'm sure that
there will be some changes made
to it and everything.
Uh, I appreciate the passion
that you have for getting this
done. We do have to help our
children, and I think this is.
One way of getting that rolling
right, and I noticed that this
is directed to higher ed, but
when will it be fully
implemented, Mr. Chairman, and
Well, Mr. Chairman, there's
always a rules process that PED
goes through, um, you know, I
used to really hate that
process, you know, I'd passed a
3 page bill and there'd be 25
pages of rules.
But uh
But I learned to accept those
rules because they work out some
of these details that we're
talking about now. Um, I, I
believe the public education
department is very responsive to
that, they have lots of
stakeholder meetings they hear
from people.
Now
We, we didn't put a timeline on
this, which means it's going to
go into effect if it passes 90
days after the session ends,
but.
Uh, remember that the higher ed
is under these directives and
have been under these directives
already for several years. We
really, really mean it. We
really, really, really mean it,
and we're gonna put it in
statute so that you have a chair
and senator, I also appreciate
your, um your question very much
because I, I would equate this
to graduation requirements for
high school students, when the
graduation requirements change
for high school students.
they apply to the incoming
freshman and we don't change
them on the seniors, juniors,
and sophomores
they apply to the incoming
freshman and we don't change
them on the seniors, juniors,
and sophomores
in the making, this would be the
same strategy we take here.
So we don't want to pull the rug
out from under candidates that
are already in process.
So that we, we have talked with
many stakeholders about when and
how this would go into effect,
but the rule would reflect a a
similar pattern.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, I do
understand what y'all are saying
right here because you have to
have a starting point and you
can't start with these people
that have already completed so
much and then hey, here we go
folks we've just thrown you
everything out the window and
we're starting over. You can't
do that to a person.
Mr. Chairman, I had to laugh
whenever I was
treating the FIR and I hope you
all have read the FIR two page 2
of
It would be page 4.
of the empire under significant
issues.
I was taught phonics, OK, that's
how I learned to read.
But I had to laugh on their 2nd
paragraph.
This made me feel ancient, it
said in the last century.
And I'm like, oh my gosh.
I, I don't.
so I can really relate, uh,
sometimes when I, uh
to people about uh
And I pass and what I've done, I
said, so were you born then?
Exactly right.
Oh yeah, I was 4 years old.
Well, I did have to.
giggle about that because oh my
gosh.
I guess I start need to start
having to keep her, huh? Uh, I
did notice, Mr. Chairman and
President Stewart, that there's
no appropriation with this bill
until we hit.
Uh, 26.
So
Because it, if it passes, it'll
go into effect 90 days after the
signing of it.
Is this, has this been uh
Discussed with high red.
chair and senator. Um, this is
related sort of to the last
question where we will make sure
that our rule that we start to
uh put rules into place.
consideration the timelines that
will be necessary.
Uh, just as we discussed in the
previous question. OK, thank you
very much for that response and
I might indicate secretary of
higher ed is in the back and
when you ask that, I saw her
nodding if I can, can read your
uh sign language.
I, I'd like to see what higher
rate is uh for.
posing here to implement this.
Then
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
the higher educationpar or I'm
sorry, I was just in the house,
and I ran over here. I had 3
bills in the house today.
They're running me ragged, Mr.
Chair, senator.
Um, yes, the higher education
department has been working very
closely with the secretary
designate, the deputy secretary,
and Jackie here on this
legislation as far as
implementation, public
post-secondary educator
preparation programs actually
fall under the jurisdiction of
the public education department.
So the timeline and roll out
will be determined on them with
support of the higher education
department every step of the
way.
Thank you very much for that
response.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman.
Stewart. I'm kind of skipping
around cause I don't, some of my
questions have already been
answered, so I'm starting to
skip around now.
Right now, can you tell me the
percentile of 3rd grade students
that are proficient in reading,
does anybody have that
information?
And I'm looking over here at
these young people that were
born during this century.
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator for 4th grade it's 38%.
I'm sorry, 38% for our fourth
graders
are. It breaks my heart.
That really so which leads me to
my next question, the success
that's happened in Mississippi,
how many years did it take for
the implement implementation.
Of the science of reading to get
them up to where they are today,
because I know that used to, we
would say thank God for
Mississippi.
Mr. Chairman, uh, it took him a
decade. They passed the bill in
2014, um.
I
See, you know, the
It was really driven by parents
of students with this lexia and
parents, um, it's, it's been a
decade and now they're in the
middle of the pack. It's really
kind of.
Amazing to see it work, and
they're not the only state.
that
is
Carolina, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Delaware, Utah.
Um, we've been trying to move to
this method of teaching but.
We really need it in New Mexico.
That soapbox again. I keep
getting Mr. Chairman Senator
Stewart.
I totally agree with you. This
is a disservice to our goal
with.
You say
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
President.
S.
To be a template sent out twice
a year to the parents.
kind of describe what this
template will say. Is it going
to be mandatory that the parents
come to school and discuss this
with the teachers and if not,
why not?
If parents aren't involved in
their kids' education and the
ability to be able to be.
Reading
for the success of their child
later in life.
We're lost again, folks, we, we
are right now.
Uh, well, Mr. Chairman, I'll,
I'll, I'll take a step at it
first, so this is on page bottom
of page 10, page 11, um, so this
is why we've gone into the
detail here is that we're just
not notifying parents, but
that's twice a year.
Uh, it's the first grader comes
out as possibly having uh
symptoms of dyslexia, that has
to be 15 days after the
screenings, um, so then, uh,
identify you notify the parent,
you describe the services that
are provided, so I tell the
parents what we're doing about
it.
Um, it'll be structured
literacy, perhaps more tutoring
small groups, etc. and then um
and also telling the parents
what they can do at home.
Uh, to help their.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate what
you've just told me.
But some of these parents.
They're leaving it up to the
school to get their kids
educated and they don't want any
involvement in it. They, they
don't even take the time to go
up there more often than not
whenever schools do have an open
house. Me, that's very sad. It's
a disservice to the teacher on
what that teacher is trying to
provide to their child.
It's a disservice to that child.
Because they're more or less
left on their own to.
I have this teacher and that's
gonna be my.
A source of what I'm going to be
able to learn with no parental
intervention.
And
I will say this again.
When I was growing up.
I was the minority.
But
All parents were required the
first day of school to come to
school if there was anything
going on at school, those
parents were
Not mandated but strongly.
Strongly urged to show up for
any activity that was going on
because these would be students
that were English as a second
language.
And it, it's proven, it's been
proven that parental involvement
in the child's life.
is a key factor on making them
successful.
I hope this works. I really,
really do.
Uh, let's see, where am I at?
So Mister Chairman Senator, I'll
also say that.
You know, we still do parent
teacher conferences at the
elementary level.
So that is a time when parents
usually show up and we're also
doing home visits. I mean this
depends on the district, depends
on on um.
You know, schools, it's hard to
do home visiting. Um, but we we
still have, and we also still do
report cards, so we still try to
get parents involved. I, I was
on the community council for a
school right by in my
neighborhood and we had an open
house, we had 500 people showed
up because we had food.
I stood there for 2 hours
dipping out posole and bowls,
uh, so, uh, where it's an
effort, it's an effort that
teachers and principals that we
all try to work on some with
better success than others.
Mr. Chairman and and President
Stewart.
If we could mandate the parents
have to get involved, wouldn't
that be wonderful, but we can.
Like we can't mandate rain.
Uh, I guess my next question
would be this, does this uh
support the requirements of the
Yazi Martinez lawsuit.
In every way, shape, and form.
So Mister Chairman, that's just
a hard question to answer. I
will tell you that the students
that we are not reaching.
In reading
Are the Yay Martinez plaintiffs.
But it, it's kids from poverty.
But aren't read to enough so
they don't listen, they don't
hear those sounds, uh,
disability.
Uh, especially kids with
dyslexia.
Um, second language learners
are, are kind of in a different
group because, you know, often
they will learn to read in their
own language, and then it's
easier for them to learn in
English, uh, so we have good
bilingual programs everywhere.
In this state we're gonna
improve some of that.
Excuse me for my our changes in
the SCG that you'll hear about
later.
OK, I'm sorry, go ahead, Mr.
Chair and Senator, apologize,
um, I.
I wanna just
Make a mention that when we're
talking about, um, our Yasi
Martinez.
Student groups, we're talking
about like over 70% of all
students in New Mexico, because
those students that were
specifically identified are very
broad in our state.
So fall into one or many of
those categories and 38% of our
fourth graders are reading, um,
at proficient in my mind,
everything that we do needs to
be done to assure.
That we're giving them, um,
equal access to all parts of
their education and most in part
and in particular to learning to
read.
So yes, this is aimed at that.
OK. Thank you for that response.
Mr. Chairman, um.
I just want to point out, I want
this to be successful. I want
our kids to be successful. I
want this.
Implemented as fast as possible.
I'm directing that towards
higher ed.
I think that.
I, I
I do not like, I don't not like
to lose in anything.
And these kids are.
We're all responsible for this.
And it's unconscionable that
we're still there.
And
Being a person from the last
century.
I'm still having a hard time
getting over that, OK?
I know it's gonna be ever
evolving.
You know what?
We've got to give it a shot if
Mississippi can do it, we dang
sure can do it and we can beat
Mississippi.
get started.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, uh, being
someone who's from around the
middle of the last century
Excuse me.
Um
Some, uh, I don't really have
any questions. I appreciate the
long-term work on doing all of
this, um.
I think it's important that we
move forward. Uh, we know what
to do, we know how to do it.
We've got all get on board and
start doing it this absolutely
is an equity issue, being able
to read matters on your future
employment. So if you want to
look at it from an economics,
uh, it, it just adds in so many
ways and very much appreciated
uh with that and will of the
committee, please.
I
I move for a dude.
You pass as amended.
And seconded, uh, and, and
Senator, uh, you can make a
comment to explain your vote if
that will help.
Out and so if you'll call the
roll, please.
Yes.
Yes.
So Senator, you have a do pass
out of education. Would you like
to explain your vote, Senator
Nava?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, Senator Stewart.
One last point that I wanted to
note is I've heard from
educators in my district, um, in
terms of again, looking at the
bilingual aspect of this, and
the quantity of instructional
materials in Spanish and the
lack of, um, so I would like to
just ensure that we have equity
in those materials, and also
would like to just acknowledge
the notion of parental
involvement, because as somebody
with parents working
construction and cleaning
houses.
Not all of our parents have the
ability to sit in those teacher
conferences, they don't have the
lang they have language
barriers, so I just want to give
a big shout out, Mr. Chairman,
to those parents who try their
best to be involved, to be
engaged. We are all at different
parameters of life, and I think
any way that we can help and
support our communities matters.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Sherwin. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator. Uh, for those watching,
we have a hard stop within about
7 or 8 minutes. Uh, the next
bill, I think will be really.
Quick and easy, uh, we should be
able to get to a vote within
that time, uh, so, uh, we're
gonna have a Senate Bill 235
coming up.
Uh, which, uh, does essentially
the same thing but talks about
math. I hope everyone heard my
facetiousness in that.
And first, everybody's leaving
on reading. How come there's no
love for math.
For those online and in the
room, we are now on uh Senate
bill 235 school math changes.
And Senator Souls, you can go
ahead and begin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
though I was somewhat joking, it
is concerning that the room is
clearing out when we start
talking about math. Uh, math
achievement actually was lower
on the Martinez Yazi lawsuit
than was reading, uh, and has
the same kinds of difficulties
about how it's taught, but I
think some of the problem also
is that as a society, everybody
thinks reading matters, but it's
almost a joke to be not good at
math. We
regularly hear from lawyers in
the legislature about they went
into law because they weren't
good at math and everybody
chuckles along.
I find that very difficult to
take because math and math
ability math achievement,
absolutely is linked to economic
growth and prosperity, and the
ability to get good jobs.
This bill 235 and we do not have
time to, you know, flesh it all
out or anything today, but just
wanted to do a little bit of the
introduction on this bill.
But essentially does the same
things that we have been doing
in the reading area and I've
sort of sat back on the LESC for
many years as we pushed the
reading, but always nudge, what
about math?
We need to have the same focus
and attention on math skills.
The time has now come, we need
to start that. This bill is
ambitious. Uh, it's trying to
catch up on what we've done in
reading in a much quicker way
than as Senator Stewart talks
about 20 years of trying to get
direct reading instruction, and
this is trying to move math in a
much quicker way. The bill has
lots of moving parts. It has
lots of things that are
complicated, but we've got to
get after doing that.
This bill is probably not ready,
I, I shouldn't say probably not.
This bill is not ready today.
Uh, and so I am requesting that
of the chair, Bill, uh, that we
roll this over to Wednesday and
would very much like both
members of the minority within
this.
Committee and the majority,
please read through it and if
you have concerns or questions
and particularly with ways to
make it better, please let me
know, please let my, uh, my
analysts know, please let PE
LES, we have all been working on
this, trying to get something
that we start elevating the math
concerns to the same levels that
we've had with the reading
concerns.
It matters to our kids.
I always find it interesting if
you ask the elementary kids,
3rd, 4th graders, lots of,
what's your favorite subject
after PE or after recess, um,
but lots of them say math.
And I always tease them, it's
like, you know, math and money
both start with them. There's a
reason for that.
Uh, and trying to encourage them
to continue to excel and to like
mathematics because of the
economic prosperity and when we
lessen the teaching of math, we
reduce their economics for the
rest of their life, you know,
and so this really matters, um,
from the very start today, I was
not, I was gonna request that we
roll this bill over even if we
had time for a full discussion
because we've got to get it
right. We don't have the amount
of time that it over the last 2.
years that we spent on reading.
We've got to get this right, and
I don't want to be in a rush to
pass bad legislation that
doesn't do what we need to do.
We've got hard dedicated people
working in the public ed
department in the math arena to
make sure that our kids get the
math advantage. We've got people
in LESC and others.
Uh, when I used to teach math,
one of the comments I'd
regularly make to my students,
if you're not good in math,
society puts a tax on you.
There's a math tax.
You have to pay someone to do
your taxes.
You're more likely to get
swindled and cheated by people
who are good at math. You're
more likely to get into a uh
Financial deal on a car that you
don't understand and you're
paying a higher, higher interest
rate because you're not good at
math.
We need to make sure that we're
taking care of our kids in the
math arena. Um, and so, again,
we've worked on a substitute.
And it's probably not ready, so
I would please encourage you,
the analysis that may have
already been done for you. Start
with those, look through the
bill, you know, let's work
together on making sure we've
got something good in the math
arena. Our kids are counting on
us, um, be open for just some
questions or comments at this
point but would request that we
roll this over until Wednesday,
we, not Monday, there's not
enough time to take in all of
those requests, but so that we
can really work on this and try
and get it right.
Thank you, Senator. So we're not
going to do any public comment
or anything, but is there any
comments or questions from any
of the committee members.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chair, can,
um, Senator, can we get the
committee?
There are the analysis are, are
majority analysis is just for
our members. It matches very
closely with lots of the stuff.
The LESC has put out very good
analysis, the PE and various
others we wanted to work
together on this so we could
really come together and work
with them, that particular
analysis is just for my members,
but they'll be happy to work
with others as would the people
from the pet. They've already
put in hours and hours and hours
trying to get this right.
Understood. And so we tried.
LESC staff is over here. They've
been working and tracking this.
The PE's been working and
tracking all of this. And so,
you know, and they're all
similar kinds of things issues
that we're working on.
And a result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. My question is, uh, I
think it was this I I've lost
track of time we're at 40 days
now.
How will this tie in with the
math lab.
feel that we just passed
recently out of this committee.
Uh, and thank you, that, that's
a good question. They are not in
conflict in any way. The math
lab bill that we passed out is
some funding for extra help and
assistance. It really isn't on
how do we teach math, how do we
move math forward. It is a
support in addition to what this
bill looks at and covers. Thank
you very much. That's all, Mr.
Chairman.
All right, any other questions,
committee members?
Well, thank you, Senator. We'll
just roll this bill or possibly
next Wednesday and uh continue
working. Thank you.
Thank you.
By the way, if anyone just
wonders, I tell people, if you
wanna know how weird I am, I
tell people I think in numbers,
I have to translate into words
for other people, so.
And we'll just let the chair
come back up.
And with that, I think the, the
agenda for Monday is already
out. We will try and follow. It
will be out, uh, we were looking
as to whether we had to roll
other bills into where it should
be out very shortly, uh, and
then this particular bill and uh
Senate Bill 125, uh, get rolled
over to Wednesday and we'll look
at whatever their bills to add
that particular day. Uh, thank
you all for attending. I think
we had a really robust good
discussion.
Today, uh, that also elevates
the importance of the work that
this committee does in the
future of New Mexico. Uh, with
that.
We are adjourned.
