Appreciate it
just a couple of quick
announcements joe if you'd like
to come up the one that makes
where people can hear.
Can announce the schoolboard
association stuff.
Every year is the handheld mike.
We don't not I don't know.
That.
That.
Yeah.
There we go thank you as you
know we generally have
legislative conference
through during the session this
a thirty day sessions or our
school board legislative
conference will be held february
first through third couple of
weeks and as part of that we
always have a house instead of
education appreciation breakfast
so they'll be held at seven
o'clock to eight o'clock am on
friday february second they
mentioned we already have three
hundred schoolboard members
registered and you all will be
allowed an opportunity to
address them briefly at the
breakfast then you can stay on
and listen to the chair of the
committee and the chair of the
house education committee give
us a briefly and give our
membership of briefing on all
the issues so again you have a
folder in front of you with the
invitation we've also included
our legislative priorities and
program for you so and we'll be
here throughout the session and
thank you for the work that you
do
thank you joe it's always nice
to have such good partners with
the school boards association
and our committee any other
things members where we get
started.
Again just for the the public
we're going to be bouncing
around a little bit on numbers
we do have the build number is
on the the table there that
we're going to be on each one
currently none of the republican
members are available to be here
but I just text with the ranking
mendor member center in the bill
who said it's okay to go ahead
with a couple of these bills
that are non controversial and
stuff without them here and so
we have i'm very fortunate have
said good working relationships
with the colleagues on on the
other side and.
That that makes our committee
always run smoothly and so
center readly if you would end I
believe we are on
senate bill
my glasses yes there mister
chairman members of the
committee but I can't commit
that these are non controversial
because it's the aid old
question of red agreed we're
going to discuss here
we will begin with senate bill
ninety two but I want to
summarise this my chairman
senator george man
did not think it was necessary
to present this bill we as you
know we've restructured junior a
little bit of how we appropriate
that and so I appropriated june
your funds to this so it has
been paid for what this is is
the pillar program in is you
know those two years funds is in
this government accountability
that we're structuring after two
years will look to see if
there's a return on that program
and if it's worthy of of state
government to continue to fund
this this is a this is just a
bill that pat woods and I
introduced to allow as we know
we're transitioning to
alternative energy both winton
solar there's a lot of money out
there for the big wind turn
bines but in a msu offers a
class that certifies just the
old school wind meals that we
use on old farms and ranches
it's a it's a popular class but
it's been sponsored with private
dollars it's very private and
and they get a lot of
participants actually from
tribal land still have a ton of
windmills old fashioned wind
mills and so that's just a pilot
school program I was happy to
fund with with junior money I
don't think it necessarily
requires a boat mister chair but
no one could really answer that.
I don't I don't well come back
with that in two years and
always like to go out to
comments from the audience and
first show hands those in in
support.
Anyone in opposition.
Do allow people to come in and
speak if you would like please
keep your comments to two
minutes or less I do think I do
time those but most of the time
don't have to stop people people
usually very good anybody like
to speak in favor.
These come up to the microphone
and give your name and.
If you represent anyone in
specific.
The.
Good afternoon mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is abio connor i'm a six
generation ranger from stanley
new mexico and I represent the
new mexico cattle girls
association at the new exco
cattle girls is in support of
senate bill ninety two and
mexico live stock producers need
to be able to call on properly
train technicians to repair
their windmills which are few
and far between these windmills
not only feed of water to our
livestock but also wildlife
throughout the whole state
and we urge you to support this
bill as it'll help our ranchers
across the entire state thank
you thank you.
Claim
do I need to press
good morning mister chairman was
the committee
with the mexico state university
assistant vice president of
government and community
relations.
Maybe not
we first and foremost one.
Support.
Thank you claim.
The.
Thank you mister cheric mitty
members camilla remarried with
the ne.
Thank you anyone else anyone
wish to speak in opposition.
Questions from committee.
By senator pinto
you'll call the road.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
yes
thank you mister chair this next
bill center ninety three i'd
like to invite the executive
director of the new mexico chili
growers travel stated join me
this has not been funded and
were required to pass from this
committee in order to be heard.
If we had mentioned first of all
this administrator travest day
he represents new mexico chili's
girls association this is a bill
that we are appropriating funds.
Thousand four research
development that we know that
new mexico state university is
really like the charge and then
a hundred thousand for marketing
it you know our promotional of
the work that we're doing here
with group green chile and
regionally is only as good as
that message that gets out so
that hundred thousand will be is
it directly spent to remind
colorado
I wasn't sure how we're doing
this all that mister dake
comment on the specifics of the
funding request thank you miss
chair members of the committee
so the max for chill association
has always had a partnership
with new mexico state and to put
funding towards research to
benefit the chilly industry we
work through an mo that was
developed in two thousand seven
we typically get around four
hundred thousand dollars of
annual funding the issue is the
last couple years we've seen her
quest come from re researchers
tolling seven hundred fifty to
eight hundred thousand all
really good projects that will
make great strides for industry
we just lack the funding to be
able to find those projects so
we're asking for that four
hundred thousand dollars to help
find those projects we've seen
over the last couple of years
and continue to make good
research.
Six I have a great success in
the children street in our new
mexico the marketing side is i'm
rarely due to a couple resent
and lawsuits that have happened
at a new york there are consumer
fraud law suits and were
continuing to see the miss
representation of new mexico
chile and we should come out of
mexico colorado other states and
they put any mexico name on it
because there is that marketing
so we want to use these dollars
to really develop and aggressive
marketing campaign.
No sir we stand for questions.
Yeah the audience those in
supporter anyone who would like
to speak and support it you'll
come up to the microphone
please.
Yeah.
This particular bill is very
dear to me after carrying the
new mexico having the official
roma bill last year which
amplified even more of our green
chile which is where I think
people are trying to to pick up
on that new mexico marketing
even more I appreciate this bill
and thank you for.
The.
Latitude researc.
Just west of main campus we
would encourage everyone to come
down where the chile pepper
institute al.
Global world right now and the
competition is here.
The.
Wise
exactly
with that mister chair we
certainly are.
If you a.
We have a hundred.
They can
bring better yields about in
this with this research can
contribute to so with that
please support things.
Thank you mister chair committee
members came within mexico state
land office and.
The.
Thank you anyone else in support
your body and opposition.
Not any questions from the
committee.
The.
I am still anyone on zoom who
would like to.
Okay questions.
And motion for a new passenger
senator pope secondly by senator
pinto if you'll call the role
please.
Yes center my yes.
Yes
yes
yeah but a pass you got a love
come into this committee
mr chairman the spinet bill then
it built ninety four with
approval from your committee I
will also fund out of junior
funds instead about the budget
with the junior funds of course
we would be giving i'm just a
little bit short of what they
requested the requesting two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars a new mexico state
university for an inalligious
which I have learned can be
spelled with an e or an o
someone made really mean joke
that that was something else
that that that I had spelled
something else and that is how a
correct smelling of an inologist
a wine expert so the legislator
has made some large investments
to encourage the expansion of
root stock and the wine industry
and come to find out we do not
have a a wine expert of any sort
so for any kind of a testing
information growing concerns
they are taking those concerns
out of state and we're asking
experts out of state how we best
you know respond to in state
wine production so this is a two
year contract or the employment
of an inologist to fall and
didn't mexico department of i'm
sorry that in a mess you college
of agriculture would be
extending that contract to have
a wine expert on staff for two
years and then the legislator
will are re examined that that
contract to see if if we're
receiving investments on it and
if it's wor.
The.
Seems like that would be
someone's ideal job or dream job
to get it this wine and work
with wine all day long anyone
anyone in support it would like
to come and speak in favor.
To one down.
Which is getting.
The.
Quite nabby university
this is in sport of the wine
industry.
We were support.
Especially for the long term th.
The.
Thank you claim
mr chair committee members can
be learner with the new excuse
date land office and again we
support this bill thank you
thank you president being here.
Good morning good morning mister
chair committee members my name
is leslie servant this I am a
mary two a fourth generation
chilly farmer so I didn't feel
like I need to speak on behalf
of the chilly bill since that
seems sort of obvious to me but
on the wine bill I wanted to let
you know our family is just in
year two of developing two
hundred acres that have been in
the family since the fifties in
the wine industry we've been
reached out to buy ventors in
across new mexico and new mexico
state plays a huge role in the
research and the teaching of a
new crop to our family they've
done it for generations and
chilly cotton because and now we
would add wine to that list so
as a personal farmer I ask for
your support at this bill thank
you.
Thank you leslie.
Anyone else speaking either in
favor or against.
No one on zoom and so questions
from the committee.
Secondary by center pinto if you
will call the role please.
Yes sender my yes.
Yes
yes
that are you three for three
thank you very good thank you at
this point we're going to be
waiting for some of the other
bill sponsors to be able to get
out of other committees and come
over so we're going to kind of
stand and reses good time for
bathroom break find another
couple coffee will get started
as soon as we can get other
other bill sponsors here and
again we'll try and do the non
controversial ones until we at
least have representation from
from both parties so standing
place everyone.
Yeah.
You know I want to give me.
Second.
Just went to let people know if
they were here for bill seventy
four center he is bill we will
not be hearing that one today he
indicated there's still some
work he's doing on that will be
rolled that over to friday or
whenever the center tells me is
ready thank you.
I can get everybody back again
and we lose senator my sisters
just in our i'm sorry you were
just turned around I didn't see
we have senator stewart with
that senate bill seventy six
which is mostly a fixed of the
formula for public school
capital outlay from last year
send it around again just a
reminder for people I have
talked with the ranking member
who is indicated it's okay for
us to proceed without any of the
republican members on bills that
are non controversial tapes of
bills I don't believe this is
controversial it's just a
technical fix and so send it or
if you would please.
Thank you very much mister
chairman members of the
committee
so you remember last year senate
bill one thirty one was a bill
that loosened to requirements
for all districts to have more
of state match instead of a
local match.
So we did this temporarily for
three years to give alic lfc he
as a fair of those acronyms
allegedly to phone legislative
education static committee
public school facility authority
of the ability to look at these
state matches to come up with a
better plan.
A bet in the meantime we've
given all of the districts that
have more than eight hundred a
students a fifty percent map a
thirty percent match for three
years thirty percent higher than
what they have and the
districts under eight hundred
and fifty percent more for three
years.
So in advertising what that did
was it it means that the those
smaller districts don't get a
waiver from their local match
many of these historics will
pass bonds
but they just don't have enough
money from their smaller
districts to do their local
match for the school districts
so when we um when we raise the
eight hundred or under two fifty
percent at some of them have a
little bit more than fifty
percent that alone took away
their ability to get a waiver
was an inadvertent mistake we
certainly didn't mean to do that
and this bill just fixes that by
saying those districts can use
the regular formula for their
waiver not the enhanced formula
of fifty percent so that's as
i've been trying to explain this
and very simple terms that's
kind of the best I can do I do
have timber do here who can tell
you every bit about those wavers
but essentially that's what the
bill does thank you send her
anything to add at this point
him i'd know mister chairman
here provide technical sport if
needed thank you for getting
very good out to the audience is
anyone in opposition to this
bill.
Those in support you'd like to
come up and speak into the
microphone introduce yourselves
in again please I have always
have to say this when stand make
sure that he realizes I do time
is two minutes
then and I are good friends
working mrperiod chairman stand
rounds for the super.
Public to the public school ca.
This fixed is necessary.
Mister chairman members of the
committee joking executive
director of the new mexico
school boards association also
service tear of the capital out
there counci.
This will certainly fix the
problems where.
Current request for waivers.
Difficult to to act on some of
these wav.
Questions from the committee.
I'd move a new passenger yet we
have motion for a new passenger
hope second by senator hickey
and if you'll call the r.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
so yes
that you have a new pass thank
you so much I think this is the
fastest i've ever got now that's
committed
so small non controversial
technical belts thank you
and again for people watching it
home then you're locally we're
going to be waiting for center
him bill to be able to get here
or other members from there the
republican party so I think
senator post bill I don't know
that it's overly controversial
but it's not as a
straightforward maybe as the
last couple so we'll just kind
stand in place until either of
those two things come about
thank you mister charles not
controversial at all.
I don't think it should be but.
Now I am.
The.
I.
It is really important.
Yeah
so have the gardens
right.
School base health center.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes
we're always.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
That's.
Looks like we have a bench of
students you're welcome to come
in find the seat join us we're
kind of just holding in place
till we can get some of our
other members here that we can
hear a few more bills
you're saying goodbye
there's not much to see here
right now sorry but thanks for
stopping by sending education.
Right
I get a lot of that of my life.
The.
Yeah.
Okay and thank you center and
bill I know you had some other
things inforested over here when
we're able to try and
accommodate various different
things going on
we're gonna call the committee
back into the session as
identicated people the we do not
have members of the republican
party here but I have been in
contact with the the ranking
member sended or nevil and
indicate and have his permission
to proceed we have bills that
are non controversial I don't
think either of yours are overly
controversial senator and so
will proceed in in that manner
if it does get to where it is we
may roll it over or wait until
they're able to be here
technically we don't have to we
do have a quarter but it's good
form to to make sure that we get
good debate and listen to all
sides of the things that are
important.
And with that senator you want
start with one of the top the
mental health initiatives and it
bill forty one and as I look
through things senate bill sixty
is got some very similar pieces
if you will please senator thank
you mister chairman and members
of the committee I my assistant
is coming down with my file
right now so I just have a few
notes I was over in great county
days
speaking to my community so
appreciate your flexibility
mister chair so we have senate
bill sixty or is it forty one
which one are restarting with
forty one okay so the mental
health initiatives form in
mental health initiatives is
asking for twelve million
dollars which is already in HB
two and that includes a suicide
prevention funding that will go
to the santa fe community
college to provide program the
qpr program it's question
persuade and respond it's
evidence.
Program and I have.
The.
Forty one yes yes
yeah there's there is some over
sorry mister.
So mister chairman the reason I
brought senate bill forty one
for word i'm hearing from many
constituents in my community as
well as people across the states
concerned about mental health in
the state of new mexico we know
suicide rates are some of the
highest in the country.
Especially after the pandomic
are we're still continuing to
deal with the pandemic but that
was certainly a time when we had
a lot of this disruption to
routine and predictability and
that couldn't definitely cause
people to suffer from more
mental health challenges there
was tramma that every single
person experienced because of
those
the consequences of the pandamak
and losing loved ones and just a
fear that everyone was under so
I want to make sure that the
legislature is investing
significant funds in mental
health initiatives across the
state.
They do anything that are just
technical support
just technical surprise I if you
want to hear about senate bills
sixty I can tell you a little
bit about what the specific
program at santa fe community
college is designed to do as a
subset of that larger senate
bill forty one as center
hemphell noted it is to use the
QPR program which is an
interventionist model where it's
designed as really as appeared
appear model let's just do
senate bill forty one will get
in and how that is sort of
within.
Forty one.
So anything else senator mister
chair what's there an amendment
drafted for this committee I did
want to include in senate bill
forty one that there would be
supervisors for mental health
and supervisors for social work
so I just want to make sure that
we're covering all our bases in
the bill it's
not have an amendment at all is
is something that we are it's
only a word or two that we can
add into it if you'll tell us
where he gets more than a
sentence or so then we probably
want to roll it over so we get
it written clean so mister chair
I
was reviewing it last night and
there's just a few places where
we could just add.
Social work supervisor.
The.
Okay where would that.
Line.
Page one line twenty one.
Okay and so this would be
afterwards is anti easing.
The.
Oh i'm sorry i'm wrong
around the controversial yeah I
bet i'm so I don't remember
having hazing
the the the wrong one I thought
I was on the first bill I was on
the second.
The.
Yeah.
Okay so so tell me we how it
should read.
Mister chair i'm twenty four
social work supervisors and
mental health and or mental
health.
Line twenty one p one after
which word.
After supervisors okay.
Or mental health.
Social workers supervisors or
mental health supervisors
correct mister.
Is that the only place.
Mister chair that's correct.
And the other places are changes
anywhere else.
Committee does that make sense.
Expansion of the additional area
I can have a motion to.
The.
Against interpope is there any
discussion.
Anyone in the audience have a
concern about that particular
amendment or feeling need to c.
Yes you need to come up and use
the microphone please.
I'm sure president of eastern
new mexico university rose well
and i'm also a license
psychologist and I appreciate
the senators involvement with
this build in providing
services.
And I think adding middle health
professionals would allow the
campuses an opportunity to hire
people around the state easier
and more readily th.
Thank you
any other comments
okay there's no one on zoom they
they've abandoned us for the day
because of the pauses
any other discussion.
They we have a motion that a
second if you'll call the role
on the amendment to add or
mental health super.
The.
Yes
yes.
Yes
I asked if so we are do have an
amended bill with with that
edition anything else on the the
bill mr cherry stem for
questions okay then get out the
audience in general about the
bill anyone in support who would
like to come and speak on behalf
of the bill and then we'll have
anyone who might be an
opposition so if you like him up
please.
Where do you just want wave your
hand yes I mean support that.
Mister.
We represent the new mexico
behavioral health providers we
just.
Thank you thank you.
And this chairman was community
and alex items you're
representing the associates
doing that university mexico and
I s.
Thank you anyone else anyone in
opposition.
This.
The questions from the county
thank you mister chair.
Correct.
Others not.
And the motion for a due passive
center and all second security
by senator pope if you will call
the role in and for you to.
The question was lots of times
things are in the budget but in
order to have things in the
budget you have to have a bill
to hang the money on and this
bill is the bill that you can
hang the money that's in house
bill to the funding portion of
it so that's you have anybody
get that long technicality as
what that question was about.
Yeah.
Yes
yes you have a due pass mister
chairman members and if you'd
like to move on then to.
Then a bill sixty thank you
mister chair so senate bill
sixty is making an appropriation
to the higher education
department to create as suicide
intervention training program at
santa fe community college that
is the training program that is
an evidence fees
program and I can turn it over.
Thank you and mis- mr chair are
intention is for this to become
a statewide program for for
santa fe community college to
essentially be the hub we
started offering qpr training on
our campus and it quickly became
evident that there was need for
this training be offered much
wider so we are initially funded
at ourselves as our own training
then we thought a small grant
from the conta fundation
foundation to actually take to
take the training a little bit
further but the model is based
on a train the trainer program
to where once people have gone
through the program they're
eligible to go through the train
the trainer program and then
those train people will be
deployed and in different
communities throughout the state
so that we can have a have a
large cohort of people who are
trained and this would be for
both staff and students and we
have also been working with high
school students in santa fe to
and provided this training to a
fairly large number of high
school students too so
we would just like we see this
as a two year program where we
can get a large number of people
trained and and through the
program in the in the two years
that the funding would be
allocated with that i'm happy to
answer any questions than you
anything else senator mr chair
we stand for questions.
Thank you
to the audience anyone in
support.
These come on up.
Mr chair members of the
committee may.
Here i'm representing gillian.
Is the new mexico behavioral.
Thank you
wish to speak in support anybody
in opposition.
The.
By ever forgetting
yeah
thank you
questions from the committee.
I would do pass.
Second by center hicky I do have
one question this training is
going to be in santa fe.
At win people come from other
areas around is it a one day
training is it multiple day
training that they appear for a
week how does this get spread
out outside of the santa fe
community for training mister
chair the the the train the
trainer portion is a is a one
day training we are starting
with a training in santa fe next
next month I think it's the
middle of february and there are
people who have been invited to
participate who have expressed
an interest in participating and
getting certified to become a
trainer from communities
throughout the state when we
have a critical mass of people
where we've offered the training
not to train the trainer but
just the individual training
which lasts about two and a half
hours I think then we can have
those trained people offering
that training in their own
communities the model is for the
training to be presented by a
trained facilitator in their own
community or region thank you
and would it involve them do
they continue to get support and
follow up yet if their questions
come up that they don't feel
they were trained for is there
someone they contact the
assistant give additional follow
up mister share that's actually
this an excellent question
because we've already had the
happen and so yes part of the
the funding is for
a consultant to be hired that
would work with all of the
trained facilitators who may
have questions that need a
little bit of assistance with
handling conversations with
people and in any kind of follow
up from there that that would
need to happen.
Thank you
goes welcome now any any
questions or thank you mister
and I all does trying to.
Yeah.
Yes mister chair a senator was
what what the intent is that we
will be reaching out to all of
the other colleges to and then
in really decrease for for each
community to essentially create
their own circle of training
because santa fe community
college is not in any way
does we don't have the capacity
to reach the whole state but we
can we can
we can work as a hub that
facilitates the training all
across the state and that is
what our intent is so yes we
would work with people either
from eastern or from the commu.
Very easy for us to have someone
train to go to l.
The.
Thank you we do have a motion
and a second so if you'll read
the role.
Yes
yes.
Yes
two for two today center thank
you mister terra thank you
members that the committee that
was the easiest committee
meeting i've ever had
with we try and be accommodating
what we can then are popular you
ready for.
We'll have a senate bill fifty
five.
Instead of right we understand
we have an amendment to start
with.
The.
Center if you want to give kind
of a brief overview and then
where the amendment is how it
is.
The.
Showed up the amendment first mr
chair you just wanted me to talk
about the amendment first on
what that however you would like
if you need to give some intro
so the amendment makes sense or
yet however works
okay.
I think what i'll do is just.
So mister chair
the amendment is a basically
going to
remove
one of the penalties which was a
felony.
Of course subsections are going
to be changed on the lettering.
The title is going to be changed
from penalty.
And
we are including epra.
In on page six lines.
First at everybody understand
the explanation of the amendment
in the changes.
The.
Okay okay audience anyone in
support of the amendment we're
in opposition to the amendment.
Yes sir.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is january williams of a policy
advocate at the american civil
liberties union of new mexico
and i'll share more about our
organization's position on this
whole bill at a moment but we do
student support of this
amendment we support reducing
the the charges taking out the
felony charge for this as as
well talk more about the eight.
Taking out the felony at the.
Thank you any other comments
from the audience about the
amendment.
The.
Then do you have anyone online
not on the amendment.
Questions in the committee about
the amendment.
The night I think it makes sense
though it were trying to prevent
hazing we're not trying to put
people in jail for hazing and
and taking the felony off with
it more towards.
Education information and
prevention
the motion to adopt the
amendment from center pinto.
The.
Secondly by center hiki.
If you will call the role
please.
Yes.
Yes
yes you have an american amended
deal so i've now you
like to go into more about the
general bill what it does how it
would function
thank you mister chair committee
members
this morning I stand before you
address a pressing issue that
demands our collective attention
and action the amount limitation
of hazing.
Hazing a harmful and destructive
practice jeopardizes the
physical and meant a while being
of individuals the impact of
hazing extends far beyond.
On the victims.
In our state we witness.
The.
Incidents have occurred
resulting in severe injuries and
long term psychological trauma.
It is time we acknowledge the
urgency of this matter and take
decisive ste.
We must recognize that there is
a need for specific law against
hazing a new mexico but that
also includes preve.
The absence of such legislation
leaves gaps and our legal
framework including the
effective prosecu.
Anti hazing a lot when I only
serve
but also provide clear
guidelines for educational.
Senate bill.
This bill prohibits hazing which
by definition is.
When a person is is recruited.
For initiation pledging
admission into an affiliat.
The.
A living group or any past time
or amusement engaged in the
respect to such organization.
Athletic team are lady living
group that causes or is likely
to cause bodily.
Psychological.
Or other person attending a
public a private p.
And I apologize for that.
Also includes causing direct.
In it includes the direction of
that coursing or enforcing a
person to consume any food.
Liquid alcohol or drug or
substance that subjects the
person to risk.
Hazing does not include
customary athletic events or
other similar contests or
competitions practice training
conditioning.
Or any type of eligibility
requirements that are needed for
athletic events or other similar
competit.
This bill ever commits hazing as
guilty.
Depending on the severity of the
harm caused to a person or
property resulting from the
hazing.
This would go into if this was
passed it would go on to effect
in the fall of twenty four in
our public.
And private post secondary
institutions.
And it also provides an
educational program on hazing.
In the twenty four twenty five
year
educational institutions to also
prepare a public annual report
with the findings of violations
by.
Or living group on campus if
there is a formal vi.
It is important to note that the
purpose of the new law is not to
replac.
The.
It is specifically directed.
The.
And with that mister chair.
Thank you senator some the
audience those in support of
this bill of anyone would like
to speak.
The.
About any message as an issue
and i'm sorry please.
New mexico university in new
mexico's associated students yes
thank you alex items with the
associate students at the
university of mexico are student
money we stand in support of
this bill we've had three major
hazing since i've been reporting
the press since twenty fourteen
as well as reports by the anti
hazing institute that are over
fifty five percent of college
students in an organized sports
clubs organizations do
experience heasing and the
ninety five percent of students
don't report hazing getting more
legislation out there discussing
the issue and insert sharing
that is broker brought up really
does help foster well being in
our community.
Thank you telling from a
president of synamous yes thank
you mister chairman and
distinguished members of this
committee given the recent
incidents across our state and
an hour higher and I sort of
introduced you but if you'll
give your name and
sorry I didn't want to be
redundant but hello everyone my
name is not even this and I am
the **** and mse student body
president but to go having
continue giving the recent
incidents across our state and
in our higher education
institutions we have first hand
witnessed how hazing undermines
the principles of respect
equality and unity that we share
a students.
Safeguards and standards that
this legislation aims to
implement ensures that every
student feels safe valued and
included I support this bill and
urge our legislators to work
collaboratively on this topic to
produce optimal outcome.
Anyone else who would like to
speak in favor.
As mister chair members of the
committee steve seniors with any
new mexico.
Five and a course we support our
students just a kind of amplify
the voice in the room right now.
Taking a step forward and just.
The.
With that think you to desponsor
an.
Thank you
online and support if you.
Good morning and thank you
mister chairman my name is chris
broks.
And I oversee if turned it in
thirty life at the universe even
if mexico I worked
professionally in the future and
that's already field for over
sixteen years at multiple
institutions and organizations
around the country and have
studied the impacts of hazing an
anti hazing legislation for many
years well not an expert I would
certainly consider myself a
reliable authority on heathing
prevention.
Currently new mexico is one of
only six states without
legislation addressing the crime
of hazing.
For what it's worth all of the
other states without these laws
have at least seven fewer post
secondary institutions as new
mexico.
Given the recent public cases of
hazing at another institution to
see that involved the multi
million dollar settlement it is
clear that this bill is needed
but that being said I do have
some concerns with the language
of the bills were in the
definition of hazing in the
spell is vegan should be
clarified further in addition
heasing is not limited to post
secondary institutions there
have been multiple cases in the
past decade of hazing in new
mexico high schools in addition
section three is very ambiguous
and leaves out athletic team
liability entirely.
Most importantly I fully support
the educational requirements of
this bill but stant but believe
firmly that the trading must be
consistent across the state and
not left up to individual
institutions to design an
implement this would require
significant financial investment
and working with industry
experts to provide adequate
training our office has
submitted an fire along with
other departments at unm which
provides more detailed feedback
on the language of the spell.
But even still a better even if
it were to pass as is it would
be a huge set forward for the
state I have had an opportunity
he twenty two twenty five
creating the crime of hazing and
feel strongly that speed fifty
five is a superior option I and
our office supports stands and
support of this bill.
Thank you is there anyone else.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
In opposition.
Yes.
Good morning again i'm doing a
williams of a policy advocate
with the account you have to
mexico and of course they see
all you support the intention of
this bill and appreciates
everything that's been sad about
hazing as something that needs
to be addressed and we certainly
don't have a problem with that
we do have a concern about the
approach that this bell takes
the a cell you generally opposes
the creation of new crimes and
as the chairman said prevention
doesn't have to mean putting
people behind bars and so we're
really looking at some ways that
this bell could take a different
approach there are parts of it
that we don't have a problem
with we really like the
reporting we understand that the
trains the training is a portent
but that the criminalization
peace is what's the most
concerning to rest and I want to
share that we've had productive
conversations with the sponsor
ready into the appreciate those
and were very open if this bill
moves forward to continuing to
offer feedback so that we can
get your place where we all
appreciate the intention and
there's concerns about the
approach or not they are so
again thank you so much we are
very strongly support the
attention of this bill and just
look forward to more
conversations about the approach
that we do oppose it now but we
hope that we can get to a place
where we won't oppose it anymore
thank you.
Thank you
anyone else in opposition.
Seeing no
questions from the committee.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you senator for bringing this
forward my first question is
we've heard a lot nationally
about this issue have we looked
at any other states that have
put together such a bill and if
so do you have any learnings
from that that we m.
The.
Thank you m.
Yes I actually reached out to
organization i'll stop hazing
this.
This legislation.
Mister chair and senator pope.
Given that washington has passed
this and may be some other
states have there been any
trip white legal drip wires.
For the states and in passage.
Anything that we could do to
prevent that happening to.
And I I just want to be clear I
think the bill is very timely
and very appropriate
at but i'm looking for is that
we're able to launch it and
because sampton's going to come
up somewhere.
Something is a hazing and and I
appreciate your definition being
very detailed but again that the
ra.
Get caught and have the courts
make up the law thank you.
Thank you mister chair center
hakey I have n.
This.
Thank you.
Thank you senate.
Thank you mister thank senator
pope um i've just had a couple
questions I want to start with
federal.
I'm really cognit.
Thank you senator center
masters.
Thank you.
Briefly me on the built when I
was talking I was thinking more
of up.
The.
But
but this sum so this has got a
two or three things.
The criminal statute.
When the prosecutor tries to
prove a c.
So couple couple words to
highlight between now and.
Good gratus has.
The word were too.
Or.
The.
Like a matr.
The paragraph chairman progress.
Pretty solid but look consider
the word
sixteen and seventeen individual
dir.
Director.
Is really worse than the it's
the p.
Or what.
Triggers it.
Is your you're saying a pers.
Post listing at home it's
misreturning it's a person who
participates in hazing of
another shall forfeit any enti.
Scholarships or a wards.
For appeared to be determined by
the.
A g is actually fantastic much
chairman essentially the group
that's participating in the
hazing.
Shall lose itself.
Any official recognition.
What's going to.
Or student organization yet but
ask yourself if that.
Or.
The.
And then just a couple of.
The educational program on
hazing i.
The.
And then also.
Some to consider on page five
essentially who would be a part
of the six member board mister
chairman center pop up it
precludes a stood from.
From the.
The.
There was affiliated with the
finding of hazing that maybe.
The whistleblower who may be a
good person to serve on that.
The.
But anyway that that's just what
I got from the first half but I
am.
The cheapest german is that.
A lot of the stuff is covered
in.
Because there's a bolanteri.
The.
I volunteered for that but but
as we all know there's an aspect
of non it's it's kind of
conditional volunteering in
other words there is not a
volunteering it's not a rational
volunteering they have to go
through this right about.
Regardless of whether.
Strong this would literally put
an end.
To h.
The.
It's just weird.
Your freshman.
Yes.
Thank you mister chair you know
thank you.
Thank you other questions from
the committee.
Motion would be in order.
Motion for a new passed by
center pinto.
Seconded by center
if you will call the role
please.
Yes.
Yes.
The.
Yes since you have a due pass
in.
They.
Mr chair center guy thank you.
Thank you and yes this bill hits
the judiciary next that
concludes our work for today
committee will be that eight
thirty on friday please be
prompt we have rolled over
senator he built till then we
currently have two bills
scheduled that I suspect there
will be a couple more will get
added to the list to day
and with that senate education
is adjourned for today friday at
eight thirty please be prompt
thank you.
Yeah.
Yes.
