And I know that there are quite
a number of students from around
the state of from our CTE
programs various other programs
of that sort and so is we could
just kind of some very quick
introductions I know first
Senator Kernan you have a shadow
with you and then the very is
different groups that if someone
can stand up and introduce your
members that would be wonderful
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I have with me
today Abigail Trammell from
Hobson she attends our brand new
C. tech school she's got one of
the first to students to be able
to go there and her interest is
in media so that's one of the
pathways that we offered to see
tech school in Hobson I see a
lot of other people from my
journal areas wealth but I'll
let them introduce fifth thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you and we also have the
president of the New Mexico
association of technical
education is that right now
Mackey
Mr oak us if you'd like
interviews yourself and you know
if you any that are with you and
then we'll have the students
introduce themselves.
Michael they stop you from if
you can't come down so the
microphone to pick it up we are
being webcast.
Use your teacher voice.
Thank you senator souls so my
name is Michael grant and I'm
the president of the New Mexico
association for career and
technical education we help
guide and provide professional
development for teachers in New
Mexico for career technical
education we also work with the
CCRB the college and career
readiness bureau to help guide
New Mexico and elevating our CTE
classes so thank you thank you
and just in in the back is Jeff
law who's the past present for
New Mackey who also the.
It runs the CTE programs down
the Los crucis schools the end
of I'll be introducing on the
floor I think is one as my
shadow today we have a number of
students who are here how many
our students with the career
technical programs.
Wonderful if you all in the
let's start here you have you
all just kind of briefly
introduce yourself and
particularly the kind of program
that you're in what what kind
creating technical program are
you participating with.
Hello everybody funny.
Part of the SkillsUSA group for
our.
Which district
Because that was that wonderful.
Thank you yes ma'am.
I also it's because you just
have an automotive program.
Right.
My name is Christian students on
the twelfth grade student
problem hi school and I'm also
in the automotive program gives
is a.
State and I'm on the bus present
across the schools are safer
because of high hi and we
construction for simplicity
thank you and and again
apparently you were having
trouble picking it up these the
court on that Senator Padilla is
the court on that microphone
long enough to get back to them
at all or.
No.
Maybe we have people trying to
come up tell them to.
We're speak really loud you guys
decide it's hard to get him out.
The.
Good morning my name is Andrew
lingo and I am the president for
the skilled nursing program.
Program wonderful.
Like the Blazers to that guess
which are.
Hey for those.
There was chosen for the
SkillsUSA program.
It.
Across the the back my name's on
only in India's and president of
windows and chapter I've
organized school the host says
what is the house.
Thank you Asian and.
Students of America thank you hi
my name is Nick kind of and
that's the social.
At which school.
Thank you my name is Megan may
be working on school and I the
person officer.
Right.
At the Garcia has won the junior
by Representative.
Grace motherly I'm the
communications officer at organ
mountains high school for.
Hello my name is Danielle Friel
Otten I'm a sophomore Office of
our chapter.
Hi my name is battling down
there and I'm the secretary for
of the chapter outlining that
thank you we have some students
on the side anyone else in the
career technical programs yes
please.
SkillsUSA program for autumn.
Thank you.
life in these
skills USA programs and also I
prospect heights.
Wonderful did we miss it okay
they are sorry.
All.
Senate these two young men are
from the Philippines and their
mother is an instructor in
Carlsbad.
Actually happy to welcome them
wonderful anyone we missed.
You will help me in this and
it's hard to from a big group of
people like this even just
introduce yourself to thank you
for being.
This.
The career technical education
programs in the state of New
Mexico is preparing our
workforce for the future free up
and finish we've got openings
ready for all of you.
Yesterday yes hurry up and
finish war going on towards your
medical careers at.
Community college handsomest
here programs and things of that
sort but thank you I appreciate
very much what you're doing with
any other questions comments for
we continue committee.
It's not first up we have the
Senate bill for which we heard
last week of sent off to make
some changes and things and so
if you share with us first the.
The very briefly overview of
what the bill does but then
specifically the changes that
were made and how they they
address the concerns of the
committee thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee we sincerely
appreciate you putting us on
this morning in front of this
very nice group of behind us
before I I go into the
description and and what we did
Mr chairman I want to let the
committee know you should have a
substitute in front of you that
we deliver to the committee
within your agreed upon time
also want to thank I I you
should not start mentioning
people because you'll always
forget somebody but I do want to
call out just a few Mr chairman
Gwen Perea Warniment from L. E.
S. C. was the art director there
was fantastic in working with
the committee your staff was
outstanding in working with us
and pulling all this together
based on the feedback we
received the last time we were
here when I think I stand around
who's also here this morning and
he was also very helpful helpful
in moving this along as as we
went over the weekend and in
those faces many others
including specific feedback from
members of this committee want
to think Senator Kernan Senator
Pinto center Maestas Senator
Hickey our vice chair pope you
Senator soul senator Neville and
I do believe that Center brand I
walking into the Senate the same
day we we've we've done a number
of things together so we
appreciate all the feedback it
was very very helpful and I
think we have something that we
can feel good about at this
point maybe some there there may
be tiny little things that still
need some work as we go through
the process here but we didn't
want to confuse an amendment
because it would have wound up
being you know something
ridiculous so we thought we
cleaned it up by putting it into
a sub for this committee to move
forward if you choose to.
One of the first in key elements
of the of the chain of the
changes that we made is to take
all of this legislation in place
it in the hunger free student
bill of rights we do have Jenny
Ramo from New Mexico apple seed
here you may recall she and I
and her team and many others on
this committee work together to
pass the hunger free student of
the rights in two thousand
seventeen so we are actually
going to place all of this
legislation in that section of
law and we're gonna add the word
healthy hunger.
Hunger for healthy.
Give it to me one more healthy
healthy hunger free student all
rights I knew I'd get out
eventually Mr chairman so all of
this will be placed in that area
of law and I want to thank apple
seed for doing the work over the
years many many years and and
they're seeing their CEO and
executives here today want to
thank her for the work that
she's done along the way and her
entire team so that's the first
major thing that we did here
second is section three A. was
significantly cleaned up so it
reads a little more clearly I
know that we had some confusion
in terms of how and why did this
apply to virtual schools and
things of that nature so we have
some cleanup their mothers took
place thank you thankful to your
committee in again to to the
doctor put a Warniment of the
the third thing that we did as
the time frame for
implementation which was a huge
discussion point last Wednesday
when we were here the time
frames for implementation is
pushed back to FY twenty five so
given the districts essentially
two full years to design develop
implement what's gonna work for
their district and health that
they they don't receive any
financial penalties as a result
of taking the full to twenty
four months to years to get this
done and implemented of the next
major change is that a section
three E. dash one in the
substituted now reads as may
include rather than required
components of the future role
which is very important that was
great feedback from Senator
Kernan and a few others and
senator I just this next item
section five aid now reads it
shall be allowed to have up to
twenty minutes of seat lunch
time this was a huge contention
and debate the other day and we
try to find creative language Mr
chairman and members of your
committee were to and your staff
were very very helpful in
helping us but that together so
this is allows up to twenty
rather than any restrictive on
on anything less
and then section five a no
longer includes reference to
recess before the lunch and I do
have to say that I think a lot
of us talk to our schools over
the last couple of days and we
found all sorts of things going
on I did some time by getting a
bus and and going down to
To the local that I meet is
Thomas elementary school on the
other side of town here we had
lunch with some students out
there was really fantastic a
really really great kids Mr
chairman of a lot to tell us
what to say and and even in that
school there's a whole number of
ways that they do it so we're
gonna leave that flat out of the
bill at this point to figure out
where where we take that but but
folks that I spoke to again over
the weekend as well we're very
you know wanting lunch before
but we're not requiring it and
then section five C. was
completely red lined so that we
have you know what what we need
their so that's essentially the
changes in the substitute we
took everything that was said in
committee the other day and and
we action all of them.
Okay and that Mr Chavis from the
governor's office as co few
comments Mister chair Mister
chair members of the committee
one clarification so you'll see
there's the July one twenty
twenty five implementation date
for section five as well as the
healthy meal requirements in
section three but we there is
the shall did remain for free
meals for all children as of
July one twenty twenty three
some private.
Thank you before you get too far
into this Representative
technical things we need to do
for the secretary yes I would
move a do not pass on Senate
bill four and a due pass for
discussion purposes committee
substitute for Senate bill four.
Thank you is there any
opposition to that motion.
The line we are now talking
about substitute thank you Sir I
appreciate your keeping us on
track.
I think that summarizes we had a
very in depth about the entire
bills last time the the.
I don't want to open this up for
everyone to comment again that
they think that the healthy
meals are wonderful or anything
of that sort does anyone have
any specific public comment
about the changes were concerns
about that I would be happy to
open it up if there's public
comment on the changes not just
the general overall bill that
makes sense.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm not really here.
And we changes I want to thank
senator.
And the timeline.
Thank you.
That.
The sponsor and our partners in
education with the sprint.
The benefits to the changes the
budget school districts also
benefit charter schools so I
just want to make sure that was
on the line for the committee
appreciated thank you.
Okay everybody doesn't have
dance I have to say that they do
approve the changes we get it if
that's all it is we're good if
anybody has a question about the
specific changes or something of
that sort so I now ask for show
hands how many appreciate or the
changes are good please your joy
and how's that.
Thirty one this got a concern
with the changes.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair.
Sanchez J. Strickler
superintendent.
Hops and overall to support the
changes do appreciate the
changes and I appreciate that
the status you're working with
miss more our officers directors
in the creation of what we've
got as a superintendent and the
financial piece I am concerned
about the thirty million
dollars.
School food authorities
participate.
That pot of money gets smaller
so as a first step that is
absolutely the right direction
there's some.
As we move forward.
And as we all know is the price
of Mexican.
Thank you can see so essentially
you're saying this is good but
we may need to make it a bigger
better program with more money.
Got it any other concerns about
the bill last changed.
If not committee members Senator
Kernan thank you Mr chairman I
want to thank the senator for
always taking good good a good
bill and making it better and I
think you've done that with this
I do I do have a question I
think I heard you say that the
time frame for the free meals
remaining to twenty twenty three
and so
What about school districts
right now that are going to have
to implement that what they have
to use operating dollars because
I don't know that every district
has money from the federal
dollars to to be able to do that
so how did they do that without
will the thirty million be
purchased be distributed for the
coming school year that it's
available so they are going to
do that thank you Mr chairman
and senator Graham you hit the
nail right on the head there the
and that's where the thirty
million is going to we can
budget for one year and this
thirty million will be for this
year so it'll supplement things
that districts going to run into
this year thank you Mr chair and
second is second question I have
with regard to the development
of the rules and I think we had
that discussion that the the
real experts on that are the
nutrition directors across the
state of New Mexico and can you
assure me that they will be the
ones that would be making
recommendations on what
qualifies as quality nutrition
in that section of the bill
where that will be developed as
a real making process and Mister
chairman Senator that's the the
process today as well and and
that will continue thank you
that's all I have thank you
senator.
Other questions from committee
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator
So one of the concerns was that
some schools don't actually have
a feeding program.
can you show me where we've
taken the requirement out for
them to add one sorry.
I was problem with not getting a
committee sub headed time I
haven't had time to read it.
From page so they're able to yes
section five I'm sorry page five
lines twenty three through
twenty five public school
districts and charter schools
operate in the national school
lunch program and the school
breakfast program shall
establish a program to offer
high quality meals at no charge
at all to all students so
essentially
At they can often if they don't
already have it if they already
have it in there to receiving
those monies will have to hear
what we proposed to the only
shell here's to schools that are
already doing the at the moment
yes yes you can program which
would mean they already have the
facilities okay and then I I
still have some questions on the
federal funding
and the certifications for that
so at got some of that here
we're talking about the direct
certification with Medicaid
what happens if the school
doesn't qualify with direct
certification with Medicaid.
Mr chairman miss miss Chavis to
address that with Mr chairman of
the committee I may pass in but
maybe technical experts from
head to talk about the direct
certification process and how
we're going to make sure that
we're joined on every single
federal dollars.
Seven six.
Good morning.
Felix Griego student success and
wellness bureau and so on.
With with his as far as the
direct certification process
that's not the only way that
they would certify students for
free and reduced meals there's
all also income applications
that school districts can take
in order to certify students for
free and reduced meals and then
the piece that you reference as
far as direct certification with
Medicaid public education
applied for a grant with USDA to
get some additional thirty
thousand reduce students that
may not have been certified to
the good thing about that what
it does is it leverages the
federal funds from USDA that way
you know if we will be able to
have enough money with the
thirty million to supplement the
program this does that answer
your question yes Representative
in this record come into the
chair Mister chairman
Yes and no so we're not saying
that every schools going to
qualify for federal funds
because some just don't they
don't meet the income
requirements is that correct.
So all schools that are
participate in the national
school lunch program do qualify
for the federal funds as and the
state funds that we are
referencing and Senate bill four
as well
I guess every school in the
state Mr chairman
Remember your name but does
every schools are state qualify
for federal yes every school
would qualify and every school
that does participate in the
national school lunch program
does qualify under free reduce
and it varies based on the
amount of students that would be
free or reduced they would
qualify for federal funds and
then the remainder would be
supplemented with the the Senate
bill four funds that we're
discussing today.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate it so the thirty
million is to supplement for the
the areas that don't for the
students adult correct correct
that's that would be free or
reduced in rate students as
well.
Thank you Secretary.
No problem.
So all the bill saying is we're
gonna try to use as much federal
funds we can as we qualify for
and then what we don't qualify
for the state's going to pay for
will backstop with the funding
they were requesting your.
So I may have the same concerns
than that the pop superintendent
has this forces being enough and
then
so this will be something Mister
chairman Senator you're on the
finance committee so this will
be something that have to be put
in the budget on an annual
basis.
Chairman Senator that's that's
right
and we've been in very active
communication with the the chair
of the Senate finance and it's
to the point of the entire
Senate finance committee
actually went out to the
elementary school with us last
week to see the program and it
first hand.
Okay thank you Mr Christian.
Thank you senator any other
questions or comments.
If not I'm open promotion
please.
Thank you.
Do we do pass.
Thank.
By Senator Neville up you'll
call the roll please million.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator my assistance
yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto yeah Senator pope yes
Sanders Sauls yes okay we have a
deep have you have a do pass
thank you for working so
diligently and hard I think this
is a much better bill as a
result and that's the whole
proposed point of this committee
process so again thank you for
your hard working again.
When staff other people who were
were part of that and hearing
our concerns and making it
happen thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
everyone the contributed thank
you.
Okay.
The.
We're going to get Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino for our next presenter
we had a couple more of our CTE
students who have come in we
have the others introduce
themselves if you all would
stand up tell us what pro what
school your from your name and
what school and what CTE program
here in.
Of course I will be enough from
the hatch act.
Wonderful.
Wonderful.
The.
wonderful welcome.
It is the two so one and I have
a lot of that has to that.
Wonderful.
Great thank you all for being
here and and then our Education
Committee it's always nice is it
Education Committee I'm sorry.
You look like that you were this
the sponsor for them.
For.
Wonderful of any other students
who have come in or is a whole
new group of students are you
part of CTE programs.
So I go please don't make a
stand up and and we produce
ourselves.
Okay.
Yeah we're waiting for the
sponsor should be coming in here
shortly.
The students are just came in
are you part of the CTE programs
in the state.
No you're just here visiting
watching what we're doing
welcome to Senate education
appreciate you being here.
You may get a good education
joker anything.
We're sitting here.
I'm sorry.
Mr just
I am doctor Roberts and we are
here from health leadership high
school and charter school in
Albuquerque New Mexico focusing
on creating the next leisure and
health care in New Mexico
wonderful thank you all for
being here Michael did you want
to introduce yourself one of our
city leaders in the state.
No I'm not Michael up.
I know we look like and so my
name's Greg Mallory dates are
great I know I know yeah I just
this does it Centers those as
well I made by for our host.
Awesome streaming video as well.
Thank you Greg I apologize.
You see people out of context
sometimes it's like this is.
Thank you.
Very pleased that organ mountain
is my it was not they Organon is
my home high school and such and
so it's always great having
those those students come up
here to be able to see and
participate.
Senator is we get merry and that
will be ready for you.
We're waiting on you.
There are other senators.
Go ahead and committee members
of.
Of with me today is the director
of the program that we're
seeking for your endorsement for
a the an appropriation for and
that is doctor Jesse Barnes
who's the of member of the
medical school faculty and who
is the director of what we call
the rural and urban under served
program.
It's it's a program that was
funded by the federal government
for about four years six years.
And we we've we've we've find it
it is a way of encouraging
medical students to consider
staying in New Mexico and
working in rural communities.
And in those parts of the.
Of of some of our larger
communities like Los crucis
Santa Fe or Albuquerque that are
that did go underserved because
they are in in in the south
valley in Albuquerque's case or
in the case of Dona Ana down in
in the C. a valley and so on.
The point of this program is to
give medical schools students
exposure to life in these
communities and to work in these
communities
When the federal money ran out
we attempted to get a state
appropriation last year weren't
successful but the school's
scrape together the money to
keep it going what it does is it
pays for their well let doctor
burns explained exactly how the
program works but the whole
point is to introduce them to
these settings and to encourage
them to work in them upon
graduation Dr Brent.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
members of the committee so as
the senator explained program
now in its eighth year of
existence really seeks to
identify sort of a a problem of
attrition of interest in working
in underserved communities in
rural communities over the
course of the medical school
experience by providing a
variety of support structures so
mentorship academic support
seminars workshops conferences
and then targeted clinical
experiences are getting the
students out of the university
setting and working in
underserved communities in
Artesia in Farmington and
Shiprock and on the south south
side and west side of
Albuquerque in many other
locations around the state you
should have a colorful hand out
in front of you and on the back
one of the graphics there is is
the picture and at each one of
those dots represents one of the
locations where Roop students
have spent time over the course
of their medical school
experience
I think we've run into a couple
challenges over the last couple
years that are leading to us
being here today asking for your
support one is been a good
challenge which is an incredible
growth in the program from I
think fifteen students that are
first class we now have a
hundred and twenty eight
students the graphic is outdated
because we took to more students
last week
corporatist abating in the
program and seventy one
graduates from the program
additionally as I think many of
you know the cost of temporary
housing across the state has
skyrocketed in many communities
in recent years and that's
really putting a strain on our
ability to get students out
working in in your communities
across the state during their
medical school experience we
know that students are extremely
more likely to end up choosing
careers in fields and
communities where they have been
exposed during the course of
their education so we think it's
absolutely critical to continue
that to get students out and in
all these communities during the
course of their training.
Thank you Mr chairman with that
will stand for questions.
Thank you senator Dr I will go
out to the audience first show
of hands people in the audience
in support of this legislation.
Anyone in opposition.
There's no one in opposition so
if you feel a particular need to
to say something or yeah please
raise your hand it will give you
up to two minutes to speak of if
it's just in support we saw that
there's no opposition so please
try to keep things very tight if
you will but start on this side
anyone who would like to carry.
And we know that.
In rural areas all.
More likely to practice in the
communities they have exposure.
Part of that package that's
coming for the legislature to
build our rural healthcare
infrastructure.
Thank you anyone else on this
side.
On this side anyone yes yes
ma'am.
The project manager.
Thank you anyone else.
That thank you all for your app
understanding about we don't do
that fifty people all saying
there in support I appreciate
that I will go to questions from
the committee Senator Kernan
thank you very much Mr chair
just to want to make sure this
is the same program that
your medical students come out
to the community state six five
four weeks very committee with
survey in that community Mr
chair Senator it depends a
little bit on the rotation and
the block that they're doing I
think it could range anywhere
from two weeks to six weeks the
price on what field they're
they're learning what I can
assure you this Mr chair is a
fabulous program they they've
come to hot year after year
after year my husband actually
was a mentor for them while he
was in practice in now retired
but it's it's a tremendous
program that not only expose the
individuals to the positions in
the hospital but they go out to
the community and they talk
about what is available within
our rural communities it's a
great program little
disappointed this year that our
new hospital just getting off
the ground was not able to
participate that I hope you'll
circle back I want to make sure
they do and if they don't want
you to call me because they need
to participate in this nor Lea
hospital which is in Lovington
understands the importance of
this program to the point where
they basically have started
their own smaller program within
their hospitals so they go out
across the country and they were
create medical students to come
and spend time involving to
they've been very successful in
recruiting doctors to Lovington
because of the program that
you're talking about so I
strongly support this and hope
that of the money's in the
budget for if it's not that
needs to be put about you thank
you.
Thank you and my mistake is we
do have one person on of those
do we would like to support so
Dianne ****.
Chairman members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to speak I'm I'm dying costs
I'm with the democratic party's
veterans and military family
caucus and we just want to make
sure that you all know we
strongly strongly support the
passage of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr ****.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair
first I'd I'd like to say I want
to thank the sponsor this bill
this this this bill's been kind
juniors and knocked around for
so many years and and to the
expert witness how many what
percentage of medical students
participate in this program.
Mr chair Senator thank you at
this point about a third of the
act medical students are number
to their program.
Thank you and Mr chair
maybe you know I I know that I
wanna give a shout out to Dr
Robert Williams here who started
this program through hers eight
years ago has been in the family
medicine department for years at
UNM sponsoring these kind of
programs and he and I back in
eighty one eighty two eighty
three were medical directors
together out town service units
in the Navajo reservation and so
that's where this incredible
support for underserved areas
come from and so but hi that I
believe now there are about
eighteen students who started
the program early on and how
many of those are placed in
underserved areas.
Mr chair Senator so at this
point and and this requires
brief explanation we're starting
this program at the beginning of
medical school which means
students have a minimum of four
years of medical school followed
by their residency which is a
minimum of three years can be
longer depending on the program
they choose before they graduate
and actually go into their own
practice and so now in our
eighth year we're just starting
to get some of our most
meaningful data in terms of
students going on to these
careers at this point there I
students who have graduated from
residency and and taking
positions in there another
thirteen who will be graduating
at the end of of this year so in
June and taking positions and
and our and we work very closely
with those students those who
are still here doing resins in
those who have left to try and
encourage them and help them
find placements all around the
state our our data right now
looks like about twelve of those
eighteen can be expected to to
practice in underserved
communities primarily in New
Mexico
Right and this is a if I'm
correct Mr chair and please
correct me if I'm wrong this is
a two hundred and fifty thousand
dollar investment to as as we
noted Friday night that dramatic
shortage of doctors in the state
particularly primary care and
what an impact this program will
have and with this money be
recurring so we don't have to
come back every year for this
will.
Mr chairman and senator Hickey
we're we're certainly at the
intending for it to be recurring
have get scored by the LFC is is
beyond human understanding that
this is something that it deals
with very intricate matters if
we're not privy to but I think I
think it will be and we'll just
make an emphasis on on making
sure that it does become
recurring.
Thank you Mr chair that's that's
very helpful and and also Mr
chair and Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
perhaps if we could discuss that
with the
the doctors of down as the head
so that when they're putting
their next budget together it
gets included so that we don't
have to keep going through this
and not know if we're gonna be
able to continue this valuable
program I thank you for bringing
this forward again this is just
one of the most wonderfully
leveraging tools we have to keep
physicians in New Mexico thank
you Mr chair thank you Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you senator
Ortiz king of of how are you
going to make sure that you're
not competing with the
federal hospitals.
Mr chair Senator can can you
explain the question low my
understanding is I HSS programs
are ready to put doctors on the
rural areas who isn't speaking
specifically to Shiprock in
Gallup I know you won't be
competing with them.
Because we talked about tribal
communities and housing how you
providing housing in Shiprock.
Mr chair Senator
so Brock specifically as it is a
interesting situation and what
we have done is in collaboration
with northern Navajo focused on
primarily recruiting local
students to those rotations both
of a preference on their end to
have more Navajo students served
and during the the medical type
line and on our end to to try
and encourage students from
those communities to to go on to
practice in those communities
down the road I think our hope
is really to increase the the
pie here to increase the number
of medical students interested
in working in these communities
down the road and certainly not
to to compete with any other
at the other programs that are
also attempting to do that.
And and Mr chairman would just
comment Senator that earlier
this summer for this fall I
spoke to I spent the in our
conversation with the
participants in the program over
lunch they have a monthly lunch
and there were several Navajo
students there who just very.
Very crucial in penetrating
questions it's clear that the
the program is appealing to
students from rural areas
already and this becomes a way
to further their commitment to
working back in their home
communities.
Mr chair so how are you
providing housing in Shiprock
New Mexico if you have someone
already there.
Mr chair Senator so when local
students go to rotation they
typically stay with family
members and so they're they're
not required to to seek housing
we have in the past in
collaboration with northern
Navajo when they have
availability for a slot they do
have some housing on campus it's
been on their campus it's been
affected obviously by the by the
pandemic so we work with the
sites to provide housing if they
have their own housing for some
of the other locations that
don't have housing connected to
the facility then part of the
hope is to build up a more
robust sort of database of
temporary housing so that we can
help our students provide the
housing work in those
communities.
Mr chair members of the
committee so there's a campus in
Shiprock.
That has housing.
Mr chair Senator campus is
probably not the the right word
but I know that northern Navajo
Medical Center does have some
housing units connected to to
their facility for student
housing.
And Mr chair are you so who's
paying for that are they paying
to have you guys come up are we
actually paying them to use
their housing.
Mr chair Senator it's it's
different for every location
northern Navajo they do not ask
for for payment or reimbursement
for the housing it's something
they provide an
I think in the hopes of
encouraging more students to go
on and work there later on in
their careers.
So.
It's an advantage in what manner
for the student there if there's
already a program existing that
would incorporate them in.
I mean is it just because the
actor UNM student that we're
claiming that we're.
That there in that area for this
program.
Mr chair Senator if I understand
the question you know I think
the the benefit to northern
Navajo and other sites and the
reason that they are
certainly happy to participate
in the program is that they want
to have students with local ties
in New Mexico ties because we
know that those students are
more likely to stay in practice
they want those students to see
what an amazing experience it is
to work in those communities
that those facilities because
that's what's going to make them
more likely to stay in and work
there later on in their careers
and and they are working Mr
chairman and senator they are
working well there there so it's
providing staff for that
facility and that's the
advantage that's why I would
think any hospital that we're
clear in our clinic that has
access to housing would be eager
to make it available it's just
where there isn't that
availability that the program
has to pay for several weeks of
state for the students but
otherwise they're they're
participating in staff members
in that clinic for that
hospital.
Yes in Mr chair members of the
committee that's what I
understand the H. S. program
would be yes so unlike
duplicating a program and saying
it's advantageous for an area in
which there's already an
existing program and we're for
not paying for any housing how
can we really say that I mean I
don't see the advantage of doing
this if there's already
something that high especially
for my region
and that's what I'm trying to
distinguish about you know doing
something that's already
available and I understand that
their communities you know my
needed more but to to claim that
for that area I think that
Hi two to understand thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
chairman
The existed to pass.
I need to ask you questions to
pastor second.
Motion for a do pass in the
second.
There were people on the the
list just a real fast question
is this listed in the budget
anywhere at this point.
The joke Senator my nose is in
the room but this appropriation
bill it goes over the financing
it sits there until they decide
if there's money in the budget
and then.
If that ahead of time has not
been done then and then we start
surrounding if they don't then
we start spending for doing your
money which is what we do you
know trying to do it I just want
to point out and for I know you
understand the process etcetera
pandemic but I just wanna make
sure that.
If if the money's not in Mr
notions budget live over there
he said in this other room some
trees intently taking notes and
making sure those covered but I
want to make sure that you of
this the your people who are
your heroes supporting it
understood that thank you.
Thank you senator pulp.
Thank you Mr chair and thanks to
the sponsor for bringing this
you know I I'm looking on this
little fact sheet here and we're
talking about one third of all
you medical students you're
asking for that two hundred
fifty KA
I guess I'm wondering if you
were able to get more funding
would you be able to have more
those students participate I
guess what what would be the
impact of more funding Mr chair
Senator excellent question it's
a voluntary program and so the
number of students participating
is largely determined on student
interest
I think what increased funding
would allow us to do is to
better remember students for
travel and housing expenses and
I think that would lead to more
students taking advantage of
those of all of opportunities
because they're quite a number
through the course of their
medical school training
and to continue to allow all
interested students to join
without having to sort of limit
ourselves based on our own
capacity.
So so Mister chair looking at
this and the importance and
since you know the short time
I've been in the Senate we we
just talked about having these
medical professionals having
them go through UNM in the
pipeline with and ensuring that
we have the professionals here
in our state so I.
I guess the other question was
have is why are we asking just
for two fifty and maybe not for
like half a million is our
reason why here I want to put
you on the spot I think the.
Binance sure stepped out of the
room was back in.
What just just just wondering
because I'm just looking at this
number and with what you're
doing.
Why wouldn't we ask for more
well Mr chairman and and senator
both the.
It actually costs about three
hundred fifty thousand to run
the program this year
since we received zero last year
we're hoping to get to fifty and
then let it increments
incrementally increase over the
next few years but if you wanted
to give this up some of your
junior money we could pick that
up to three fifty pretty easily
or if you know I mean it is like
if we get anything this year we
would be we would be at least in
the budget and then build on
that in the future that's kind
of the whole.
And the thought was it's easier
to get to fifty to three fifty
into the budget.
I.
So I I I guess I Mr chair that
the next question I might ask is
I mean.
Would you be open to us amending
this maybe for half a million
dollars Sir I mean it Mr
chairman.
Mister chairman Senator it yeah
I mean absolutely using the real
cost of the program is three
fifty they'll have to find it
other places in the medical
school budget if we don't give
them the full three fifty so yes
but the bottom line still is in
finance they may not have room
for any of this so so we'll just
have to see but if you want to
ask for more we we would be open
to that Mr chair sponsor
and I'm only kind of doing this
because it's not in the budget
right now and either way to
fifty half million right you're
still going to have to ask for
this and try to get this but I
just think something like this
is real important so
Mr chair I'd like to move an
amendment on the status for half
of military equipment Senator.
This is but certainly
amendments.
The budget.
Was.
Senator if I could I'd be happy
to to help was senator pope
moves that we amend this to the
five hundred thousand instead
two hundred fifty thousand for
so Mister chair on sensibility I
move that we amend.
on the first page section one
line seventeen from two hundred
fifty thousand to five hundred
thousand.
Sixteen I'm sorry section one.
Seventeen change that to.
Five hundred thousand five
hundred.
Correct.
Is there a second.
Their second to that motion I
will seconded.
So we're on on the the motion
Senator Kernan thank you very
much Mr chairman I certainly
support the program and I I
think that I think we have to be
careful because the message we
don't want to send is that we're
asking for something that is not
sustainable and I think it's
really important as members of
this legislature to be really
careful about the money even
though we have a lot of money we
know and I know coming from the
area that provides a good bit of
that money that it's it's very
volatile and I think I'm gonna
support the amendment I think
it's fine to just that but I
think we have to be careful
about messaging and you may have
some other programs that are
very very good and
I don't know it's it's to me I
just think we have to have to be
really careful so I'll support
the amendment that I'm not sure
we're sending the right message
thank you.
On the amendment on the
amendment thank you Mr chair of.
I have a little bit of of
worry
Mr chair and and Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino about asking for five
hundred thousand dollars on a
limited budget
and this this does put the stake
in the ground and something that
I think's probably affordable
and also I would recommend and
and as we move the appropriation
for over that this bill get
dropped into the house and if
you drop it in the house and
through finance there get it
included in house bill two then
it doesn't become as much
concern as it would to Senate
finance and so I don't know
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino if you
look at putting it in the house
and F. course they can always
cut it back to two fifty or
whatever but this this puts a
stake in the ground that's been
floating up top of the ground at
two fifty five hundred I think
puts it a little bit at risk
just my observation but I don't
know if you are also filing in
the house as well but it that
might be the easiest way to get
this funded thank you there
Brent on on the amended please
thank you Mr chairman
appreciate it Jerry Senator
Ortiz you know sorry we've known
each other for quite awhile
I support the the bill
I price forty minutes if it was
the three fifty it's actually
costing
but five hundred I think it's a
stretch
it may be something that
eventually would need is just
gross
we are going to have to you know
make sure we deal with some
other issues that are driving
doctors out of our state this is
not the only issue
I think it's a great idea to be
able to introduce people to our
rural communities and
underserved communities all of
you look at it almost all of our
state besides the main part of
Albuquerque is underserved
but
I will be voting for the
amendment but I will vote for
the bill to move forward and I
would also offer that if you
can't get to you know.
Know that the guy that holds the
wall so tightly to open it up
that I'd be glad to put your
money in.
Thank you.
Thank you and I just like to
comment on on the amendment is I
think it was very telling when
you indicated that it costs
three fifty.
But that there are students who
don't participate because of
travel costs and other things
that with more funding they're
more students to do this for
years we've talked about the
number of particularly in the
rural areas underserved trying
to get recruit doctors there the
data that you indicated that
about two thirds of the students
who participate in this program
stay in New Mexico and serve in
rural underserved areas.
This is an area that money
solves a problem
and I hope he gets into the
budget and five hundred thousand
to expanded so that every
student who wants to participate
has no barriers to participating
is an area that we the money
actually solves the problem of
increasing the pipeline in the
state of New Mexico and in the
big scheme of things that we're
talking about with this budget
five hundred thousand dollars is
not much to solve a problem that
is been chronic in the state for
years in particularly recruiting
to our underserved areas and so
I fully support the amendment
and the bill and with that if
you'll.
Anyone else on the amendment the
first we need to vote on the
amendment thank is it possible
to ask the amendment sponsor if
he would consider an amendment
to is amendment.
We don't have an amendment yet
Senator all what are you what
what I was going to propose is
three fifty because that's clean
and then junior money on top
that I just want increase the
probability of it being passed
through the various finance
committees well and finance has
the ability to lower to three
fifty if they so see fit.
Thank you.
so first vote on the amendment
to amend from two hundred fifty
thousand to five hundred
thousand as the the amount for
the bill so if you'll call the
roll on the amendment.
Senator Brandt nope Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator myiasis yes Senator
Neville Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes so we have an amended bill
and now we're back to the main
bill is there any other
discussion on the main bill.
If not we do have a moat well we
had to redo it because we have a
different bill now an amended
bill and so if it's alright we
will remove that and ask for a
motion on the amended bill is
the the primary bill.
Motion by Senator Brandt as
amended second by Senator Hickey
and if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan center
biased at this Senator Neville
yes Senator Pinto yeah Senator
pope yes Sanders Sauls yes have
you have.
Mended bills and congradulations
that not something happens all
the time up here where people
think that your bill is flawed
because it didn't ask for enough
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
And Mister chair I could just
say I probably won't be able to
ask for anything going forward.
Are you planning to bills are
now gonna be shorted by two
hundred fifty thousand we strive
hello just passing had this
morning that.
Hello hope that filled.
We do have Senate finance and
three and a half minutes Thomas
LA center Campos and Sam's
expert witness on his bill and
he's gonna be the expert witness
on my bill wonderful yes thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate Education
Committee just at people as
you're leaving at the end you're
doing great right now please
keep it down as you're headed
outside and talk outside thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
in essence a Senate bill ninety
three ask for seventy eight
thousand dollars to improve the
school security program within
the Morris school district as
you all know this last year
which begin April the sixth we
went through some horrific fire
and a flood issues of the issue
continues to be that whether it
be in home and or in water
itself we continue to have dire
need for improved communications
and in to improve our security
system so in essence Mr chairman
that's what this bill does.
Anything else or.
No I think the Senate all okay
I'll to the audience on Senate
bill ninety three more school
security first show hands those
in support.
Anyone in opposition.
Stand.
The chairman of thank you for.
This bill of those coming
for the mortar fire formal other
districts for factors used in
support.
Thank you is there anyone
online.
Okay then we're to questions
from the committee on Senate
bill ninety three Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
appreciate wanting to help of
more with security concerns but
how did the fire make the
security concerns any different
than they were before the fire
help me understand that.
Why this is different so if I
may Mr chairman of course
Senator Brandt as we were
working on security which
included fencing and if you will
cameras and other issues as we
dealt with it before all that
was moving along in a very
progressive way with the fires
with the floods it affected if
you will the areas surrounding
the school area around home and
and when it came to the fencing
that put a stop to that because
that's going to have to be
replaced as well so what it did
is it did have an effect on both
home and and in more.
Mr chairman Sir thank you I'm
still very confused so I've been
up there since the fires
I'm just not sure how this
changed the cost and and why
that would be done through the
normal process
it.
I I think that what.
Yes Sir Williams is doing with
the next bill is coming up
should actually addressed those
issues and I don't know that we
need to do a separate
appropriation otherwise my
district gonna come want to
separate appropriation and Hobbs
district's gonna want to
separate procreation and
everyone's gonna want separation
and so I don't support this
appropriations necessary
specific reason if it was
because of the fire then more
schools should consider a
lawsuit against the federal
government to say let the fire
thank you.
Other questions.
Yes.
Thank you I have a couple of
questions very similar to to
Senator Brandt as we look
forward.
More schools has somewhere
around a million dollars of
offset you've come from direct
appropriations outside of the
public school capital outlay
process there are several bills
moving forward right now that
would eliminate those offsets
for districts and for school
security C. T. E. early
childhood I think those are the
main areas would reduce the
state local match for districts.
Why is this a bill that
shouldn't go through that
process which is the typical
mechanism that specifically
addresses school security for
funding and instead go for a
direct appropriation because the
concern that Senator Brandt
brought up that every district
would go then if I can do it
without having to come up with
local match or any of the other
things that's a better way
Senator why this thank you very
much Mr chairman of course to
the ascent Education Committee
as we go forward to and they
will continue to go ahead and
seek if you will those
appropriations through these
processes right now as we deal
with the we're hoping that as we
do move forward the additional
resources will definitely help
us in the area with the
communication towers with cat I
and some of the other fiber
optics that we did have in place
a lot of these issues are going
to have to be addressed so it's
going to require more than if
you will just a hundred fifty
thousand it's going to take the
additional dollars to to upgrade
if you will the communication
system and the security system
for that area we are seeking
additional means but again as we
move forward as a message bill
with this in essence to us and.
Hopefully in the long run to all
of our districts that would be
if we work together we
definitely can take care if you
will of the security within each
one of our school districts but
this is very specific to the
more schools thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you
Yeah I we've got several bills
that are dealing with these
kinds of things across the state
many but specifically with
safety some as a result of what
it happened into of all day when
we had the the horrific shooting
up in the Aztec district we
pumped out a bunch of money got
it out very quickly to districts
for safety and security I think
some of that money this would
become available around July
first and some of that money was
being spent in the districts
within two or three weeks as I
recall
I know there's I think there's a
bill on the house side that was
supported by L. E. S. C. to
change that the formula while we
had our is time aplenty for one
time money and again to get this
money out fairly rapidly and
quickly I got real concerns
about direct appropriations to
districts of this sort.
I'll leave it at that.
Center right German of.
Bills.
Okay thank you and.
By temporary table it's not like
a kill it table this is we're
gonna keep some funding bills
here and see how and if I
understand what you're saying
Senator as some of the other
bills that affect is very area
play out so that we're not
sending competing bills that
then have to get sorted out in a
conference committee or
something that like that later
on if that makes sense is what
you're asking.
At I think I wanna make sure I'm
not putting words in your mouth
as such so we do have a table in
motion which is not available I
was just trying to explain that
debate if you call the roll
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes.
Senator my is yes.
Third of bills yes.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope.
Senator yes.
And so it will hang out in our
committee kind of still on our
list of bills to bring back up
at an appropriate time as we see
how whether things play out
thank you rich Mr chairman
members of the Senate ducation
Committee thank you.
And cinnamon else near term will
yield some similar kinds of
areas yep Mr chairman Senate
bill ninety five appropriates
twenty five million dollars from
the PS you'll see our public
school capital outlay to PED for
school security the spliff wide
open slept with a one year time
frame of the school districts
may be short may be in need and
I think PED can determine what
the school in what they need as
we move forward so with that
will stand for questions thank
you and so out to the audience
on this those in support.
That you anyone in opposition.
So supporters if you'd like to
can briefly comment.
So.
Please up.
This
panel.
Thank I don't think there is
anyone else here.
Yes.
Chairman propose on the register
lobbyist for revenge public
schools and the schools public
schools we stand in support of
this piece of legislation keep
in mind that the task force
there are no there are members
of our communities and
stakeholders together makes a
recommendation endorsed.
Thank you.
The stand.
Instead of the superintendents
association calls with.
Because of a false alarm I was
forced this is one more piece of
indoor legislation.
Bring it forward.
Thank you anyone online.
If you please have them
introduces a command please.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm surface Gerald
I'm senior vice president at the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce more in strong support
of this bill school security
continues to be a priority for
districts and schools and as the
FIR yes the public school
capital outlay fund balances of
brownies applications for this
funding has slowed school
leaders have had their hands
full with managing changing
schedules and protocols during
the pandemic now that the worst
of that is behind them they can
get back to their facilities
more regular needs Senate bill
ninety I will provide you
chambers systems the replacement
all doors and windows new
fencing metal detectors
electronic entry systems all
kinds of things that are school
leaders say will make their
school safer and help their
students and teachers feel safer
to were in favor of this
appropriation especially if it
helps fund the school security
capital projects more
expediently thank you thank you.
Okay questions from the
committee Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
so I just have one simple
question and for you and Stan
and understanding why we're
sending this money to pad
instead of having the public
school capital outlay authority
oversee the output of this money
is it because of the matching
funds what what's the reason for
that.
Mr Chairman center.
I'll tell you honestly I don't
know maybe staff knows them.
Maybe efficiency but I don't
know Mr.
Mr chairman Senator.
Part of this.
Across the.
Since we have.
The.
Senator.
I'm sorry I'm just seeing if
this tax has some to do with us.
Would you like we in deal the
current Senator Kernan and then
come back to you as I I guess Mr
chairman
stand I I just the money from
this appropriation goes to Pat.
It doesn't say anything about
with input from the public
school capital outlay authority
which seems to be the place that
has done the research in those
what districts need this pad
have the ability to actually
make the right decisions on this
or do they even have the
staffing to do that.
Mr chairman I apologize I didn't
read.
I apologize if this.
And senator we have great from
the public get department who
might have be able to Luminate
this a little better chair
Senator Brandt at present that
PED does not believe that we
have the capacity to to do this
Center recommending the two FTEs
would be I needed to
appropriately manage the grant.
Mr Chairman Sir that the
concerns me.
That we're moving this to Pat I
I think the public school
capital outlay authority has all
the groundwork to to actually
administer this I think that we
have some other bills that are
coming again kind of the same
issues and Campos that will make
sure we can put language in
those roles to make sure it
doesn't count against people's
match we work on this bill LFC
that would make sure even the
school districts that had a
liability already against the
state that those would be wiped
clean I think that's the right
approach I have no problem
putting twenty five million
towards those security issues I
think it needs to go towards the
security issues not every
Senator has been proactive as me
and my other Rio Rancho senators
and representatives from both
sides of the aisle that put a
lot of money into the security
Rio Rancho schools through our
capital outlay but by doing that
Rio Rancho schools as a
liability against their match so
we have a bill that's coming
that should be fixing all of
that I don't know that we want
to move this twenty five million
out of.
the public school capital outlay
authority put in Pat who doesn't
have the capacity to do it I
think the money needs to stay
there and be identified they're
to be used for.
Security for school I I don't
that makes sense when you think
about that Mr Chairman center
that does make a lot of sense
but we might need to amend it
but we still have to move the
money out of PS C. O. C. into
two general fund for operational
so that they are allowed to use
it.
We may have to then this bill I
I just think we need to probably
take another look at this and do
it draft change to maybe you can
do it between here and finance I
don't want to get hung up but we
are really early in the session
so I don't think it would but we
need to do this the right way
and I think setting it to Pat
having to put more staff on that
having them catch up on the
learning curve is not the right
way thank you Mr thank you other
comments that occurred and I'm
sorry I had you on the list I
just to look at my list thank
you Mr chair so so just for
clarification the twenty five
million did I hear you say
you're moving it out of PSC I
have kept it light in so that's
money that's already sitting
there it's going to be moved and
I'm wondering if the reason
might be the difficulty in
getting the money from public so
kept out like because of the
restrictions that might be
alleviated by future legislation
that we're going to hear because
it you know many times we we
haven't had people apply for the
scholarship school districts
maybe because of the match maybe
because of the difficulty of
being in line so I understand
why that process needs to be may
be changed a little bit which I
think we're going to so so I
don't know it seems like we need
to hear all of them and find
out.
I'm pretty sure everything's
gonna pass and we will be able
to get to those dollars more
easily that if if there's
another reason it needs to go
the path other than the quick
availability like morning set
now and maybe through that's a
better pathway to get it to more
now rather than going through
the process public school kept
out by so I'm a little confused
to so thank you other.
Comments I I guess my question
is along the same lines that
mechanism that set up to push
these monies out and we do have
with the MPSC O. C. the
mechanism for safety was
identified as a legitimate use
of capital outlay money's I also
don't understand a very
concerned when the PED's says
yeah we we just barely manage
what we do it's gonna take two
FTE over on the PED's side to
administer that that doesn't
sound like that's gonna be real
efficient to move the money
through PED's when they don't
have the people to process all
of that I know there are several
bills coming through that are
working on this very issue on
trying to get more money try
we've been listening to the
school districts about why
they're not applying for more of
the capital outlay types of
money and I think several of
those bills are designed
specifically to address those by
reducing the reducing or
eliminating the offsets by
lowering the state local match
so that they local districts
don't have to come up with as
much match.
And the PS the OC is been set up
as a mechanism to push money out
in these kinds of programs and
so.
Yeah what I'm thinking but it's
Adam AB absolutely the will of
the committee but is potentially
also to hold this bill here and
see what happens with the others
that are more the enabling bills
on how to get that money out to
districts.
But other comments from
committee members.
Really to.
Motion to temporarily table and
Set it aside keep it in our list
for what it may be more
appropriate to bring it back
depending on other legislation
that has moved that accurate.
Mr chair when we get to hear the
bill that addresses the issue of
the match of waving the offsets
when is that bill coming for
this committee.
Senator I'll have to look I
think that one maybe over the
housing because it's a
L. E. S. C. endorsed bill you
don't run parallel bills of
those and so we're gonna want to
watch but I will look into that
and if you remind me on
Wednesday I should have an
answer for you as to where that
one is who's carrying it what's
going on with that so and Mr
chairman and senator does that
give us time to consider that
and then come back around are
the I mean it what about what
you need for your committee to
move him.
Mr chair and senator I I think
that I think what I hold them
all together but the house bill
may get caught up in certain
issues so we better have a
secondary plan and if these
bills are laying on the table
here thank you as a secondary
plan to then these rules
something in and then rolled
back out and maybe the best
thing to do currently I I may
agree with that Gladys on the
killing table it's only on the
kitchen table in order.
Maybe the best thing to do.
The topping block it was in the
Senate finance.
When you add some information
that might be helpful here.
Okay.
First.
And the Madam pro tem as a
building that's but she is that
is a vehicle this was a
something that I don't know
where it came from actually
great I know we had someone
somewhere house and some were
Senate I could remember which
ones we assigned to which places
so.
So Senator did you make a motion
for a temporary table of if you
will please call the roll on
tabling bill to hold it in our
committee not a killing Senate
Bill.
With that we've created a new
category on my.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Maestas yes
senator bill yes Senator Pinto
yeah Senator hello.
Senator soul yes so the bill is
going to be held here in the
committee thank you we had a
fairly short gender today we got
through everything thank you
committee Wednesday I think
we've got a little bit more
ambitious plans for things
please members of we try to make
sure we're here on time so we
the expeditious in getting
