Here.
To present this I know you are
me ho who is on call us so we
call them is let their head out
here.
Do we have our committee Matt.
The bills let's.
The gentleman let me see
remember really fall L. yes the
public get study.
Lane.
Hello.
The next contest.
Thank you we text Leo the meal
and let him know that he'll be
off next.
Begin very for people watching
the just trying to get very is
people here we're gonna be
jumping around on the agenda
we'll keep trying to go in order
to we find somebody is here so
it'll would jump back up the top
after this but you hear HB three
forty two education savings plan
uses.
Representative welcome to Senate
education thank you Mr chair I'm
happy back and I will be brief
of my presentation I'm mindful
of the time commitment so Mister
chair with me at the table to my
right is now to Cordova she's
executive director of the TV and
also CPA to my left is Kurt
summer he's legal counsel for
the TV so what House Bill three
forty two does Mr chair members
of the committee this brings our
state statutes into alignment
with federal Internal Revenue
Code on five twenty nine plan so
currently under our state
statutes you can only use a five
twenty nine account fund balance
to pay for a college tuition
expenses so what this would do
is well actually to expand our
users to where they can now use
monies for apprenticeships which
you're not allowed to do right
now you could use those monies
actually pay back student loan
debt which seems kind of strange
you can you can pay for college
on the front end but not on the
back in so to bring an alignment
with that and then there's a
there's an opportunity as well
as if you have a fund balance at
the end so what so you open up a
five twenty nine account for a
grandchild for example with our
opportunity scholarship now
there's a good chance that
students that go to college in
state are going to have student
loan debt hopefully and so if
there's a fund balance at the
end of that education then the
grandparent could roll that
balance into a Roth IRA for the
grand child and so it's
encouraging that kind
investments well and the fourth
piece.
Is this allows for distributions
for private K. through twelve as
well so it's it's really just
bring state statutes in
alignment with federal Internal
Revenue Code with that Mr chair
we stand for any questions thank
you of that is first just to
show hands those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
And the supporters if you'd like
to come up to the might we do
limited to two minutes.
Thank you I won't take that long
at Mr chairman members the
committee karla Kugler
associated builders and
contractors a commercial
construction association we also
have the largest multi trade
apprenticeship program in the
state we stand in strong support
of house bill three forty two
are pleased that the federal
government expanded the usage of
the five to nine program a
personal savings program and
want the you know New Mexico to
follow suit and do the same
before us with apprenticeship
it's actually paid for by the
employer so these funds can
actually be similar to a G. I.
funding bill these funds can now
be utilized for the student
themselves for tools of the
trade and things to help just
further their success so for
these reasons we stand in front
support thank you thank you.
Mr chair Deborah Condit register
lobbyist for the public charter
schools of New Mexico and we
like to thank the sponsor and
the education trust board for
their work on this issue and
support the bill House Bill
three forty two makes important
clarifications and changes
that'll help families see the
full array of possibilities
associated with saving for their
children's future education with
eight five twenty nine account
even putting a small amount of
money away for future in
education makes it more probable
that a child pursues that future
in education and that's good for
New Mexico thank you thank you.
Yes Sir a good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is John crane camp Fund
general counsel state
treasurer's office I don't have
anything to read here today but
we did want to come in to
express our support for the
legislation and thank the
sponsor of the principal thank
you thank you.
With a certain more Mr chair on
Marxism of the higher education
policy director of the higher
education department the
education trust board up is
under our department secretary
Rodriguez to support different
committees today it is speaking
right now another one but you
just wanna let you know that we
see us that strongly in support
of this bill hope you'll
support.
Thank you we do have three
people online in support if they
would like to speak please dell
as far as.
Hi good morning on thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dale as far
as and I'm speaking to you as an
account holder of over twenty
years of the New Mexico New
Mexico is five twenty nine plan
the education fund HB three
forty two is asking for the
state of New Mexico to recognize
the final language in the
education trust act outlining
federally allowed uses and
expenses included in section
five twenty nine of the Internal
Revenue Code.
There's no appropriation request
for this funding is merely a
suggestion that New Mexicans
experience the same benefits the
five twenty nine account holders
have in other states.
Those other states follow the
language in the education trust
act as it stands right now
account holders in other states
that follow the federal language
relies more benefits than those
account holders in New Mexico
this is a very common sense
bills and aligns our state with
iris language specific to five
point implants I appreciate your
consideration and encourage you
to support this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Sanchez surface
Gerald.
The morning Mr chair members of
the committee separate sterile
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we're in strong support
of this bill as a state we
should always work to make sure
receiving federal opportunities
for our residents especially
when it means giving New
Mexicans more freedom and how
they use their own saved money
plus opening of five twenty nine
savings plans for more uses than
before could encourage more New
Mexicans to begin setting funds
aside for Children grandchildren
even themselves for education
expenses this bill will give our
residents a powerful tool to
help them and their loved ones
get ahead in life and we urge
the committee support thank you.
Thank you and last done Baker.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name's John Baker
I'm with United association
local four twelve plumber
pipefitters union I would like
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward
apprenticeship is a very
important career pathway and the
skilled trades are very
important to our economy
and that it is education and so
I do appreciate the sponsor and
would ask for your support thank
you.
Thank you is there anyone in
opposition.
Don't think we have anyone up
okay questions from the
committee.
For the past seconded.
Is did you call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan Senator my Estes Senate
Bill Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator yes the
do you have a do pass thank you
Mr chairman Philip the house
Republican adopt a child is
committee so I appreciate.
Representative Romero we're back
up to the top of the list house
bill one twenty five and then
the next one up will be one
thirty four.
And house bill one twenty five
school dual credit task force.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning committee so house bill
one twenty five is a temporary
provision that would create a
task force to look into various
issues with dual credit I think
it's very timely that we have
the high school graduation
requirements bill on the floor
and the task force would be
tasked with various things
related to dual credit
programming funding things of
that nature and I have an expert
witness he may have a couple
words.
If this is on Google on good
morning.
Madam two at Mr chairman members
of the committee and David Byrne
and the executive director of
the four corners regionalization
Whopper tip number one up in
Farmington serving six member
districts there and other
statewide initiatives we've
spent the last.
Whether the year working very
closely with high schools and
higher education partners around
the state in the area of dual
credit in a number of things are
very clear to us first of all.
We know that dual credit
opportunities are essential for
students as they are looking
towards our careers looking
towards college degrees and so
forth we know that kids that
receive dual credit while in
high school receive college
credits have a much greater
chance of graduating from
college in four years than their
peers do.
We know they're they're very
clear opportunities and at the
same time if we look back a few
years the entire dual credit
arena in the state has just
exploded the number of kids are
taking advantage of these
options the number of schools
the number higher education
partners that are making the
impossible is just exploded.
So we get to a point where now
we're looking at the landscape
of what is the what is the
students experiences and what we
find is is enormous amount of
inconsistency throughout the
state there are good
relationships are are good
programs are are good practices
in place but it's honestly it's
kind of all over the board
issues around credentialing
issues around who's paying for
what types of fees and services
issues around what types of
courses can be offered in how
the offered online or in person
we we see a lot of issues around
equity issues regarding students
ability ability to even access
courses from their existing
partners or establish
relationships of others.
So with all of this in mind.
What we're really talking about
is the chance to first of all
let's get our hands around this
issue what actually is happening
in the state what are all of the
conditions that are affecting
students ability to take and
succeed in dual credit courses
and let's see we can find some
of those best practices that
that can serve as role models
for serve as exemplars
throughout the state to make
sure that every kid who's
interested in dual credit in
that particular career field has
the opportunity to take it so
that's really what this is to do
is to look at the universe of
dual credit.
Find out first what's happening
in the state because it's all
over the place find of those
programs that are seem to be
most successful and then let's
see what we can do with those as
far as helping to establish
promote or expand opportunities
for our students.
Thank you for that that Mr
Chairman with information thank
thank you first just to show
hands somebody in support.
Anyone in opposition.
Then looks like we've got one in
support online see no one in
opposition if the supporters
would like to come up in please
keep it very quick and short
pieces there doesn't appear to
be opposition.
The the head Mike works best you
have to hold the button down on
this one.
Senator soul members of the
committee we appreciate the
opportunity to be here Chantal
preservation Mexico university
at Roswell and also the
president of the.
Branch campus Association here
in the state we support this
legislation and we look forward
to the ambitious timeline of
trying to get this done before
January first they want to start
it the summer and try to get it
done in six months so it's
ambitious but but achievable we
believe so we just stand in
support of this thank you thank
you.
Yes ma'am good morning chairman
sold sparking.
Hold it down the whole time.
Good morning Senator souls for
and representatives of the
committee my name is Bobby
Curtis on the executive director
of the regional educational
cooperative's Association and
stand in support of this bill I
think it's especially important
to have these opportunities
through dual enrollment in
particular for our students in
rural education and just as a
reminder you have sixty eight
districts and
Lots of students in rural
education in our state so we
stand in support of this
legislation in the bill thank
you thank you.
Please the.
Hold the button.
Learning Mr chair members of the
committee hearing great Steve
young is without any New Mexico
government relations director
for and on behalf of our members
we stand in support of this bill
just to be brief we just want to
amplify the voices in support
and ask you to vote in favor
thank you.
Thank you we have one online
Sarah fitzgerald.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee again separate
sterile senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we're pleased to
stand in support of this bill as
well today HB one twenty five
presents a great opportunity for
education leaders to take a step
back and make sure our systems
are safe system is working for
our students dual credit courses
aren't excellent option they're
safe trial run of real college
level coursework and they allow
our most motivated students to
rack up enough college credits
to sometimes enrolled in college
full time as sophomores later on
or even graduate high school
with an associates degree but
that's if our system is working
as it should we need to make
sure our K. twelve and higher
education leaders are working
together to make sure students
credits transfer when they
should and to ensure have access
to these opportunities no matter
where they live this bill will
help accomplish this and the
urge your support thank you.
Thank you there was no
opposition is that correct and.
and so questions from the
committee.
As the second the motion for a
do pass the second any questions
from anyone.
If you call the roll please
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes center my Estes
Center Novell yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes.
To do that.
Representative would you like to
just stay there and do the L. E.
S. C. public education study
please if I may Mister chairman
Mr chairman House Bill to
sixteen is another bill that
you've heard before for a number
of years now is for the
legislative education study
committee to study higher
education and early childhood so
it's striking the prohibitive
language that restricts Elia C.
to studying the colleges of
education so that it would open
it up we did on and and this was
working with the secretaries of
early childhood and higher
education that had requests for
delayed implementation date in
order to kind of get all our
ducks in a row make sure L. E.
S. C. has what they need in
order to make this transition as
well as the departments in order
to to get their ducks in a row
as well so we've seen it before
it's passed unanimously both
chambers were hoping to actually
get it signed this year with
that Mr Chairman list of
questions thank you and so we're
on.
House Bill to sixteen as amended
the LFC public education study
those in support leave the room.
Anyone in opposition.
John of you I come up you're
you're good okay so the and
nobody online questions from the
committee.
Madam thank you very much and
and we've talked about this
Mr chair and representative
about we're where does higher it
really fall and certainly LFC
that if they have to report and
talk about many that there many
other things that I think within
the higher it Department
colleges specifically the
college of education we need to
we need to be sure and keep an
eye on those things so I think
that's the intent of this
correct and maybe even expanded
a little bit Mr chair and and
senator yes very much so so for
all those reasons stated as well
as not just looking at the
colleges of education because we
know those students are having
to take classes across
departments but being able to
get a handle on that the higher
education funding formula is
different in the K. twelve
system so we could be able to do
a deep dive and that and
continue that substantive work
that we've seen through the
interim between the LESC and the
LESC in our K. twelve system and
apply that to education required
thank you very much thank you Mr
the other questions and I I have
more just kinda some similar.
Excuse me similar comments is
when we get up here this
committee gets all the early
childhood bills we get all the
higher it bills and in many
cases we haven't had a lot of
the background that comes with
those with the exception of the
teacher colleges the teacher
preparation programs that L. E.
S. C. does have purview over I
think this would help in the
education committees that we've
looked at many of these we can
advocate for good legislation
prior and come with Ellie S. C.
endorsements and so as we're
looking more at education as a
conception to to career focus
this really allows lots more of
that so that we don't come up
here and have to try and catch
up quickly in some of the areas
because we haven't had
information or or presentations
up I see it very much not that
those areas need regulating by
the L. E. S. C. but they need
advocating by the L. E. S. C.
and and making sure that we've
got a continuity and
seamlessness across the the
education curriculums and up
programs.
That any other comments or
pleasure committee.
The motion for Mister chair
seconded by Senator pope if
you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
my Estes senator bill is Senator
Pinto yes Senator pope yes
undersold yes you have yet to
pass right the let's get back
over here committee.
The server amido house bill one
thirty four as amended and then
after that we'll have house bill
one ninety eight.
I'm sorry Representative
Trujillo you the name on his the
ones been bugging me about one's
going to be done so I apologize
Representative G. O. welcome to
Senate education thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee amid defer to my host
and then I'll speak if you don't
mind so Mister chairman members
of the committee it's
international women's day and
with me are three amazing young
ladies from Albuquerque academy
and we need one more chair if we
can who have helped craft this
bill which is the menstrual
equity in schools which
addresses the period poverty now
period poverty refers to the
inability to afford basic
hygiene products such as pads
tampons and liners for the
purpose of managing menstrual
bleeding now nationwide or one
in four men straighter struggle
to afford menstrual products
it's impact is magnified for
people of color for nearly two
times eighty four percent of
females Mr chair our students in
New Mexico The New Mexico who
attended title one eligible
school period poverty in our
state is a crisis for education
health care now this bill will
help rural men straighter than
ensuring that menstruation
project products are available
in public schools now is the
former high school cheer coach
and as a former educator I
carried around Amer's and I
brought that first immersed that
I ever Kerry today it's now a
vintage cafe because these girls
and so it carried around
menstruation products for
females who could take whatever
they need with no questions
asked now as a coach in rural
New Mexico it's not easy for my
students from Abbey Q. or
further north to go to a store
to get what they need after
school hours when I have them
there at your practice so what
they did is they took what they
needed with no questions asked
you're going to see that there's
a vintage Los Alamos National
Laboratory take on this big
because when the women of Los
Alamos National Laboratory knew
what I was doing with the
murders I took it to Los Alamos
to ensure that the products are
always in here and so.
So products this bag member
emptied the tank ensured that
the bank was never blown up for
suspicion of it being about.
And so joining us via zoom and
you'll hear later is one of my
former cheerleaders from
Espanola valley high school
who's now a mother who has a
daughter and understand even
more the importance of the
murders but before we go to that
I want to yield to the house
sponsor Representative Trujillo
who's not only a good friend of
mine but an ally who strongly
believe that this bill as well
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee we started working
on this project thanks to phone
calls from these young women to
my right and my left they
remembered that I carried the
tax incentive bill for the Mr
products and they asked me if
the if we could talk about
moving the bill forward that
would actually provide free
menstrual hygiene products for
young women and
elementary middle school and
high schools and I'm not going
to take a lot of time because
you really need to listen to the
articulate of comments that
these young women have made so
I'd like to do for first to you
would you introduce yourselves
and then you go on through and
share why we're doing this if
you don't mind Mr chairman yep
hold about.
Good morning chairman committee
my name is Nora Lee and I'm one
of the students that worked with
Senator how to meal and
Representative through he'll to
create this legislation in New
Mexico where nearly thirty
percent of our children live in
poverty period poverty is an
issue defined by its impact is
it is an issue of education and
it is an issue that compromises
access to education in our state
we know why education is so
important we understand its
ability to and generations of
poverty to put an end to
disparities between rural and
urban outcomes to our more
immigrant communities a
community that I am from with
the power of language education
is what took my family from a
literate to speaking in front of
you today in two generations.
We you all believe in education
so I'm asking you today to
believe in students period
poverty is created by economic
and security but it is
perpetuated and continued by
shame whether a state via there
is consequence here students do
not of choice we live between
purchasing these hygiene goods
and other basic necessities
between scrambling to find a pad
and making it to class between
what we are given and what we
deserve today I am asking you to
make a choice for the students
who have none supporting H. B.
one thirty four is supporting
New Mexico's future.
Thank you.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
Marley Fisher and I'm another
one of the high school students
working with Senator how to DO
and Representative to hear on
this bill it's three one thirty
four minutes free equitable
access to menstrual products and
all public elementary middle and
high school bathrooms dispensers
will be installed in each of
these bathrooms and regularly
stocked Justice toilet paper
paper towels would be but more
than that this bill provides
equitable access to educational
opportunities to respect the
dignity that our students
deserve four and five students
nationwide have missed class due
to the inaccessibility of these
products this isn't another
statistic to read and brush off
period poverty affects real
people real students some of
whom you'll hear from today this
morning I should be in physics
class learning about torque but
I'm here on international
women's day testifying in strong
support of this bill because I
know how important it is I'm
missing class so other students
don't have to.
Seventeen other states have
passed similar bills mandating
much for drugs in school
bathrooms together Senators we
can add New Mexico to this list
New Mexico maybe the state that
need it most for these reasons
we urge you to support H. B. one
thirty four today.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is Sophia Liam
and I have another one of the
students that have been working
with senator how to me and
Representative should be on this
bill.
Senators in order to understand
the impact that you can make by
passing this bill I think it's
important understand what
inspired us to bring this
conversation to the state level
it's a simple as a few sticky
notes a sixth graders newer
Marley and I all understood a
certain fear when we first
walked into the bathrooms in
sixth grade.
The fear that we wouldn't have
enough drugs to make it through
the day a fear that students
with the iPad hiding behind our
sleeves but most importantly it
it was a fear that play to the
back of our minds for every
second of the school day
focusing our worries with our
bodies rather than our work.
This fear was so impactful that
seven years later as you can see
it inspired us to do something
we were able to get the free
menstrual products in the
bathrooms are on screen as we
excitedly checked each bathroom
for the free pads and tampons we
came across the same six great
bathroom that caused our initial
fears expecting to be matched
with a nostalgic nervousness we
were instead met with a colorful
collage of sticky notes our
sixth graders wrote thank you
notes to stick on to the walls
next the bathrooms they read you
are my savior and thank you so
much where we were once fearful
our sixth graders were proud.
Senators by passing this bill
you are not only allowing
students to make it through the
school day but you are giving
the confidence and showing them
the positivity and a natural
bodily function that was never
made to cause fear.
Today you have the power to
decorate the walls of our
bathrooms and the minds of our
youth thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman we do have and I I
will call an expert witness but
you can go to the committee but
we do have Brianna what's being
said less than I'm zoom who's
willing to say a few words and
so I can wait to go to them for
that.
Anything else.
Thank yes that I moved to tears
Mr chairman by the hard work
these young women are put into
this bill.
Thank you just in the audience
those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay we got a lot of people and
we do have other bills so please
keep things very short if you
feel compelled that that you
would like to speak or say some
other other things so you come
up to the Mike and then we've
got fiber so we've got looks
like six online to speak and of
the online ones be prepared I'm
at limits you to only one minute
but please go ahead hello I
think the committee for the
honor to speak before you today
my name is Erin are you look at
is and I'm a seventeen year old
senior at Los Alamos high school
I'm advocating for the passing a
bill H. B. one thirty four men
increase access to mental drugs
in New Mexico public schools as
a teenager human traits in west
out with first hand financial
instability I can attest to the
importance of this bill we
stress the in New Mexico eighty
four percent of ensuring
students with attend title one
eligible schools and twenty five
percent live below the federal
poverty line wanted for the
students New Mexican students
are didn't have been forced to
miss learning time due to period
related issues in an ever
changing world is crucial that
the most disadvantaged students
have access to the same quality
of education establishing a
period inequality cannot
obstruct the education of youth
ensures a prosperous future of
our great state passing H. B.
one thirty four can help bridge
educational gaps in New Mexico
thus I would like to remind the
committee that voted in favor of
H. B. one thirty four as part of
thank you and thank you to all
the wonderful women I work with
on this.
Thank you others in the room we
would like to come speak if you
please come lined up so we see
how many people are ready to go
if anyone else is going to.
Yes ma'am good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Laura and I'm standing here
in the as a representative of
transform education Mexico I can
only be very brief because I can
imagine there's other young
women online that have powerful
what words to share of our
coalition stands in full support
of this bill thank you thank
you.
Good morning sharing committee
my name is Jack Hyde I work with
Julien echo I'm here to speak on
behalf of Planned Parenthood
with the support of this bill
because we know.
How important it is for our
school settings to have free
access to hygiene products
feminine hygiene products to
always be free and available to
women set and anyone who needs
them because we know is not only
a hygiene issue I mean
healthcare issue it's also a
financial issue thank you thank
you.
Okay last one in the rooms yes
ma'am.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and we
fully support this bill and
thank the sponsors for bringing
it I'll just be very brief and
state that payment The New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
always supports communities and
the people with lived
experiences to develop solutions
for the state of New Mexico and
this is one of them so we are to
do pass thank you.
Thank you.
Joe did.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee jokey and with the
New Mexico school board
association and for all the
reasons stated we support this
legislation thank you thank you
will now go to the online and I
have first have Bethany Mayer
Evans and then after that'll be
Hayley's Oct.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Reverend more
of it with New Mexico religious
coalition for reproductive
choice and we stand in full
support of H. B. one thirty four
no student should have to worry
about starting their period
unexpectedly or not having the
supplies they need while they're
at school we believe that
providing period products in
school bathrooms will decrease
the number of students who have
to stay home or miss class
because they started their
period and don't have the
necessary products.
And we also believe that this is
a human rights issue and so
we're very proud to stand with
the previous.
Wonderful you were working and
period property here in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Haley's argument that
next would be Erica Davis after
he the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Haley
document the staff attorney from
southwest winds Law Center last
year the subways wins Law Center
surveyed healthcare providers
and those experiencing
homelessness and found that
there's a large unmet needs for
natural products in our
community inaccessibility drugs
and Shane tied to menstruating
can have devastating impacts on
students education I myself
remember going home early
mortified because I forgot my
drugs at home and my makeshift
toilet paper pad had failed on
me providing reliable free
access drugs in schools is an
important step not only in
addressing inequities of period
poverty also in fostering safe
and supportive school
environments because of this the
southwest women's Law Center
fully supports H. B. one thirty
four and the students who
brought this to us today thank
you thank you.
next Erica Davis and then Emily
will about.
Good morning Senate educational
thank you so much for your time
my name is Erica Davis current
I'm the director of advocacy a
girls of the Santa Fe yesterday
we hate thirty plus students
from our leadership allow group
wanting to hear this but this
was today so that's alright but
they have our full support with
that and here in Santa Fe for
sixty years we working with our
students and young women and we
know that this bill would help
break the longstanding statement
of an unnecessary stigma behind
ministration and relieve the
financial barriers that many
students face when it comes to
the accessibility of sanitary
products is bill has all of our
support from our students their
families and the team here at
girls Inc and we ask for your
support to continue to secure
this for our students and let
them lead us in this as it will
have one less stress in them
pursuing their course work in
education and support our chair
from the twitterverse if this is
the for our students this the
for New Mexico congrats on the
book here thank you so much for
all the teller doing include
west our students for leading us
into a brighter future thanks
thank you.
Emily will Dow and then
Monet argue back will be after
that really.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily wilt
thou with New Mexico voices for
children and we'd like to thank
Representative Trujillo for
working with our students to
bring this bill forward and
Representative Fajardo meal for
joining today in support as well
and we support H. B. one thirty
four for all the reasons you've
heard before I think the fact
that this bill has been led by
our students and the powerful
testimonies you've heard from
them speak much louder than
anything else I could add so we
just ask the committee to join
us and support thank you.
Thank you they are to back and
then Meredith match and sh.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Monique archer back and I'm
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico Black central organizing
committee we strongly support H.
B. one thirty four because it
centered and community care
mensural equity in our schools
means that our students will
phone feel nurtured by their
institutions during a very full
time although period poverty has
been a discussed issue during
previous New Mexico legislative
sessions it affects more than
half of the population of our
state no student should have to
miss school and no person should
have to miss out on daily life
because they are unable to
afford the basic necessities
they require we strongly urge
you all to vote in favor of H.
B. one thirty four also we
commend our courageous and
driven youth leaders for
bringing this to the people's
house thank you for your time.
Thank you the action and then I
believe Briana Salazar is also
so we'll have her speak at this
point that to.
Mr chair members of the
committee on merits Meijin and
I'm speaking on behalf of the
league of women voters and
American Association of
university women these students
came to the league and asked us
to work with them on this bill
and we are so proud as a long
time educator myself this is
civic education at that it's
best they are inspiring students
across the land to come with
issues of importance and this is
very very important I have seen
students leave school for the
same reasons that you've heard
because and this is a very
important equity issue it's a
small investment will return
have high returns in terms of
school attendance and completion
thank you students thank you
Sanchez and I urge the committee
to support this bill.
Thank you and Brianna Salazar.
Yes good morning good morning my
name is Brianna cells are former
student and graduate from us
over the high and the university
of New Mexico when I was a
student athlete in high school
my coach Leo who is present day
Senator the part of the always
carried immersed with him every
practice game and event we had
in this March we knew they were
feminine hygiene products for us
to get anytime we needed no
questions no judgment so now I'm
asking you to support this
because having this option for
teenage girls will be one less
stress and as a mother of a
young daughter this would make
me feel more secure when that
day happens knowing that my
daughter has the care she will
need if he needs it I support
this and I hope all of you will
too I think you Senator the
automobile and Representative
Trujillo for raising this issue
and an advocate for students
thank you thank you.
There was no one in opposition
so we'll go to questions from
the committee.
So current thank you very much
and again thank you you all did
a great job and very well
prepared and I appreciate your
bringing the bill
tell me about the appropriation
Mr chair and representative
Senator is it in the in the
budget yes Mr chair it is in the
budget of one point two million
dollars was added to house bill
two and so Mr chair and
representative how would that be
distributed through the PED it
is incumbent on the PED Mr.
Chairman of Senator Kernan two
devices
Of.
Process in which the a lot of
large letters will go to the
public schools eighty nine
school districts and possibly
the charter schools to.
have administrators determine
how those of projects will
participate be disseminated so
Mister chair with just that
amount of money and looking at
the FIR it appears that that's
not going to be sufficient to
cover all the elementary schools
and all the mid schools and all
the junior high schools so how
will they cover that additional
expense mmhm Mr chair madam
Senator we were told by LFC the
schools also have of a large
number of we
of reserves that they can use to
augment.
In the process to any product
that is needed thank you Mr
chair and also it looks like
this is only a one year
appropriation just well it says
in fiscal years twenty twenty
four so it is a recurring
appropriation yes Mr chair
members the committee were
assured that it would be a
recurring cut so Mr chair is
that in the and I don't have the
it's an agency operation finance
committee at step amendment so
yes so it is recurring and in
and I think my concern is
So the installation of the
machines in us and there will be
two different machines are a
machine that would produce two
different products because not
every that female would want to
use the same and so the
installation hello how would
an individual who might access
the product
it what if they decide they need
to have one or two or three or
four five how do you have a set
for I mean could they just go in
and pretty much take everything
that's in there Mr chairman and
senator
Studies have shown that these
products have been installed
initially.
So young people who access them
are usually so happy it that
they take as many as they
possibly can because they don't
think they're going to have
access but as time goes on the
realize that those products are
going to be there and available
for them so they don't take them
as often so the anticipation
that they will take them home is
is to but eventually it will
Wayne.
And Mister chairman Senator so
menstrual equity begins with the
recognition of the need so
twenty percent of our children
live under the federal poverty
line and what we've seen in
similar programs is that
students experience financial
insecurity may take more drugs
for the first few months that
they are available but one
students understand that
menstrual products will be
consistently available.
The students understand that
they only take what they need of
these products are part for both
school and home students
shouldn't feel as if though they
can only access free products
when they're at school so thank
you Mr chairman so basically
it's it is available in the
purposes not just for for at
school so we're clear about that
and and I don't oppose that all
right I think I'm in I'll be
honest with you my concern from
my perspective I think what do
you have it in the nurse's
office which is not as
convenient I understand that
certainly makes it much easier
to go into the restroom and into
that that but I'm not to support
a bill that puts a minimum I'm
interested or I think a gender
neutral restroom is very
appropriate that's fine and I
think we're probably going to go
to that pretty much anyway
across our school districts and
in our sport that I don't even
object to the money even if it's
more money I think that this is
all something that should be
considered and and I would
support that at that for that
one reason I'm I'm not in
support of thank you.
Thank you other questions.
Senate Bill you made a motion
and a second and a second second
by Senator pope if you'll call
the roll please Senator Brandt
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes Senneville yes
Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator also
yes.
We have a due pass thank you Mr
chair members the committee love
in education when we have
students committee you all were
amazing I the Dover and your
presentations were the clearest
invest almost anyone we cap
committee and so thank you for
what you're doing the world
world waiting for you hurry up
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members already Warner Mr chair
to not run for my seat I told
him.
One of them of the next we have
the H. B. one ninety eight is
Representative that they had at
a solemn Representative that it
so please come up.
So this is house bill one eighty
ninety eight career tech finds
for Indian IT schools.
And then we see after that the
last one we have is House Bill
five thirty three with a lot of
that I see sitting here so
please go ahead we do have a
hard stop at eleven so please be
mindful of thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I co
sponsored this bill with
Representative Kerry plantation
Tax committee can't make it to
the Senate meeting so I said
that I'd come over and I I this
bill simply is it technical
amendment to the C. T. E. R.
pilot project and to include
bureau of Indian
educational funded B. I. E.
schools in this legislation and
Of
have nine secondary schools that
are run by the B. I. E. and
seventeen hundred students are
in the schools and we just want
to make sure that CTE career
technical education is also
available to these to the
students we all know that
college isn't for everybody and
we support our young students we
put you know forty million and
to CTE in the in the house side
because we really support this
career technical training in our
high schools and I'll just tell
you in Rio Arriba now if you at
sixteen go to northern stool
enrollment program in career
technical lead and get a
maybe a plumber's lye
electricians license at the age
of eighteen he can start at the
lab was sixty thousand dollars a
year so these programs are
incredible they're building
throughout the schools I have to
introduce a really the two
experts here and it's
the tenant governor Allen Warren
who now works for the Landel
foundations is leading a charge
in this and certainly governor
ridge's Regis Pecos who we all
know anti with that simple
questions Mr chair thank you of
the audience those in support.
There anyone in opposition.
Have no one in opposition if a
couple of you want to come up
and speak hopefully not all we
don't need to hear from
everybody but please come up to
the microphone.
Where no one wants to that's
fine too.
That was
Is to.
We limit the for people and you
do have a maximum of two minutes
please go ahead when you
chairman members of the
committee my name is mark
Mitchell former governor from
the public to suki and currently
I am the chairman of the all
public council governors which
represents nineteen pueblos
stated in Mexico and one in
Texas
H. B. one nine eight would
ensure that students attending
the bureau in in in the fair
schools will have the same and
equal access to career technical
education and we look forward to
a do pass thank you thank you.
Yes Sir Mr chairman of the
committee chairman thank you
director of youth learning for
Senator public representing
governor Tavriya of for us you
know this is of an equity issue
also
working I guess hand in hand
with federal federal law and
state law making that congruency
each other so with that Senator
public stands in full support of
this bill thank you thank you.
Yes Sir warning Mr chair members
of the committee share growing
our a vice president with the
devil prepared to our school
board of trustees in Farmington
we fully support this bill this
bill will help us move forward
and provide more opportunities
for native students with in New
Mexico it's an important bill
appreciate your support thank
you thank you.
Good morning.
We're working yes you have to
hold the button is all W. just
wanted a chairman members of the
committee my name is Gopi he'll
and I'm a former governor of to
secure public also the executive
director for the no there in the
public council and I'm also the
chairman of that all public
council of governors Education
Committee and we start strongly
stand in support of this bill
because as tribal leaders it's
our responsibility to educate
our ending kids to matter what
institution or going to and also
it's inequitable because right
now our kids are citizens of New
Mexico which is what that has
the same opportunity as any
citizen to attain and educate
educational matter what
institution echo for as with
that thank you for allowing us
to make this presentation.
Thank you you all were wonderful
I think the longest ones thirty
five seconds of.
The deal
with that we'll go to questions
from the committee Senator
Kernan thank you very much and I
I highly support this piece of
legislation and just.
Read a little bit about what
we've done in Hopson we have our
new C. tech school and just want
to tell you that it's it's a
community effort as well just be
all you know from the state just
do this the work that went into
developing that school they
traveled all over the country to
get plans to determine how to
best implement C. deck in our
community and I would I would
encourage you to go and visit
and learned from that experience
save you some time and money and
also I want to and you know
you're from Landel and you need
to participate because what we
found in our community when when
industry participates and we
received a significant amount of
money from our Permian strategic
partnership in their the oil and
gas people down there and they
gave ten million dollars the
Daniels fund contributed our
medics foundation contributed
the city in the state of course
we have to bond part of that but
when you get that many people
together you're gonna have such
great input in the pathways that
you choose for your students
it's going to meet the needs of
your community you're gonna have
to pay more for your instructors
so that's where your operating
costs comes in and we're going
to need to do something from a
state perspective to make sure
that we're paying our school
districts money they need to
operate but I'm excited that
this is spreading everywhere and
really hope that you'll reach
out from CS and Hobbs's long
time but it's worth it so thank
you for doing this thank you
senator and yes it's a very
impressive Center and and the
way it was set up is is
wonderful what really is a
community center thank Center
pope Mr chair moving to pass.
Thank you seconded by Senator
Kernan any other comments that
call the roll please Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan Senator my Estes seven of
bills yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator also
yes
you have the best thank you Mr
chair thank you all
Representative Lara.
Million for the activities of
because this is one of the
emergency bills House Bill five
thirty three small group
insurance contributions.
Representative Representative
please go ahead thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
house appropriations and finance
committee system for hospitals
thirty three is the
health of insurance premium
So with that I want to use the
parity that's built into the
house bill two this is the
enabling language on that would
allow us to
Not unfortunately not cover the
hundred percent that we wanted
to but at least covers a portion
of the insurance for for it for
educators in New Mexico and with
that Mr chair we stand for
questions.
Thank you those in support of
House Bill five thirty three.
Any opposition to five thirty
three.
A couple of you like to come up
and.
And Clemente.
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee want to thank the
sponsors I merry par Sanchez
president of the national
education association and want
to really thank Representative
Lara for bringing this bill and
Representative Figueroa and
before her Senator Mimi Stewart
this is a bill that has needed
correcting for a very long time.
This bill gets us to of a
correction it doesn't do enough
as Representative Lara said
we're gonna be back again next
year to talk about the the
dissected built into the system
and we by that I mean that
educators outside of.
Educators in the state pay for
over four thousand dollars for
the medical premiums compared to
fifteen hundred dollars that
educators pay out the state
versus just service division
that is inequitable in and of
itself so we appreciate fixes
that are being discussed this
session but but it is being
piled on top of an inequitable
system for those educators that
teach outside of the major rural
I'm the major urban center of of
Albuquerque really and this bill
does get a lot right it is going
to help our lowest paid
employees and are are level one
teachers that will help them
while they're at level one it
does not affect seventy six
percent of educators so with
that please support this bill
and thank you Representative
Lara.
Thank you John.
Thank you Mr chair members
appendage under to that to New
Mexico we also want to say thank
you to Representative Lara he's
been very tenacious on this
issue
we're here in support of House
Bill five thirty three today as
a way to protect the advances
that we have made during this
legislative session and the
funding that has been granted
towards our healthcare premiums
and just to underscore something
that President par Sanchez said
this really does help a lot of
our classified employees in the
school and we certainly wanted
to lift those educators out they
are an integral part of the
system and so we do also urging
yes votes on five thirty three
thank you thank you is there
anyone online.
Okay up.
Questions from the committee.
Senator Kernan thank you so
Mister chair and of
Representative the the costs
borne by the district is that
covered in the SCG any
additional funding Mr chair Mr
chair Senator yes it is so
they're covered yes yes it and
this is parity between of school
employees and what state
employees I mean is that what
we're fixing are we fixing
originally yes that's a work to
do okay it's not particularly
between you know APS they have
less then they don't pay as much
as all the other minute CS
employee so that's not what it's
about it's about the okay that's
all I have thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward
of course this isn't this isn't
the bill that we initially we're
trying to get done you know
House Bill
one or two I believe and I
percent
And I know during those
discussions there was a lot of
talk about equity in trying to
give a hundred percent to our
educators and then talking about
what's going on right now with a
lot of our employees in state
government.
But I think one discussion that
hadn't been discussed was the
inequity going on right now
right with our educators.
When it when we compare that to
what the health care benefits
are with the current state
government folks and Miss
addresses some of that.
With just R. folks earning less
than fifty thousand but of
course above that.
They're still going to be that
inequity could you kind of talk
to that address out of what's
what's going on with educators
making over fifty thousand
dollars what kind of costs and
what
they're filling up their when it
comes to health insurance costs
Mr chair Senator I I apologize
and it looked at to to introduce
my experts of of pictures on the
wall for Mexico and
to Simon from DFA and I would
like to to defer to a.
To them if they have an answer
for that.
Mr chair Senators members of the
committee that's okay I'm the
time Miller there's another
Joseph Simon.
This I'm from DFA
it so you yes you read this bill
only affects those that make
less than sixty thousand dollars
and the it does.
Create equity in terms of the
employer contribution so the
percentage of health insurance
premium
but you are right in in implying
that the the cost of the PSI
health insurance is greater than
that of GST when you look at the
premiums but that that doesn't
quite take in the full picture
and and Patrick you probably
speak better to this
The PSA has
lower deductibles then the GST
plans and so if you have a lower
deductible and you're probably
gonna have a higher premium so
anyways they're all in trying to
say is you are right that but
there's a little more to the
story than just the cost of
premiums so thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative thank
you experts so it's it's sort of
like car insurance you pay that
high deductible but you know you
might a.
You know the premium might be
lower on the front and what
you're going to pay more for the
so there's an accent or
something
but we also looks like a large
percentage of those educators
making over sixty thousand now
what are they looking at as far
as their percentages now because
I believe they won't be getting
the eighty twenty correct Mr
chair members of the committee
so this bill would bring the
percentage the employer
contribution to sixty per our
site eighty percent for those
making less than fifty thousand
the employer contribution to
seventy percent for those
between fifty and sixty.
And then the employer
contribution would just stay
where it is for those making
above sixty thousand which is
sixty percent.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
and then can we talk a little
bit we have a few minutes here
About some of the differences
in.
Say for example where I'm in
Albuquerque with APS what their
plans are in state Nipsey.
And and I guess some of the
differences there on on maybe
some of the educators working
and what the differences are in
those plans.
Yes Mr chair sorry.
Okay okay Mr chair members of
the committee APS.
They already pay above the
statutory minimums
and some some other districts do
as well the minimum right now is
basically for everyone making
above twenty five thousand which
is the majority of employees the
minimum that the employer has to
cover sixty percent APS's
already above that I believe
they cover eighty percent for
those making less than forty two
thousand seventy percent for
those between forty two and
fifty five and then sixty
percent for those above fifty
five thousand so with this bill
they'll have to adjust their
contribution rates as well
slightly up
for the employer to cover a
little bit of a higher share
but they're they're already
almost there at APS in terms of
these I contribution tears.
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you expert
on that and so I you know I I
just wanted to kinda have this
discussion and I know we've
we've talked about it you know a
little bit and some of the other
committees
I just think we we've done so
much to kind of address pay of
our educators in K. through
twelve and I think that's been
great since I've been here
but we also have to address
those health care costs because
we can do a pay raise and it
just gets swallowed up there so
Just wanted to ask these
questions because I think this
is something we need to kind of
work on in the future and and
look look at what's going on in
ways that
we can.
Make some adjustments.
And and do more for educators
and just wanted to express that
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Kernan thank you at
mistreating through Mr chair of
the F. I. R..
Question about the higher ed
participants in other words
they're not going to receive any
additional funding to cover this
cost in that's a little bit
concerning to me when you look
at our independent community
colleges which I have one in my
community in so can they switch
and go under
I mean they can't go anywhere
else can.
Mr chair of on I'm so sorry but
for if you want to have a
hundred Mister chair I don't
know if we were ever would like
to and senator Patrick for Mr
chair members of the committee
the.
The LFC recommendations what was
taken for the higher education
institutions in there about ten
of them that participate in PS I
a right now
and they they would be affected
by this bill but the it the
thing is is that I want to say
all of them or nearly all of
them already pay above the
minimums some of those
institutions pay eighty percent
for everyone across the board
already so that there would be
no fiscal impact to them and
LFC is indicated that they built
the cost of this bill into the
I. Angie increases that each of
these institutions got okay
thank you thank you Mr chair I I
am going to try and reach out to
my community college and see I I
don't know that LFC maybe they
didn't maybe they didn't I don't
know what the on their of their.
Arguing about that part of it
right now but I do think this is
appropriate but I want to
mention again and just for the
record note that you when you
when you're in Albuquerque in
your seeking health care at
least for now you can find a
doctor in in its.
Very easy as compared to the
rural areas along the other
borders and in many of our my
constituents including myself
crossover into Texas those
contracts are more expensive and
that's what I need to see a I
think has to you know it just
costs more and so we need to
keep that in mind to be very
careful as we move forward with
the new health authority that as
we try to save money and we look
at cost that we've recognizing
keep that in mind you know not
all of us live in Albuquerque we
certainly can't go there a
number one they don't take this
item number is five hours so
we've got to always remember
that there is a difference in
accessing care in the cost for
health care of whether you're
with the state government we
have state workers in my
community as well as school
employees and so I hope
everyone listening remembers
that moving forward when we try
to save costs but I support this
and and I will be checking
though with with my Independent
School because I do worried if
they're if they're not funded
for that it's but hopefully they
are paying the higher rating by
that because thank you thank you
the other questions Mr Chairman
motion for the past thank you
bye Center renewable if you'll
call the roll please Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan Senator bias Senator
Nobel Senator Pinto yeah Senator
pope.
Yes Sanders Sauls yes.
You have a do pass thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
and committee thank you I
apologize we got started a
little late we did get through
things we currently have one
building or committees for
