We have a whole new staff right
analysts in in their eight year
avail of the committee right for
bills for things you need done
for the committee questions you
have about bills
and so I want you to meet Donnie
want to come up here engine was
everybody else.
We have two that are here today.
Do not let you introduce
everybody in that that way.
You can tell me exactly what
their job is for Senate finance.
Of course my name is a do not
rely on the chief of staff
percent finance this year we are
fortunate enough to have several
staff members with us including
for example committee secretary
or Sony Snyder who is a retired
LFC capital outlay
analyst we have Donna cook.
who will be one of our primary
analyst we have Marie Chavis who
will also be one of our analysts
we have estate another one of
our analysts we also have a
Phelps Anderson who is right
outside the door is about to
walk in and we had two other
analysts including Helen Bennett
who's our legal counsel for
Senate finance and we also have
the Dennis's middle schools are
educational funding expert so
that's the team we have a range
for Senate finance and they're
available for the full
committee's use at any point in
time.
We have a lot more staff right
because we're gonna have a lot
more built in they're gonna pile
up
we're not gonna house bill two
to the middle of February so we
need to be on our toes of what's
happening in the house.
As we move forward in in
exchange that happened yesterday
I'd seen a green cloud last
night over the capitol in so
we'll a we'll move for but
that's not our that's not our
issue in the Senate that's a
house issue we just got to focus
on what we need to do and how we
had that way
I'm gonna start on capital this
morning that we talk about some
water issues
and and we're gonna go on the
floor mat Levin thirty I think
is what time are going to the
floor and they see you and then
we'll come back the female I'm
gonna talk to the new chair see
how they can move the feed bill
long so you guys know if we need
to.
Come up and in front of the bill
out once it's ready in and go
back and try to get that thing
out of our hair so so paychecks
offloaded stated to workers in
the capital
so that'll be important today
and then this afternoon we'll
have some more that LFC
evaluations and in and talk
about comp in just keep moving
forward if there's something
that you think we need to err on
the agenda something that
triggers your ears are parks
that that's an issue that we
should look at here let's let's
we got plenty of time let's get
a hearing on it right.
Let's move forward.
the kind of limited in in our
office and center Rodriguez's
office right the mount of
traffic we're going to have
you guys no and our staff needs
to know who you are so the
recognize the faces because
we're like.
COVID still around there still
some issues and and it's hard to
manage this amount of people in
a small office if you guys do
that but make sure that make
sure that our staff recognize
your face introduce yourself to
so they know that if you got to
come in here to see me and do
something right because they're
new and they will get confused
and they will make mistakes and
it'll happen but.
so just make sure that that that
you know they are in and they're
available for you so.
I think we can get started
Center couple soon.
Actually this often prayer.
It's not going to go ahead and
go ahead and send if you wish
as as you all know as we
continue through the work that
we do
the prayer if you will is
basically the reflection in our
of our own lives and so to go
ahead and start something like
at this is the way I'll begin
this morning.
To each and everyone of us with
what exist within our hearts or
minds or souls or spirits it's
up to us to continue with the
independence to be strong to be
visionary to be compassionate
and to give people the services
that they continue to expect
with the tragedies that have
existed but the kind of lives
that we all live it's very
difficult for us at times to.
Fully understand how it is that
we can offer this guidance but
our heavenly father continues to
give us all the divine grace in
order for us to do that so the
prayer that I offer is that each
and everyone of us continues to
be happy to be healthy to be
strong to be visionary to be
wise in to be the leaders for
the state of New Mexico so with
that Mr chairman I turn it back
to you.
Thank you want to start
introduction right there's no
comeback you very much Mr chair
Senator Pete Campos and it looks
like this is one of the old
signs right here but
Representative all the parts of
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico and I'm very grateful
to go ahead and be here on the
Senate finance committee thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning everybody of senator
Michael Padilla I represent the
Senate district fourteen which
is essentially the southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo county
one of the only Senator is it
represents the central central
part in New Mexico so very happy
to do that work for everybody
that lives you know obviously
mentoring across the state and
the Senate majority whip the
eleven years in the Senate and
second here on this committee
thank you.
Morning Mr chairman I'm Senator
Siah Correa Hemphill I'm from
Silver City and I represent
Senate district twenty eight
which is Grant County catching
County and Mr speaker of County.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members so.
Well first of all with the.
A knowledge of the prayer of
phones Senator Campos thank you
very much and also being
grateful for all the moisture
that we're getting statewide
which is very much you know
that.
The state you know really
benefits from that.
I am on Representative full
Bobby J. Gonzales senator from
district six which encompasses
not Los Alamos very well Santa
Fe.
House and I will be starting my
twenty eight year with the New
Mexico legislature and the the
majority of that was in the
hospital in various committees.
very much ready to do the work
for that we need to do for the
people of the state for for this
year.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Pat Woods
