it forth. Um, I'm an educational
retiree myself, and I think a
lot of these things, um, you
know, the lack of sharing
between PERA and ERA and the two
different systems and so on. I
mean, we need to address that,
uh, and a lot of other
inequities between
the two systems. So thank you
very much.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone in opposition.
They checked him no one online,
so we are now to questions from
the committee.
it out
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Figueroa, thank
you all for being here today.
I do want something clarified.
Excuse me.
I know that there was.
During the investment and
pension oversight committee,
there was a question brought up.
Regarding the unclaimed member
contribution, can you clarify
that?
Yes, Mister Chair and Senator,
it refers to most often
contributions that ERB cannot
reach the member or a
beneficiary of the member um
through repeated efforts, so it
often comes up when the member
would reach the age of 72
disbursements are required by
federal law at that point, and
they still can't reach the
member or member's kin or
beneficiary.
Those are unclaimed member
benefits.
OK.
So it's not if a member
contributes to it, but before
the last day that they're.
Eligible to do that, they don't
make the contribution, so
therefore they may not be.
Eligible in my understanding
that right, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Figaro and the incident
you're talking about is a member
that has maybe.
is deceased or left nobody.
climbing the property.
Mr. Chair and senator, you are,
that was my question. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
If not, ready for a motion,
Mister Chair, I move a do pass
on a Senate Bill 75 amended.
But for do pass on 75 as
amended. Is there a second?
Se advice sent little little
quicker, uh, Senator Ramos, uh,
seconded by Senator Nava, uh,
Marianne, if you'll call the,
the roll please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes, you have a due pass on
Senate bill, what are we? 75.
As amended. Thank you.
I am the sponsor for Senate Bill
82, so, uh, Senator Pope will be
acting as chair.
So for those in the room and
those online, we are now moving
to Senate Bill 82, public school
capital outlay changes.
Senator So, you have the floor.
It's very nice to be here in
front of Senator.
Nice to be here in front of
Senate Education to see your
lovely faces, um, Senate Bill 82
is a bill that is um endorsed by
both the LESC and the public
school capital lay oversight
task force and the work that
they've been doing over the
summer, uh.
Just some very brief history
over the last several years
we've seen the cost of building
and remodeling schools skyrocket
a couple of school bids have
come in at over $1000 a square
foot. That prices many small
districts and other districts
out even with the formula we've
had for the state and local
match.
We have had a
Moratorium, if you will, on some
of the state local match and
reduce the amounts which
increases the state portion of
that to help uh some of the
districts got behind on things
during COVID on maintenance, uh,
there is still a need for that
reduced match.
That's what this bill does in
the main portion of it. It also
makes some changes to the.
Um
Criteria for getting a waiver
for a district to go out that
don't need it under other
criteria to be allowed to
petition for the state funding,
um.
And makes it easier for them to
get the money, I guess. Uh, and
that's about what this bill
does. It looks like a fairly
thick bill, but as you go
through most of it are very
minor changes of a date and
things of that sort. Uh, it's
particularly helpful, helpful
for our smaller rural districts
that.
have a difficult time raising
the amount of money that's
needed for doing.
Instructions and remodels, and
with that I'd be happy to try
and answer questions and I do
have some, some experts around
if needed.
Thank you, Senator, with that,
do we have any uh people in
support in the room, if you
could raise your hand.
Do we have any opposition in the
room?
If you'd come up
Make a comment and support.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Again,
my name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm
here actually representing three
different groups at this moment,
uh, previously stated the
president of the Coalition of
Educational Leaders, SoEME, the
state superintendent
Association, uh, as well as New
Mexico School Board Association,
they're unable to be here today,
um, firmly in support of this
motion. Thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have any support or
opposition.
We could allow them to speak.
You have 2 minutes.
Are they having problems on
their end or?
OK.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and move on, so I will move to
the committee. Are there any
questions from the committee?
On Senate bill
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Soles.
I was looking at uh the some
information I have received on
analysis and its stating which
school districts would benefit
from this legislation. And then,
in reading them, it is the
smaller school districts, is
that correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, it mostly
will be smaller school districts
that gives them eligibility to
petition and uh changes the
state local match.
According to what I'm reading,
there's 18 of them now that
would benefit the most from this
legislation.
Uh
And also, uh, where's my next.
I write too many notes to myself
and the cost of construction now
has gotten so out of hand. Can
you tell me why that is, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Souls.
If I could do that, I'd be a
wealthy man, uh, but no, uh, Mr.
Chair and, and senator, uh,
we've had long discussions about
it, uh, in some cases, there
seems to be some uh gouging
going on in others, it's getting
crews out to rural areas. There
is lots and lots of construction
going on, so there's limited
amounts. It's probably a
combination of many of those,
those different things, but it
hurts our many of our small
rural districts. Mr. Chairman
Senators.
Exactly right whenever we have
to have.
People that are involved in
unions to come down to our
areas.
More often than not, we have to
hire out of state. To me that's
just.
Awful.
That we are not hiring our
citizens in our state to be able
to do this work.
Whenever we have uh
Certain construction industries
that don't want to go out to our
rural areas.
get this work done, it puts
everybody that does live in.
All 18 of these small school
districts.
Up against the wall on trying to
get any sort of repairs made.
Or construction started and
therefore the cost of
construction has gotten out of
control.
Uh, I wish that we could change
that. I think most people that
do live out in our rural areas,
say yes, we do have capable
people in construction that are
able to get this job done as
well.
But the constraints that are put
on these companies.
What we have in place right now
for public buildings that are
owned by the state, that's not
gonna be possible and I think
it's doing a disservice.
To our workers and the state of
New Mexico.
But I appreciate this bill and
what it's trying to do
we have any other questions from
the committee?
Uh, I just wanna, uh, thank you,
Senator, for bringing this
forward. I've heard about this
the last couple of years,
especially after COVID, uh, just
one quick question. I know we
mentioned about.
These costs and the impacts.
Some of these
A rural schools, um.
Could you clarify for me?
Is, is there an issue with union
workers?
From your standpoint?
The issue with union workers or
senator, um, is outside the
scope certainly of this
particular bill, uh, there are
other laws that affect public
workers and whether they have to
meet what is often called, I
think the little Davis Bacon Act
within the state and some things
of that sort, you know, it's
outside the scope of this, but
this really does as you
indicate, I think there's 17 or
18 districts uh that benefit or
that would make them eligible to
be considered for a waiver.
And the public school facilities
authority, we have plenty of
money right now to to do this
within the constraints of having
enough building trades people to
do it in in the different areas.
Thank you.
Um,
Oh, do I have a motion or the
will of the committee on this
bill.
Move a do pass.
Or you do pass from Senator
Figueroa.
And a second from Senator
Thornton.
You could call the roll.
Yes.
Yes
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. The reason I would like to
have a little bit of time to
explain what I'm fixing to talk
about.
In my district, the Lake Arthur
School, the original school is
still standing. It's not on the
National Register.
But they are starting to have
problems with it. It will cost
way too much money to have it.
Be brought up to compliance with
the ADA.
So
Here's the middle of, here's
this old old school that my
grandmother went to school at.
She also taught there for many,
many, many years.
And now they're starting to have
problems with this school.
And it's gonna be up to that
small town of Lake Arthur, which
is a bedroom community.
They are going to have to do
something with that school
either.
See if it can, it and it sits in
the middle of the school
property.
Now they are going to have to go
to the townspeople and the local
taxpayers of that particular
district.
To see what they want to do with
it because there are, are
starting to have big issues with
it.
And uh
They're kind of in a quandary
right now.
But that's what's going to
happen because there is there
going to be any.
Construction companies that do
want to come down to Lake
Arthur.
To demolish that old building
right there and it, it hurts my
heart. It really does. But
anyway, that's just something I
wanted to bring up, Mr. Chairman
and Senator because there will
be a problem later on. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator. You have a
due pass.
OK, everybody, uh, the next bill
up is Senator Padilla.
Around. I don't see center. Can
we put out to
To see if we can get him that
he'll be up next and we'll go
down then to Senate Bill 107.
Senator Pope, the NMSU STEM
Center of Excellence.
For those people watching while
Senator Pope is coming down, uh,
Senator Brand is not available
or here today, so we skipped
over Senate Bill 64, and we will
also not be hearing Senate Bill
116, um, unless someone from the
minority party would like to
present for him or has that, I
don't know whether he's talked
with anyone.
If not, we're happy that we can
roll it over to.
to the future.
So for the public we are on
Senate Bill 107 NMSU STEM Center
of Excellence. Uh, we skipped
over Senate Bill 93 with Senator
Padilla, we're looking to try
and get him to be the next bill
up.
And Pope.
My apologies, Senator.
I didn't think I'd be up this
quick.
That works out
Uh, first off, I want to
introduce uh Connor Hicks, he's
here and works for LESC and he
was really instrumental on the
draft of this bill. So he'll be
up here, um.
As an expert answering some of
the questions.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
Senate Bill 107.
Um, Senate Bill 107 would create
a STEM innovation network by
establishing a center of
excellence for STEM at NMSU,
creating a steering committee
for STEM and setting a structure
for statewide hubs.
Center of Excellence at NMSU
would manage day to day network
operations and managed funds.
And uh uh interdisciplinary
steering committee would provide
oversight and authorized
regional and tribal hubs across
the state.
Regional and tribal hubs would
connect communities with STEM
education and professional
development opportunities and
career pathways.
Up to 8 regional hus hubs would
be selected.
Any federally recognized tribe,
nation or Pueblo, New Mexico
would also be eligible to
operate a tribal hub.
This bill would appropriate 6
million from the public
education reform Fund, otherwise
known as PERF to the public
education department for
expenditures and FY 26, 27 and
28.
Uh, this will be a structured
3-year pilot project with annual
reporting requirements and
evaluation processes to
understand the effect of the
program by the end of FY 28.
SB 107 also requires a steering
committee to meet regularly.
And uh specifies purposes of the
network. These include fostering
access to education and
employment opportunities,
strengthening STEM initiatives
and connecting educators to STEM
professional learning.
So with that, Mr. Chair, um, we
have more information, but I
just want to keep it short and
give more time for questions for
those that need it.
I don't know if there was
anything you wanted to add,
Connor. I think we're OK. And so
we're ready for public comment
and questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh, and we
always got public comment just
quick show of hands, those in
support.
Those in opposition.
If some of you in support would
like to come up and speak. You
have up to 2 minutes each.
Mr. Chair, senators, my name's
Jan Williams. I'm a retired
engineer and a fellow of the
Society of Women Engineers. I'm
speaking in favor of SB 107,
STEM innovation Network for New
Mexico is proposed with regional
hubs has the potential to
improve the financial and
employment outcomes for all
students across the state by
introducing students to STEM
pathways and careers that are
geographically and culturally
appropriate, including some
additional people in
construction and reel.
We, we know this works because
several states with similar
networks have seen tangible
results in math and science test
scores, and in the number of
students who go on to pursue
STEM related careers from
certificate levels on up. This
is a strategic investment. It's
meant to raise the employment
levels throughout the state and
lift New Mexico, New Mexicans
out of poverty. I urge you to
pass this bill and work with
colleagues to find the funding
for this important initiative.
Thank you.
Next, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Sarah
Pratt with the New Mexico Ata
School Time Network, and we
stand in strong support of this
bill out of school time before
or after school, summer learning
is a great place for students to
explore STEM, and this bill and
the STEM innovation Network will
help connect in school, out of
school, higher ed to the
workforce and prepare our New
Mexico students for New Mexico
STEM jobs. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Ling Faith Hearts. I'm the
executive director for New
Mexico Mesa. We're out of school
time program doing STEM care
pipeline work across the state,
grade 6 through 12, and this,
we're in strong support of this
bill. This will only elevate the
work that we do throughout the
16 schools that we currently
serve throughout the state of
New Mexico. Thank you. Next one
please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Committee members. I'm Kirsty
Tyson. I'm with the Lannel
Foundation, and we stand in
strong support of this bill.
Education is a developmental
process. And if we want
STEM-ready workforce. We want
students coming out of high
school.
To choose SEM careers and have
the knowledge and the skills,
the interest and the identity to
choose them, then we need to
make sure starting in pre-K that
they have access to inquiry
learning in schools every day,
which this network can support.
That they have regular access to
out of school STEM learning
opportunities and that they have
access in middle school and high
school to explore the great STEM
careers that exist in New
Mexico. So it's about connecting
all the dots from pre-K to
industry to higher education,
out of school in K-12. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main
standing um in strong support of
this legislation, um, and
wanting to thank the sponsor for
working on this and the Lannel
Foundation. I don't wanna
repeat, um, I could say ditto
ditto ditto ditto. I just wanted
to add that a New Mexico State
has the capacity to deliver on
this, um, and we've been talking
about this bill for quite a
while and I really appreciate
all of, uh, I appreciate the
support.
this committee. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in support?
I was handed a list. We have 5
people in support who are online
who would like to speak.
So first on the list I have
Wanda, if you would please.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Uh, my name is
Wanda Bulger Thomas. I'm the
director of the STEM Outreach
Center at New Mexico State
University, and we are very much
in support of SB 107. We look
forward to serving as the
principal hub and partnering
with other institutions,
organizations, and industry
partners to leverage resources
and strengthen STEM learning and
STEM career pathways for all
students in New Mexico. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, Wanda. And next, the
NM most network.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maiagbuck and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico the school timet network,
and I stand in strong support of
this systemic lift of STEM
innovation and STEM access to a
STEM education access for all
students and youth in New
Mexico. I think this will make a
tremendous difference for all
the employers looking for
qualified young people to enter
the STEM workforce, so I
you pass this bill and this will
make a big difference for New
Mexico and our future. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. And next, Enrique
now.
OK, good. Good morning, Mr.
Chair, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Enrique
Nel, and I'm here today on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We support Senate Bill 107. Uh,
the phrase stem as we know it,
uh, today was created only 24
years ago in 2001, uh, we
recognized at that time that the
United States was not competing
on the global stage in the
education of science,
technology, engineering, and
math, and it was considered a
risk to our ability to compete
in the global economy.
And that's why we recommend, we,
we commend Representative Pope
for carrying this important
legislation. New Mexico is
ground zero for STEM jobs. There
are hundreds of high-tech
companies throughout the state,
and of course we have our
national labs, the Air Force
Research Lab, as well as our
research universities. It's, uh,
it's up to us to make the
investments, uh, that we have to
make to nurture the next
generation of innovators in our
state, and we believe that goal
is important. We want New Mexico
to be more competitive.
when we leave this legislative
session and passing this bill is
a great example of how to
accomplish that goal. Thank you
so much.
Thank you, Mr. Nell. Uh, John
Jakowski.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee.
My name is uh Jack Jakowski.
I've been involved with the
Mexico Mesa.
Since its inception in 1983,
Uh, before STEM was actually an
acronym.
And uh more recently have also
supported the Mexico Partnership
for Math and Science Education.
And the Lanel Foundation in the
concepts associated with this
bill.
I also speak today on behalf of
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce.
As the co-chair of the Education
and Workforce Committee, we are
in strong support of this bill
and believe it will create
The future that New Mexico has
been hoping to have for more
than 10 years when a number of
major corporations in New Mexico
and the National Laboratories
agreed that they would work
towards trying to make New
Mexico a shining star in the
STEM environment.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jack. Uh, and last of
the ones online, Shelly Crutcher
Greig.
Good morning. Thank you all. I
stand in support of SB 107, and
as a
PhD STEM educator for more than
20 years and our beautiful
state.
And the founding director of R4
Creating and out of school time
nonprofit leader in STEM
providing competitive robotics,
drones.
I've spent a lot of time with
the youth in our state.
I believe not only will this,
this bring together important
resources in a way that makes
more sense for our families and
our communities.
But it will also strengthen that
bridge from education to
economic growth by allowing us
to ensure that
Programs are not siloed, that
there is a common, common touch
point for for each of the
amazing programs in in this
science, technology,
engineering, and math.
Division and so thank you
Representative Pope for bringing
light upon this and bringing
this supporting this and I
appreciate your support of this
to each of the members of the
committee.
Thank you.
And just for anyone online, it
is Senator Pope, but that's OK.
We, we understand, you know,
people aren't here and the some
of the titles and things. Um, is
there anyone in opposition in
the room?
New opposition online.
When in opposition, would like
to speak, if you please.
Loud
Please go ahead.
Hi, I want to say I am in strong
favor of this bill as someone
who works in STEM education
across the state, um, with the
college and career readiness
Bureau with expanding computing
educational pathways, but I also
want to say that all of these
bills that are wonderful and
that push, um, education are
going to fail unless we also
fund CTE because STEM is CTE,
Computer science is under CTE.
Engineering is under CTE.
And the bottom line is that our
teachers in the classroom do not
have what they need.
to teach STEM.
They can go to all the
professional developments in the
world, but when they get back to
the classroom, the local school
districts are not providing the
funding that they need to
actually implement STEM. So
until that gets fixed, we're not
going to be able to make the
changes across the state that we
need to. So hopefully when SB
130 comes up to make a program
unit, it is discussed in
earnest, um, because all of
these other wonderful bills are
going to have a really hard.
time making traction without
classroom funding.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, and with that, Senator Pope,
if you'd like to make a comment
or two and then we'll go to
committee questions. Just, I
just wanted to uh thank Connor
and let everyone know once again
that this was endorsed by the
LESC, um, as you can see, a lot
of our nonprofits, educators and
organizations around the state
have gotten behind this and
we've worked with them on this
bill, um, because we wanted this
to really be inclusive and
really make sure that we're
including everyone in the state,
um, on this bill. Um, but I also
have to give credit.
to uh Janet Williams. She's a
constituent of mine. Uh, she's
the one who actually brought
this forward a few years ago,
um, after I was elected and she,
this has really been her
passion. And I just think
legislation and bills like this
really, it's about coming from
community.
Right? And she's really put in
the work, so I really want to
make sure she gets the praise
and the credit for getting this
done because she's really
passionate about this and really
cares about the future of our
young New Mexicans. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. So questions
from the committee, please.
And a Ramos.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator Pope,
thank you for bringing this uh
this bill, and I strongly
support it.
Uh, and I really respect NMSU
NMSU is a great school. My son
just graduated with the degree
with the civil engineering
degree from there.
But I do want to say one thing.
Why are we looking at New Mexico
Tech when they're ranked in the
top 10 in the nation in most of
these areas.
Why and I miss you.
Thank you, Mr. Churcher. Thank
you, Senator. I thought you were
gonna ask why a Lobo like me
would be uh.
Working with NMSU, um, and I, I
think, um, when you look at it,
their history and the work that
they've done, uh, with the
Gaston School District, they
already kind of have in a way a
system in place and I've been
doing a lot of this work.
Um, that being said,
Um, New Mexico Tech.
Are there other schools in the
hubs, um, that will be created.
Um, everyone's gonna be
involved.
And so I just want to make sure
that we're, you know, we're not
excluding anyone. I'm not
excluding my lobos either, um,
but that's really why um that
decision was made.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, uh, my, my
question's gonna be pretty
simple. I mean, it, it's just
gonna be a numbers question but
on page 3 of the bill, uh, down
on the bottom, uh, number one,
the network shall consist of no
more than 8 regional hubs in a
tribal hub for each of the
federally recognized Indian
tribes, nations and pueblos in
the state so that means.
Upwards of
30
Entities are gonna be.
Hubs
For this, Mister Chair Senator
Boone, uh, there's a possibility
that it could be a high, high
number. Um, we're just really
trying to be respectful, um,
and, and ensuring that our
pueblos and tribal communities.
If they want and set up an
individual hub, they can, but in
some instances, you know, maybe
if you were in San Felipe and
Santa Ana, you might just have
one hub, you know, they're
closely connected pueblos, but
we also want to make sure that
if they want individual hubs, we
just want to make sure we're
given that opportunity.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, I
understand. I just wanted to
clarified, uh.
Just seemed like it was gonna be
an awful lot.
Of, of entities there and, you
know, if y'all have got that
thought out.
And uh, thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Nova.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Pope for bringing this
this bill forward, um, I'm
certainly in support and also
commend you on the fact that
this is, I think, addressing an
issue within STEM of
underrepresented populations in
the field, which I think is
extremely important, especially
in a state like New Mexico. Um,
I do have a question just about
how you picture that these hubs
will look like and how will they
play out for community colleges.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Senator Nava. You
know, um, how we look at this is
there would be
Of possibly at a community
college or at the tribe and I
think what's great about that,
even though it would increase
the number, um, it really
becomes a hub that's a
reflection of the community's
needs, right? Um, it wouldn't be
a top-down approach in a way
it'd be a bottoms down, bottom
up approach to where what are
their needs in that district.
Whether it be the type of STEM
education, what type of careers
and jobs, what they're looking
for. And I think this, that's
what kind of allows the
flexibility. So in the bill, you
know, we don't have a lot of the
specifics there because uh we
want that flexibility and I know
sometimes in a bill like this,
not getting all that
information, uh, can be a
struggle, um, but that's what we
want to happen, to really have
that community involvement in
that area, uh, to kind of build
that hub for the needs of that
community.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Pope and
Uh, Connor, I do have a few
questions on your.
A committee that is going to be
set up.
It's gotta be a big bid 14
member and that Mr. Chairman to
me that's, are you ever gonna
get concurrence on anything
that's, that's a good question I
need to ask right there.
all um
Answer that for you, um, I just
wanna be careful that
He's not doing kind of the
policy stuff but kind of be an
expert on some of the things
we're answering.
Um
I understand your concerns and I
think some would say we're
allowing a
A group of 42 to kind of, you
know.
Work on some things in our
Senate. And so,
I, I think I
Understand your concerns. On the
other hand, we want to make sure
that
We have representation.
Across different agencies and
across the state.
And I think that's uh.
It's gonna be, it's gonna be a
burden, I think, to have that
many people, you know, to come
in agreeance unless we spend a
lot of time discussing every
issue that does come up.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Pope.
Uh
I am a naggy.
Um,
And that's supposed to be our
agricultural school, so the
concern that.
Senator Boone brought up I think
is very valid there we have.
Going as
Techno technology goes.
Uh, I think that they are the
innovators here.
How will this help New Mexico
State University as far as them
being our agricultural
university.
Because I also see in the bill
you've added in on page 2 lines
16 through 18, New Mexico State
University to work towards
innovation in science,
technology, engineering, and
mathematics. Yes, it used to be
an engineer.
Uh, science, it's used every day
in our farming and uh ranching.
Endeavors throughout the state.
Technology, we still have median
age for a farmer 7 years old, I
believe.
They're not going to change
their ways. I'm one of those and
I'm not gonna change my ways. So
tell me how this is going to
benefit New Mexico State
University.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Senator
Eel, um, you know, and MSU has a
STEM education research
institute. Um, I know they have
great engineering programs as
well already. Um, I just goes
back to kind of my response
earlier, um.
I think when we look at STEM.
It's just so wide and varying to
where
I think down there, um, they
might be looking at it more with
agricultural, more with science
and weather, um, I know we've
been went down there to see the
work they're doing on uh
cleaning up produced water. So I
think.
This doesn't
cause any issues as far as
impacting their role as an
agricultural school, I think it
actually enhances um.
So that that's how I would kind
of look at it. I don't think it
takes anything away that they
do.
And I think overall as a school
having that as well.
It helps in their programs and
it helps with.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I'm
not totally disagreeing.
We do spend lots of money on
education.
As per capita goes, we are the
highest state that does put
money towards education, and
here we are again with the
latest study that's been done.
We're 50th.
Is this going to make a
difference.
Is what you're proposing here.
For the STEM program goes into
work.
Many of our students, once they
graduate from high school.
They are not going on to
college, they're going to take a
some sort of other field, a
hands-on field.
So is this really going to make
a difference, that's my concern
there. I didn't need an answer
on that. I'm not throwing that
hard question at you.
Um
Just, just for the fun of it, I,
I, I'd be kind of.
And y'all might not have the
answer right now, Connor. I'd be
real curious to know Mister
Chairman and Senators, uh.
Pope, how many stem schools are
there in?
The state right now.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, could
you clarify what you mean by
STEM school?
Through K through 12.
So I, I think that you know, I
don't have an exact number for
you, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
think in in uh New Mexico,
there's not a specific like stem
designation for schools that you
see in other states. So there
isn't going to be necessarily um
a hard and fast number on that.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator Pope
and Connor, I guess that's
throwing designation of the
schools that are, and Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Puppe, the reason I'm
breaking that up, we have, I
love my area of the state. They
want our kids to be successful.
They want them to be able to
stay here in the state and make
a living and raise their
families here in the state.
And we have benefactors down
there that have reached out to
very
Various uh charter schools in my
area.
And they have provided them with
the means necessary to become
STEM schools, and I'll tell you
what these kids are.
They should be the shining
example of what PED is trying to
get done at our other.
Elementary schools.
And I do want to point out that
uh.
The funding for all this usually
comes from the oil and gas
industry.
We have to be very, very aware
of that. We know the
fluctuations that do happen in,
in that particular industry, and
right now our state is flush.
But whenever I see that we have
continued.
Growth
With recurring expenses coming
up all the time, are we going to
be able to sustain that.
I want our kids to be successful
if we could do anything to
ensure their success, it would
be mandating that their parents
become a part of their
education.
And unfortunately, that's not
the case. It's left on the
shoulders of our teachers.
And with that, I am very, very
sorry. Parents take heed.
Take part of your children's
education.
Question Mr. Chairman, Senator
Pope.
Where did these funds come from
to fund this particular program.
I think that number was $6
million. Is that correct?
Um
Yes, the bill does propose an
appropriation of $6 million over
the course of 3 years from the
public education reform Fund,
uh, so I would say that this
bill is linked in some ways to a
few other bills that are before
the legislature this session for
consideration, one of them which
would rework the public
education reform fund to operate
similar to the government
results and accountability and
opportunity fund, excuse me. Uh,
and so, and then
and also LFC and LESC both their
recommendations for the budget
do include a $150 150 million
dollars transfer to the public
education reform Fund to support
a variety of initiatives, this
being one of them in the LESC
recommendation.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Pope, $150
million?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that is
correct.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, 150 in
the fund, but this bill is 6
million over 3 years. This, this
bill is not 10.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Pope,
I'm also seeing that the fiscal
implications on this bill is
that a non-recurrent.
Uh,
so, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
yes, so the way this is written
is effectively as a pilot
project, and so, uh, should the
other bill that would we rework
the purse be adopted by the
legislature and signed by the
governor. It would allow for
multi-year budgeting using that
fund to support different uh
different initiatives in the
case of the LESC recommendation,
the STEM network would be one of
those things, and provide 2
million per year over the course
of three years, at which point
there could be a
Set up a
And Mr. Chairman and Senator
Pope with this.
Fully encompass what y'all are
expecting and to miss you to, to
be able to accomplish in that 3
year span.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, and,
and I also want to reiterate
that it is a pilot program that
3 years and the money, but the
intent is, uh, for.
The center to be.
Finding private funding and
other funding coming in as well.
Um, and
Grant as well.
Yes. And I just appreciate the
answers from the panel that's
setting up there, Mister
Chairman and Senator Pope and
Connor.
Did New Mexico State University
submit this request to NMHED.
For incorporation into their
higher ed uh funding
recommendation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I do not
believe so.
Yeah
So if they did not submit the
request are they fully on board,
Mr. Chairman and Senator Pope.
To implement what we're trying
to do here today.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I don't have
a letter and they're not here to
be on board, but I can tell you
the last few years we have
worked with them in Ford, uh,
that was kind of similar to what
they were wanting to do, um, so
they've been involved in the
process and understand what's
going on and have been
supported.
And if I make uh the first one
online, uh, Wanda is the
director of this program or New
Mexico State University. And so
several of the people that were
online are part of the, the
program that would be doing it.
So we don't formally have that,
but my belief is, yes, they are
because of the people who were
testifying in in support.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the
explanation there, but as far as
the whole school being on board.
If they did not submit the
request that kind of leaves a
little cloud up in my brain, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Pope.
Oh
The Cin bill 107 provide
performance measures,
Senator,
uh, the bill itself does not,
um, I believe actually my uh
deputy director might be able to
speak a bit more for the plans
with the Perf and how that would
function similar to the growth
fund or my director can.
Good to see you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Senators, uh, first time.
Nice, nice to hear that. Um.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator is.
Both LESC and LFC are
recommending.
A general fund appropriation.
Uh, to the public education
reform Fund and without getting
into too many details, that's a
fund that the legislature
created in 2019.
To capture reversions from
previous programs. That fund is
nearly depleted.
And so the the policy proposal
is that we use that fund as a
grow like funds for education uh
innovation, so being able to use
the public education reform
Fund.
To create 3-year pilots of
varying kinds. And again,
there's different proposals
based on the different budget
recommendations currently, the
STEM network would be one of
those.
A 3-year pilots.
OK, but Mr. Chairman and Senator
Pope.
Where are the performance
measures that it's going to be
the guidelines. I, I'm very
curious about that,
thank you for the clarification.
Sorry for missing the question.
Um, there's a
Senate Bill 201.
Currently is a proposal to
essentially amend the statute
for the public education reform
Fund to make it more like that
grow uh fund.
And it does include a number of
um
Provisions that would require
the public education department
to create both performance
measures, evaluation
methodologies and plans. So each
of the each of the
Initiatives funded out of that
perf.
would have to undergo a pretty
extensive planning and
evaluation process.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, Senator
Pep, that was exactly what I
needed to hear right there. I do
want some accountability for
this money that we are going to
be spending there that is
eventually gonna go back to K3
uh pre-K through 12, I guess is
what I want to call it, uh, that
is going to make a difference in
these students' lives.
And Mr. Chairman, I do plan to
support this bill.
But I do want to point out one
more time, parents, please get
involved in your kid's
education, it will mean the
world to them.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank
you.
Very much.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, other
questions?
If not, we're open for emotions.
move a do pass. Motion for a do
pass by Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
Yes, you have a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you committee members.
Thank you, and we do have
Senator Padilla in the room also
represented Gurola came in. uh,
I called her up because
Senator Brand is not here to
present a Senate bill, we need
to have a senator with her, and
I wanted to ask uh from the
ranking member if one of you all
because it's a Republican
sponsor would like to sit with
her to present that, uh, we
could have Senator Figueroa, who
knows some about it, present
that, or we could just roll it.
And so I'm kind of asking what
you all
OK, so, uh, represent Figueroa,
we're just gonna roll the bill
until Senator.
Brandt can be here with you if
that's OK.
Thank you.
yeah, if you would and for
people watching, we are on
Senate Bill 93 out of school
programming.
OK, good morning, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Vice Chair and members
of the committee and our ranking
member and the rest of the
committee. I appreciate you
being flexible this morning. I
was addressing the rural
telecommunications carriers, as
you know, broadband is one of my
major swim lanes and we're
working closely with them. So I
appreciate you allowing me to
still be heard today. Um, I am
joined here by Ian Gates. He is
with NM Most. He's going to be
my expert witness and everything
that I don't know about this,
he's gonna know about it. And
so, um, essentially what this
bill does is it's an
appropriations measure. I love
when um we have a half.
page bill that turns into just
about every potential lobbying
organization wants to show up
and have something to say about
it. I love it when that happens,
but essentially what we're
asking for here, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee, is
$20 million to support out of
school time funding out of
school time programming, excuse
me, 10 million of the of the of
the earmark would go to the
school districts and 10 million
would go to statewide nonprofit
community organizations, there
are tremendous benefits to out
of school time programming, and
we've seen many of them. I know
that um in a
bipartisan fashion in this
legislature, we have seen us
come together in our ability to
get this done. Some of the huge
benefits are going to be
academic support for students
that need help outside of the
classroom, uh social skill
development in terms of the the
development of their skills now
that we've gone through this
whole pandemic thing, we've got
to sort of get people talking to
each other again and interacting
with each other again and that's
one of the great things this
program does. um, there's also
physical activity that comes out
of these programs, emotional
well-being for the students so
that they get the
guidance and the help that they
need in terms of further
interaction with their
colleagues and their
contemporaries, um, enrichment
activities, things like tutoring
other things of that nature,
positive role models that they
will encounter in in this uh in
this out of school programming
reduced risk benefits, community
building, and family support. I,
I can go on and on about this,
but I one key benefit that I
think is different about what
we're asking for this time,
which Mr. Chairman, your staff
and I both agreed when we went
and had a bit of discussion on.
This is the funding is
permissible for transportation,
which is one of the largest
barriers to participating in
this type of programming. So
that is permissible here. I'm
going to ask Mr. Cates to say,
Gates, excuse me, to say a
couple of words and then we'll
take some questions.
Morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee.
If it's green, it's on.
Oh, there you go. Uh, good
morning.
Good morning, um, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um,
My name is Ian Gates and I'm
with the New Mexico Out of
School Time Network.
Um, and I would also invite all
of you to refer to the excellent
bill analysis and fiscal report
from LFC and LESC on this bill.
They talk about a lot of the um
important reasons why we need
this. Um, as the New Mexico out
of school time Network, we work
to ensure that state investments
in FY 26 are going to sustain
and expand access to out of
school time programming, um,
including after school, summer
learning programs, and teen
centers for the benefit of
youth, families, and communities
across New Mexico.
These programs are a lifeline
for New Mexico families, an
essential part of our education
system and a critical space to
support young people to support
young people's mental health and
development.
In New Mexico, there are
124,000. I'll repeat that again.
124,000.
Children and youth waiting for
an out of school time program
because they're just not
available. Um, data in New
Mexico uh shows that parents
strongly support state funding
for out of school time programs,
83% say that these programs
provide opportunities for youth
to learn life skills and 85%
report that after school
programs help them keep their
jobs um for the parents.
Um,
providing a lot.
I more points. Yeah, of course,
um, I would just say a lot of us
are focusing on public safety
this session, and we believe out
of school time programming is
essential.
Uh, to make sure that public
safety and um
Um, that public safety is
addressed because crime spikes
every day from 3 to 6 p.m. and
every year in the summer. And
those are the two times when
after school and summer programs
are here and then I also just
wanted to stress, uh, one last
point I think that's very
important for um
Adressing the gap. Uh, we have a
lot of maps uh on our website.
If you visit Mmos.org,
illustrating that, I know this
is small, um, but as you can
see, uh, we still have a long
way to go as far as reaching
more programs in rural New
Mexico and students and youth
there. So an expansion of funds
from the current 6.5 million to
20 million would really help us
get there. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So you
can
You can hear, Mister Chairman,
the excitement around the
program. I'm sure you're gonna
hear from a lot of people here,
but I also want to underscore
this is a statewide initiative.
So this is for everybody. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. At the
audience first just show of
hands in support.
Anyone in opposition.
If you'd like to come up, yeah,
you would have up to 2 minutes
to speak in support.
Mr. Chairman Stan rounds for the
coalition school leaders and
also for the school
superintendents. I'm sorry I
haven't been here. I've been on
wheels between several
committees, but I know my
colleagues have done well. We
stand in support of Senate Bill
93, Mr. Chairman, one of the
best investments you can make.
is extending our experiences for
kids after the time we had them
in our core educational efforts.
Uh, time and time again I've
seen kids over my career be much
better for after school
activities. In fact, Mr.
Chairman, final point, I believe
as we move education forward,
we're gonna need to think about
the resilience of our system.
To provide support to kids
outside of what our norm has
been historically. Thank you.
Thank you, Stan.
N
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Robert Aulaka. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the, uh, Boys and
Girls Club of New Mexico for
Navajo Preparatory school and a
number of charter schools and
we're in full support of this,
um.
Um, the Boys and Girls Club, for
example, serves over 20,000 kids
uh throughout the state, uh,
we're in 24 sites, um, also very
critical to our some our rural
communities, um, as Mr. Gits
mentioned where, you know, this
out of school time funny, you
know, also addresses some of
those potential effects of, you
know, it's a crime session, you
know, looking at all these
different crime bills, this, um,
these types of programs actually
help our kids stay out of
trouble, so.
we're in full support of this
and um one last point is, um, as
we move forward, um, it's
important to try to get this in
a recurring basis if at all
possible. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Robert.
Next, please.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Cynthia Delgado. I work for NDI
New Mexico, and I am a
registered lobbyist as well as
an employee. Um, our
organization is over 30 years
old of those 25 years we have
been providing out of school
programming across the state.
We are in Santa Fe and
Albuquerque, Socorro, Silver
City, Artesia Roswell, Taos, um,
we see a great need for that,
um, based on our programming in
the public schools, we saw our
children needing more.
Outside of those public schools.
Um, we have partnered with UNM
Research to evaluate our
after-school programming and
what we learned is the kids that
were in after school programming
had higher standardized testing
results. They had lower um
truancy, and they had lower
incidences of having to see the
principal. So we are evaluating.
Our program. We stand in strong
support of this program both in
terms of um one time funding,
but even more importantly, in
terms of recurring funding.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Next please. Um, good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I am Denise
Ray Comstock, executive director
of Horizons Albuquerque. We
thank Senator Padilla for
sponsoring SB 93 and urge your
support as well.
Our unique nonprofit serves 192
K312 students at its full
capacity and over 550 family
members from Albuquerque and
nearby underrepresented
communities with the summer
enrichment program supplemented
with year-long out of school
time tutoring and wraparound
services and programs, including
job shadowing and mentorship.
All of this is at no cost to the
student or their families. Our
program serves students from
over 65 feeder schools
throughout Albuquerque. Last
year, the OST funding language
required OST programs to serve
all students at school sites.
That requirement precluded the
students of Horizons Albuquerque
from benefiting from OST
funding.
We are thrilled that PED
Secretary Padilla informed us
this year that Horizons students
can benefit if SB 93 passes with
the current language. For these
reasons, I urge you to pass SB
93.
Thank you very much for your
time, Mr. Chair and committee.
Thank you.
And next please, good morning,
Mr. Chairman and committee
members. My name is Ling Faith
Hearts. I'm the executive
director for New Mexico Mesa. We
are an out of school time
program. We serve 106 middle
schools and high schools
throughout the state, 61% of
those schools are in rural areas
of New Mexico. And our, as we
continue our thoughtful growth
around the state and services,
New Mexico Mesa providing
services in that out of school
time format, I can say our full
support of this bill.
allows our colleagues and, um,
partners to continue to grow as
well in this area.
Uh, when we started this
thoughtful growth in rural areas
4 years ago. Every time we add a
new school, we create a
measurement marker for those
students and that measurement
marker allows um
What that growth will look like
and look like in the next year.
Every year our anticipated
growth of student participation
doubles. So there's something
that our students in rural areas
are hungry for, and we really
are in huge support of the bill.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Um, anyone else?
Not, I believe we have 3 on Zoom
and so the New Mexico out of
school network.
You're on?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I am so excited that
we are here today discussing
expansion of out of school time
in New Mexico. I just wanna add
a few points to what's already
been expressed, um, this
particular funding will help
sustain and expand. So the um
COVID money, the ARP, the
American rescue Plan supported
more than 50 sites funded
through nonprofits and that all
sunset in 24, so those 50.
s can be sustained in addition
to some of the school districts
that's listed in your fiscal
impact report, quite a few
districts invested some of them,
uh, COVID money in after school
and also lost that funding, so
this will be a critical
sustainability plan for all
those efforts that we made
during COVID is also then
providing opportunity to expand
in addition to that, so that
more young people and young and
children in New Mexico can have
access cause most of the
Programs still are funded in the
Rio Grande Corridor, so this
will help expand programming
into rural New Mexico, um,
additionally, it's critical to
have funding be available to
nonprofits as well as LA school
districts so that we can
maximize capacity in rural
communities and very often
there's a partnership between
the LEA and the nonprofits, but
there's definitely a benefit if
there's a separate funding
stream so that we can maximize.
Uh, say teen centers who wanna
be a nonprofit and fund for
teens and older youth, which is
a huge gap in our state, but
also allows schools to continue
funding those sites and expand
after COVID funding ended. Thank
you so much for your time and
your support today.
Thank you.
Uh, Christopher Boone.
Hi, thank you again, Christopher
Boone. I'm a board president for
Horizon's Albuquerque, and I
just want to echo the words of
our executive director Denise
Comstock, who just testified
before you in strong support of
this bill and just want to thank
Senator Padilla for sponsoring
SB 93. We urge yours.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. And then Shelly
Crutcher Grinding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
senators. I stand in support of
the Senate bill and my
apologies, Senator Padilla, I
knew you were a senator, but I
slipped representative in there.
Uh, I am the founding executive
director of R4 Creating, and
we've been providing out of
school time STEM education for
over 20 years. Each year we see
an increasing need from families
and unfortunately,
have to have a waiting list for
students, and while
While we are based in Rio
Rancho, we actually serve out of
school time programs throughout
the state, including programs in
at San Felipe Pueblo, Cuba
Elementary, Hobbs, a partner
with Mescalero, and so I did
want to follow up on Senator
Ezel's question. What is it
that's making a difference in
education and how do we make a
difference? And I have to say
that in my humble opinion and
from all of the research
That I've read that I've truly
believed that out of school time
is the answer. It allows us to
mentor our students year after
year, guide them, challenge
them, provide them with
resources, identifying needs and
help them to create the most
successful future path that they
can, and it starts in those out
of school time, ongoing
relationships. It is a
partnership between
school time and out of school
time, but I do think that many
of the students, if you ask
them, that is an art alums as
well. That is what's making it.
Thank you.
Thank you
Um, I, was there anyone wanted
to speak in opposition?
We have one in opposition
online, if you would please.
We do not have one online. Uh,
where the questions from the
committee.
Then Ramos, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Padilla, thank you for
bringing this bill forward. I, I
think, uh, this is very
important for our rural areas.
You know, I, I see in, in uh.
On this bill
On line 24, page 1.
It says nonprofit community
organizations.
In my, in my community, we have
180 nonprofits.
How, how are we going to decide
who's going to be getting this
money and what criteria are
they're gonna be using?
Do so. Uh, thank you chair and
thank you ranking member. I wish
I could tell you that actually,
but I, uh, we give it to the
department and they are charged
with like they always do
promulgating rules around how,
um, you know, those selected
will be selected. There's going
to be criteria, there's going to
be deliverables, all of the
things that we expect with any
public dollar. And so I wish I
could tell you a solid, give you
a solid answer, like these are
the 19 things they're going to
be selected on, but I would
imagine that 180 providers in
your area.
probably aren't all interested
in doing this kind of work, but
the subset that are are going to
be eligible. They are going to
be able to apply for it and they
will be treated fairly through
the process.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, how
are we, how are we going to make
sure that the rural areas do get
these funds.
Um, cause I know there's a huge
demand in in the urban areas and
uh are, are we going to make
sure they get a certain
percentage.
Or how are we going to do this?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
ranking member. No, there isn't
a guarantee and there isn't a
slice or a percentage or a a
devi uh, you know, a map on how
that's gonna happen, but it's
the reason that we came to you
today moving the programming
from 5 million to 15 million.
tell you that there is probably
a $50 million need in this area.
So I think that we're we're
taking this approach very slowly
so that we make sure it's done
the right way, but I would
envision that that the increase
from 5, the extra 15 mL, uh,
puts us in a position to make
sure that this money lands
outside of the I-25 corridor as
well.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Riel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Senator Padilla.
This bill has some really good
points in it, but my concern is.
This is not a one time
appropriation is.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Ezel, it's a $20 million
appropriation that does not
revert until the funds are gone.
It's not uh recreated or or uh
because we start our budgeting
process every year. It would not
be a a a recurring expense.
The money would be available
until it's used though. So
that's why I didn't want it to
revert at the end of the year,
just in case we weren't quite
there yet.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, it's
Senator Padilla, 10 million of
that is going to the school
districts and 10 million is
going for local and statewide
nonprofit community
organizations. Is there any
definition regarding statewide
non-profit
just come up, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Padilla.
Hey, I've started this new
organization.
Mr.
Senator, uh, they would have to
go through all of the
machinations and trials and
tribulations and 501c3
designations and nothing would
be and and I'm, I'm going to
guess that the public education
department again, much like the
ranking member's question, um, I
would envision that, you know,
uh,
Demonstration of your ability
to, to, to deliver is going to
be a requirement to apply for
these types of funds. So your
first year showing up saying,
hey, I'm here now. I don't think
that's really going to get you
very far until you have a proven
track record of how you're, and
how you're going to deliver
this.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla my concern was 501
registered with the state going
down that path, there's lots of
good organizations out there. My
concern is, is.
More often than not, whenever
I'm hearing about programs like
that, yeah, they may be
successful, but it follows the
Rio Grande Quarter.
And it's hard for our young
people.
Out in our rural areas to be
able to get to participate in
anything like this because of
distance and distances traveled.
And this is one thing I am going
to brag about because it's
happening this week. We do have
4H and FFA programs.
That a lot of our, a lot of our
real kids do participate in.
And this is all done on a
volunteer basis.
Those club leaders are
volunteers.
The parents do get involved with
these young kids.
And the reason I'm bringing this
up is because tomorrow is 4H day
and Wednesday is FFA day.
So I do like to brag on these
kids I are one, OK, I was a
leader too uh my mother was a
leader and the oldest 4H club in
the state of New Mexico is the
cottonwood 4H Club that was
first started by Miss Azie Funk
in the cottonwood area, so I do
have to brag of my 4H clip.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Padilla.
What type of performance
measures have to be met before
any further funding.
Come along and you may want to
get somebody from this group of
young people sitting right over
here. If they, if they could
help answer these questions
performance measures to me mean
quite a lot. I mean, we can
throw all the money we want to
at education.
But until there is some report
on how it is actually.
Lifting these young people up.
We need to funnel it some other
way where we can get a a
substantial increase in where
our ranking is in national
nationwide so chairman and uh
and Senator Ezel, um, this is
not a new thing that we're doing
here. This is an expansion of a
very successfully run program
programming right now. So the
PEDs already established most of
those, those figures, those
requirements. I'm sure happy to
have anybody that wishes to
speak. They're more than happy
to do that. Um, I would like my.
Senator, would you like PED to
respond?
I like that, but I, I want to
know where a person can go to
look at what those performance
measures have accomplished.
I'm Greg, if you would please.
If you're able to.
ED is always wonderful and kind
of suddenly like, oh, I, you
know, he's over there. I see
looking stuff up already, so.
Good morning. Uh, Mr. Chair, and
uh Senator Greg Frosted from the
Public Education Department,
Assistant secretary. Um, so this
bill does have uh it is
continuing the work and the
first round of um
This would continue the first
round of awards that have
already been made, um, and I'm
not familiar with the, the, um,
the current evaluation that,
that I know is in process
through the uh community schools
division and
Um, the out of school time, not
through the LESC but through the
public education department, but
I will be able to follow up and
give you the, the outcomes of
what it is that they're looking
for in particular.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, Mr. Frosted, that gives
me concern.
I figured if anybody would know
it would be this group of people
sitting right over here on what
has actually been accomplished
through the.
Distribution of these funds. So
I, I do have some concerns here.
I don't want that information
just disseminated to me. I want
everybody to know what is being
accomplished by these funds.
Mr. Chairman, can I just add
something real quick? Oh yeah, I
would just add there's a wealth
of data from organizations like
the After School Alliance,
nationally, but also New Mexico
data from the 21st century
program. 21st century is the
largest federal program that
funds after-school programs, and
they have a lot of data on the
outcomes that out of school time
programs provide in communities,
whether it's on benefits or test
scores, lower rates of
absenteeism, etc. So, um, that's
also something that we can look
at, but Mr. Chairman and Senator
Riel, I hear you loud and clear,
and I'm, I'm
Along the same lines as you, I
like to see numbers and data and
facts and figures, times,
emotions, and all that business,
um.
But we will get that far and
spread that far and wide and Mr.
Chairman Senator Padilla, I
appreciate that, Mr. Cas. I do
appreciate where I can go to
find those numbers, but I think
that PED or higher ed or
whatever.
The whole education department
needs to know those numbers in
case somebody does have
questions about it. To me it's
very important. I want to know
where my taxpayers' dollars are
going.
And Mr. Chairman, like I said, I
am going to support this, but my
concern is our rural kids
whenever I hit in my particular
district.
Whenever I have
Young people that are riding the
school buses during regular
school time over 60 miles one
way.
That's a hardship on those kids
and those families if they're
participating in anything like
this because they're not gonna
be able to do it.
So Mr. Chairman, Senator dear
Mr. Kates.
And PD I, I appreciate y'all
being here and answering my
questions. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and, and
this group, they they are LESC
rather than PED and, and
certainly if you would like,
they can look up and get
research for you and because
they work for you as well and
can get you any of that kind of
data, it may take them a little
bit to get into it,
but I think it's important for
All of the legislature to know.
What is being accomplished
through those fundings.
Thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, and as you are
chairman of the LESC, um, I
think for a two-year period at a
time, is that how it goes there
now? I believe I will probably
be the chair of the next 2
years.
get presented to LESC and I
believe it's an annual basis
also, so just want to make
mention of that so that's aside
from LFC where I'm at in UAESC,
that's pretty much half the
legislature there. Here's this
data every year. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Other questions.
Figaro.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator.
I fully, fully support this
bill. My question concerns some
language that may be read as
limiting, um, because Mr. Chair,
our
Appropriations bill uses
language to fund out of.
Out of school time.
Summer enrichment, comma.
High dosage tutoring. It
differentiates those things and
Mr. Chair, having allocated
funds toward out of school time
programming that did not go
where intended, um, because it
was also summer enrichment. My
concern is that some programs
might be designated as
ineligible, because the language
in SB 93 doesn't match and
doesn't specifically say summer
enrichment.
Mr. Chair, I don't think it
should out of school time
obviously would include summer,
that's out of school, but it has
been interpreted that way in the
past, and I don't think that is
the senator's intent.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
Senator Figueroa. No, as a
matter of fact, I like to, when
I'm about done with the bill. I
don't know how you all work that
have been in the legislature for
a while, the chairman and I have
been here exactly the same
amount of time. I go to the
drafter and I say take
absolutely every bit of every
single thing of everything out
of this bill that has no
business being in this bill.
And, and the reason that I asked
for that is so that it is a much
wider and gives the the the
department a lot more room to
create, define, etc. If you, if
you do list too many things, it,
it ends.
um I think limiting. I think the
way we have it actually widens
the scope.
That's my interpretation of it.
Could I just add, I think, um,
How does such tutoring in summer
programs are very important, but
it's key that we fund out of
school time programs through
this bill. And that's why the
language isn't there because it
could be interpreted in that
way, um, exactly what your
concern is, and unfortunately,
the current status quo is under
the funding for this year, um,
the language includes out of
school time with high dosage
tutoring and a majority of that
money is going to tutoring, and
that's why we want um a bill
like this one, and we want
language like this in
appropriations so that the money
is only going to out of school
time programs and it's not being
diverted.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, then
I would ask.
Our year-round programs that
include summertime work.
Intended to be included or is it
really?
Before and after school.
The book
Uh, the all I would say. I don't
think there's any limiting
language here that would
prevent, which you've just
described, Mr. Chairman and
Senator.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Not open for emotion.
Mr. Chair, I move to pass.
Motion Senate Bill 93 for a pass
is there second,
seconded by Senator Figueroa. If
you'll call the roll, please.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a due pass.
Thank thank you members of the
committee.
That's gonna conclude the bills
we're able to hear today. 2
bills for the people watching
were rolled over SB 64 and SB
116 because the sponsor is, I
believe ill but is not here
today to present those. uh, we
will start at 9 o'clock on
Wednesday. I appreciate the
committee and the good work that
we did today, participation of
other people that we have, um.
