I don't think I had to go into
much more detail than that as
you all to read between the
lines any of the the other
pieces the today we are starting
something a little different we
haven't appropriations calendar
that will do after we do the the
basic bills these are all money
bills that I just have basic
appropriations the idea will
have a very brief presentation
on them but the plan is to not
spend more than five minutes on
anyone bill or will move it off
and put it on to the next agenda
one if anybody on the committee
wants to have a more in depth
discussion about whether it
ought to be moved on to finance
we can pull it off and do so but
the trying to speed some things
up so we're not spending half an
hour on district appropriation
bills and then also SB four
hundred which is my bill on
middle and junior high school.
redesign.
That's going to get rolled over
to Monday because when to
Wednesday start to Wednesday
because when the analysis
started coming in it got sent to
the building and facilities
people we got sent to the
architectural people and to have
nothing to do this doesn't have
anything to do with buildings
but analysis were coming back
that the cost to do seven
hundred eighty Vettel school
high schools and rebuild all of
them.
Bill has nothing to do with that
but we're behind the analysis
didn't recognize that so so that
one's going to get rolled over
to Wednesday any questions
comments where we start from
committee members anything else
I need to.
Mentioned.
We have not we're gonna change
our order up a little bit in
order to try and accommodate
people so we're gonna start with
senator stored on three eighty
three the public did background
checks process then go back up
the pope then for three sixty
seven than three ninety seven
and then the join the Senate
joint resolution with senator
Neville and so Senator if you'd
like to kick us off please thank
you so much Mr chairman and
members of the committee SO
three eighty three this bill
from our public education
department and I have with me my
expert Greg frost that whatever
I leave out he'll clean up after
me so PED is responsible for
conducting background checks for
everyone seeking an education
license the FBI has notified the
department that our current
state law is not in compliance
with federal requirements we've
been trying to do this bill for
several years so this is
something that multiple state
agencies that had to address in
recent years as FBI conducts
regular compliance checks so
that PED has worked with the FBI
and department of public safety
to ensure that this version of
the bill meets those federal and
state requirements so what it
does it will bring us into
compliance so it can continue to
perform the critical function of
conducting these criminal
history record checks and ensure
student safety it specifically
names to the types of license
and certificate subject to
criminal history record check it
insurers PED does not share
criminal history with other
entities unless expressly
permitted by federal law it also
adds additional various personal
categories to the definition of
instructional support provider
so that's what it does
alternative.
Over to correct to say anything
that I've left out Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Stewart and
and Mr chair members of the
committee good morning.
I just want to re emphasize it
at present we're on a waiver
from the FBI the FBI has
notified us that that are
statute is out of compliance and
the waiver does expire at the
end of June if we're it is
conceivable that if we don't
receive another waiver or if we
don't get a bill passed this
session that
the PED would not be able to.
to issue new licenses beginning
in July.
So we sent the questions.
the other the audience those in
support.
Of this B. two sixty seven.
Anyone in opposition.
It's really more of a technical
three eighty three oh three
eighty three I'm sorry.
A look at the wrong number three
eighty three.
But on the public health
background check process it's
mostly a technical fix so we
continue to do things is there
anyone online.
Questions from the committee
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chairman thank you we need to
passes for sure.
Tell me about local school
districts in the background
checks that they are allowed to
do this does that cover them or
do they have to go through this
process as well.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan yes
this this also updates the
process for them as well and and
the
It's it's unclear if just
starting July one that they
would be unable to also run
background checks but for sure
this this bill does update the
process for them as well and
we'll cover them into the into
next year thank you that's very
good news and I had a request
from a local head start program
and they wanted to do their own
background check checks and they
were denied and I don't know if
it if it was because of this or
they're not comfortable
expanding that the wordy outside
of the public education
department so we worked on that
that that didn't happen so they
use I guess I can use public
schools to do their spit it does
slow down hiring a little bit
but it's very important
certainly support bill thank you
and and Mister chairman Senator
Kernan just so you know as well
that ECECD's also working on on
similar legislation.
And and senator one my analyst
just indicate on page fourteen
line twelve through sixteen
indicates that that covers that
exact concern that you're asking
about.
Page fourteen lines twelve
through sixteen nothing in this
section shall preclude governing
authorities from developing and
implementing policies or
procedures requiring affecting
other or additional background
of criminal history checks a
person or applicants for
employment.
Other questions from the
committee.
A motion for it to pass Senator
Neville.
Second by Senator Brandt you'll
call the roll please Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey yeah
Senator Kernan yes etcetera
myiasis.
Yes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator yes you have a do
pass.
Representative thank you so
much.
Senator pope let's use one of
differs Senator Rodriguez is
here but the people.
We can but Federal Regis go.
It is so well before she was yes
other POK the committee that
that civil.
The Senate bill three sixty
seven school attendance changes
then after this will do Senate
bill three ninety seven school
based health centers Senator
pope.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senate bill three sixty seven.
School attendance changes and
with this bill we are.
Hoping to improve student
attendance in several key ways
first we want to increase the
focus on comprehensive whole
school based.
Absence prevention strategies
and resources we want to line
school attendance interventions
with reasons for students
absences we want to target
school attendance plans for
students on those who are most
excessively absent.
And we want to expand support
for comprehensive drop out
production efforts with that I'd
like to introduce great for us
that is is to be an expert from
PED and I want to let him
explain a few more details on
this legislation.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator pope for
caring this bill there's been a
lot of discussion over the last
several years about increasing
student time and there are
multiple ways to do that and I
think they're all important
certainly increasing the
required instructional time has
been discussed a lot but another
way to increase learning time
for students is also through
improving attendance improving
student attendance in twenty
nineteen the compulsory school
attendance act was replaced by
the attendance for success act
and the the compulsory school
attendance act was focused more
on punishment where as the
attendance for success act
really focuses more on providing
families and students
interventions in order to
to make sure that they have the
supports they need in order to
make it to school and to improve
their attendance and one of the
ways that it does that is
looking the same at unexcused
absences and excused absences
because regardless of why the
student isn't at school they're
still gonna need supports to get
caught up
over the last several years of
implementation we have seen that
there are some areas of the bill
that we can improve and and
that's why we've been working
with senator pope on this bill
for your consideration and some
of the principal changes that
we're talking about
Center put party mentioned are
adding specificity around some
of the interventions for
instance that have focus the
some interventions on the
transition from elementary to
middle school or middle school
to high school it also adds a
fund to the act the attendant
successor Fund and in the
executive budget what's included
seventeen million dollars one
million of which is to support
statewide interventions and
sixteen million of which would
go directly to support schools
and would go out based on
student enrollment to school
districts and would really
support resources for schools to
implement attendance
interventions the tennis for
success act when it was passed
was an unfunded mandate.
there were no resources provided
to school districts to get the
work of the act done and this
would remedy that.
It also requires schools to
complete fewer individualized
attendance improvement plan so
it's really focusing the the
individualized attendance
improvement plans on the
students that need it the most
this last year there were forty
percent of our students that
were chronically absent that
means they were missing ten
percent or more of the
instructional time and having
forty percent of the student
population with individualized
attendance improvement plans
it's is really burdensome for
the districts and then for the
teachers to implement that many
individualized plans makes it
really really difficult and that
this bill would amend that so
that it's only those were
excessively absent the the the
most critically in need students
would then have the attendance
improvement plans and this last
year that was seventeen percent
of the students which we still
recognizes a lot and too many
but we want to make sure that
it's not that at least it's not
forty percent.
The attendance for success act
also requires school boards to
refer excessively absent
students who continue to have
unexcused absences to the
juvenile probation office and
that's an inappropriate role for
school boards so this allows
that to be the just school
personnel would would do the
referrals and not the school
boards.
And one of the other really
important aspects of this is
that it change that it updates
the ten day drop rule which is
is in the school finance act at
present it says any ten an X.
sorry any ten consecutive
absences should make a student
be dropped from a school and
this changes it such that it's
unexcused absences would require
a student be dropped from the
roll the reason for that rule at
all just to make sure that
schools don't hold on to
students and count them toward
membership for funding
but it's important that students
were in the hospital or who may
be out of state on a for a
family funeral or something like
that would not be dropped from
the rules for just having ten
consecutive absences.
And and those I think are the
are the highlights of the bill.
With that Mr chair were ready
for a public comment or any
questions public comment first
in the room a show of hands how
many of the support of this.
In opposition.
If those in support like to come
to the microphone for
I do with the no more than two
minutes please be respectful and
trying not to be read.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marlys show to
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico council of education
leaders and normally you would
see stand around here today and
stepping in in his shoes he's
out of town that we do stand in
support of this legislation we
believe it corrects an issue
with the school boards and the
reporting on the chronic
absenteeism and we appreciate
the efforts by the Sanchez thank
you.
Okay.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee lily more tease
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico scored Association
and we stand in support of this
legislation for all the reasons
that were described by the
expert witness it streamlines
the streamlines the process it
reduces reporting requirements
places responsibility for more
it should what should be from
the point to the superintendent
or staff it also provides a fund
and resources for students to
have more of materials
interventions in the classroom
we support this bill we ask you
to move it forward and we thank
you for entertaining this
conversation.
You.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico it
doesn't get said enough the good
things happen when teachers and
students get together in a
classroom we appreciate what's
what that what the original
intention of the attendance for
success build did and does and
really appreciate the cleanup at
this bill does the two main
issues we've always had with
this and implementing it the
right way have been
administrative burden and
funding this bill takes care or
take might not take care of it
we still have to report but to
make some real significant
improvements and we appreciate
sponsor thank you.
Thank you.
Sir.
Good morning Mr chair yep hold
up good morning Mr chair members
of the committee I'm Larry
Chavis superintendent Santa Fe
public schools also representing
the New Mexico school
superintendents association we
stand in full support of this
bill provides clarity provides
funding for an unfunded mandate
that was mentioned earlier but
also it goes hand in hand to for
extending the the time in the
classroom if the students are
not in school they're not
learning so as we go through
this session and we start to
look at extending learning time
this goes hand in hand with
better student outcomes so again
want to thank you senator Paul
for carrying this and we we
support this.
Thank you.
There are a couple people on the
path but because the changes
were having trouble on the chat
telling people are for or
against and so the I suspect
this bill is terribly
controversial I there are a
couple of people online for and
changes with the the question of
things we're not.
Anything go to questions from
the committee.
What in opposition the room that
I see that way.
Okay.
I know common Mr chair.
Since the.
The motion for a new path.
By Senator Kernan.
The call.
Senator Brandt yes.
Kate yes Senator.
Yes yes.
Senator Campos.
Senator po yes for the full yes.
Yes you have to do this.
We need to start at eight thirty
or eight o'clock everybody seems
like they don't.
Secretary of we've just got good
bills.
We've got we're getting things
moving quickly Senator
Rodriguez.
I know I see.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I've got
there we go we can sit here all
right those Senate bill three
ninety seven school based health
centers thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I've got Kristin
arrests COVID she she's a
clinical operations manager for
the department of health here
and of course this one is Nancy
Rodriguez and I'm not cloned or
anything sometimes I I just was
just like her but she is that
Nancy is the executive director
for school based health care and
then of course we've got our
yeah land the policy director
for the department of health
care to answer help us answer
questions and Mr chairman this
is merrily a bill that codifies
in statute what we currently
have that event has never been
codified they we have the school
based health centers their love
clinics in the in the schools
and they have never been in
statute so basically you know
that's what we're doing of the
funding is there or the
department of health provides
funding and so it doesn't have
an appropriation and I just
insurers that that students
continue to get to be able to go
there for primary care and
behavioral health or mental
health support including several
things that to student can go to
to get services for like chronic
conditions mental health care
substance abuse disorders and so
on what they currently get now
nothing changes it would not
adding new things to the
provisions or anything just
staying in place just codified
thank you Mr chairman thank you
anything.
thank you and good fortune
argues the microphone it is
we're just.
I'm only into the.
Due to the right good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee I just wanted to start
today by stating very clearly
what the policy purpose behind
this bill is Schoolbased health
centers have been operating in
New Mexico for about twenty five
years in New Mexico our students
really rely on them as a source
for primary care and behavioral
health in a sustained
uninterrupted way throughout
their school age two years and
we realized we rely on the more
New Mexico then and the
surrounding states because we
have a real shortage of primary
care providers and we have
challenges really with getting
that access so this is really a
bill about access and about
protecting school based health
centers in statute
it's also about acknowledging
the diversity of our communities
the differences in our
communities and what we are
seeking to do is really just
codifying these to make sure
that they are protected into the
future as a point of access for
primary care and the D. O. H. is
intending to continue what it's
been doing for all of these
twenty five years which is
really partnering with
communities that request school
based health centers request
technical assistance we partner
with them provide them with data
that is relevant to their youth
population so they can make
fully informed decisions about
what types of services in health
care they need in their
communities there is no mandate
here this is simply a bill
codifying is something that we
really need for our students and
the state of New Mexico into the
future I'm gonna turn it over to
Christina rosca that for just a
few comments either need to use
the hand Mike or make sure that
my other my.
It seems to be one of the ones
get turned state there thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
us this morning
I just want to say a little bit
about school based health
centers in the relationship that
that exists between school based
health centers and and educators
quite frankly Schoolbased health
centers exist because of the
relationships between health
care systems and education
systems and that the
understanding that the students
are better learners and so when
we survey our our the schools
were Schoolbased health centers
exist they by and large like
ninety to ninety seven percent
of our school partners are
school based health centers
exist talk about or agree with
us that school based health
centers
support their students academic
success and are a benefit to the
students they make
Representative they make
referrals to students are for
for students to the school based
health center because of
emotional issues or or health
issues that affect students
abilities to learn and be
functional in the classroom
and school based health centers
every community is every
schoolbased listeners just a
little bit different well they
all provide primary care and
behavioral health
we joke that schoolbased when
you've seen one school based
health center you've seen one
school based health center and
that is because of the
relationship that they have and
the communication that they have
with the districts and the
community individual community
needs and and the operator's
response for school based health
centers our response to those to
those things
so I thank you for hearing bill
and I think that we can do we'll
be able to continue to do really
great things and codifying
school based health centers in
law and help our kids recover
from a really rough.
Last three years going forward
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Nancy would you like to say a
few words real key leader here
for school based health centers
thank you so Nancy Rodriguez
with the New Mexico Alliance for
school based health centers were
private nonprofit organization
that supports the state seventy
nine school based health centers
including the fifty for that
contract with the department of
health and I have provided a
couple of handouts you should
all have to hand outs that may
answer some of your questions
both about how school based
health centers operate where
they operate and how they
collaborate with their school
and community determine what the
health care needs are I wanted
to just point out a couple of
things on those handouts and I'm
happy to help with any questions
you may have on the back of one
of your handouts we did do a
sign on letter through our
organization so you have a list
of more than forty other
organizations that stand in
support of this bill as well as
appropriations for the school
based health center program and
I know that we have a number of
other organizations that are
represented here today that
didn't get a chance to sign on
to that and given the bills you
just heard prior about
attendance I did want to point
out that nationally school based
health centers are in every
state in the country they are
heavily invested in states that
are similar to New Mexico that
have high chronic health and
education challenges but there
are lots of states that are
investing in codifying school
based health centers were not
alone in that and one of the
reasons is because of attendance
in in typical data Health Care
unmet health care needs
typically one of the five top
reasons people cite for chronic
absenteeism and school based
health centers can help with
that they can also help families
not miss work and students not
miss class to address those I
met health needs so there's data
across the country that shows
the value of school based health
centers and this codification
will just help Department of
Health better support both of
the communities that have school
based health centers and the
communities that want.
Amendment one of our roles as an
organization is to respond to
those queries and to our test
point about this not being a
mandate we don't have to ask
districts and individual schools
to host school based health
centers they are knocking down
my door I have to turn the
notifications on my phone off at
night I have eighteen
communities that are part of
planning grants right now who
want school based health centers
that don't have them and I have
at least another dozen who've
been talking to us over the
years about wanting a school
based health center because they
know their students need access
to health care in order to to
learn and thrive so we are
organization encourages you to
pass this bill and I'm happy to
answer any other questions
answered thank you senator
anything else no I think we're
good thank you Mr chairman again
up to the audience first just a
show of hands those in support.
Those in opposition.
Are you in support or
opposition.
Mr Chairman both of the the life
of a lobbyist is complicated.
And I online that a it looks
like we have one opposed and two
in support of that act.
And members of the committee
that up then you're gonna need
to use the microphone I.
Are you standing in support
first or in opposition.
Mr chair will start with the
opposition that.
Members of the life of a
lobbyist.
Half of her is mine and the
others.
Marley shows registered lobbyist
for an and C. L. and we of
course support the concept of
the bill and everything that the
sponsors and advocates are
trying to do our only concern is
that we're concerned about some
of the potential unfunded
mandates that might follow from
these implementations and that
that's the only concern that we
have that we definitely support
the concept and we'll do what we
can to work.
With the administration's to to
see that this is successful
thank you is there any other
opposition my dad don't go away
because we're gonna get to the
supporters.
The.
Anyone in support it would like
to come up and please keep your
your comments tight.
And please know more about five
four five the.
Did you leave that what you're
gonna say the same that others
of sets of Greg good morning
great frosted representing the
public education department the
public education department
absolutely understands the link
between health and academics and
we stand in support of SB three
ninety seven thank you thank you
Greg.
Believe me good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee little emeritus
provided is on for the New
Mexico scored Association of the
school board association for the
last ten years has had a policy
in our and our platform
regarding supporting school
based health centers many of our
schools throughout the state has
has been mentioned have current
existing schoolbased health
centers and they're working very
well for their communities
providing services that they may
not get elsewhere and that are
closer to home we appreciate the
additional funny the that's in
the bill and we feel that the
additional funding the
department of health has may
help the schools a rural schools
that do not have school based
health centers to get them we
will expressed one concern in
the language the bill has a lot
of shows a lot of mandatory and
as you know the school board
association promotes local
control and the ability to make
decisions on a local level some
school based health centers
currently have services that are
not.
Some schoolbased centers don't
have all the services that are
outlined currently in section II
there's a multitude of services
there and some schoolbased
centers may not choose to have
all those services and so we're
concerned that the language of
bill says that these shall be
provided and we don't want
schools based health centers
that are insists and existing
school to be required to add
additional services that they
did not opt for have outlined in
their contracts we're concerned
about that language and we're
concerned about the ability of
that perhaps the bill indicates
that school based health centers
shall be created throughout the
state and all schools must have
the money that may not be the
choice of the local districts we
asked we support the bill we
support school based health
centers and we asked the
committee to please look at
these concerns carefully thank
you so much thank you really
make.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and
we want to thank the sponsor for
her continued diligence on this
as well as the experts they keep
they keep bringing it it's great
on hi we stand in strong support
of this we are one of the
signatories on the
on the way out you have there
but we think that we wanted said
it best already thank you thank
you.
So not this.
Good morning Cherry committee
members I am a stolid non this
with Planned Parenthood of the
Rocky Mountains and Planned
Parenthood the Rocky Mountain
stands in support of school
based health centers as an
important point of access for
health care services across the
state thank you.
Yes Sir.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
David Roddy and I'm health
policy director New Mexico
primary care association Pramik
federally qualified health
centers operate forty five
Schoolbased health centers
seventy percent of the state
funded health centers as well as
it does on that do not get state
funding I was around when when
the first Richardson
administration when he made the
commitment to expand health
centers and we've had a lot of
challenges but they and now one
of the the most essential
services that that we as clinics
operate I work with the clinic
and Bernalillo small clinic and
they have a behavioral health
specialist a counselor and she
is busy five days a week and to
get students to go to a clinic
and to access behavioral health
is one of the most difficult
things in the world and and god
knows we all need you know the
behavioral health and they they
most of all and so it's it's
just a wonderful asset I thank
the sponsor all these wonderful
people about this bill to you
and I are just not support.
Thank you Mr it's good seeing
you again.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's Larry
Chavis superintendent Santa Fe
public schools late last year I
guess it was early in the
previous school year US
secretary of education Dr Miguel
Cardona visit our school and we
were recognized as one of
fifteen model school districts
across the nation for the use of
our our school based health
centers and with that being said
that during that round table he
did ask fifteen of those
students what should we focus on
attendance extending the school
year or help of our students
every single one of those
students raise their hand in
support of health of of students
and well being so again as we're
talking about extending the
school year attendance this is
another factor that goes into
better outcomes for all students
so we do our support and we
stand in favor thank you thank
you superintendent.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is a
lease deal and I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty and also an
attorney representing the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the nineteen as
lawsuit NMC L. P. and transform
education New Mexico stand in
full support of the spell for
the reasons given by the
wonderful experts here this
morning and I would just add
that on services like those
provided at school based health
centers are really so critical
for our most vulnerable students
like those address to the
lawsuit thank you thank you.
Yes ma'am good morning senator
members of the committee my name
is Annabelle Martinez I am with
you want to hold the button.
But.
Is this better there we go good
morning chairman and members of
the committee my name is
Annabelle Martinez I am with
Human Services Department
medical assistance division and
and we stand in full support of
this bill as we collaborate with
school based health centers and
we will it's crucial that we
expand our school based health
centers as it provides access to
needed behavioral health
services and also physical
health services to students in
our rural areas and across the
state thank you so much thank
you.
And online in support we have
yes you.
At that rate and then Gabrielle
Dietrich.
Please go ahead morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Debbie
Action New Mexico voices for
children speaking in support of
Senate bill three ninety seven.
School based health centers are
critical to increasing child
access to health care and to
improve health outcomes state
effects of schoolbased health
centers also extend beyond
health outcomes because when
children have access to physical
and mental health care school
see reductions in absenteeism
and dropout rates and they see
increased graduation rates and
higher GPAs.
based health centers are
specially imported now the
children are returning back to
schools after the pandemic
potentially with unmet
behavioral and primary care
needs for these reasons we
strongly urge you to support
Senate bill three ninety seven
thank you for your time.
Thank you and Gabrielle
Dietrich.
Gabrielle are you there.
I am thank you so much Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Gabrielle
Dietrich and I'm the executive
director of nami New Mexico now
Mexico stand strong support and
SB three ninety seven as the as
the wellness centers and schools
create an important point of
entry for young people in our
state.
Thank you and I think we have
Sir if it's Gerald was in
opposition so if you would
please.
Mr chairman right I was going to
testify on a different done at
this one thank you very thank
you.
anything for we go to questions
from the committee Mr chairman I
don't have anything else to say
that thank you Sir Kernan thank
you Mr chair we had a good
conversation the other day and
in my office and
checked with my community and
both school districts that do
have school based health centers
do not there part of the twenty
five they don't receive state
funding and so for the record
and then we're we're here for
testimony I want to be assured
that if you are not receiving
state funding.
That you would not be held to
the same rules and regulations
that are going to be established
by the department going forward.
Mr chair Senator Kernan thank
you for that question I did
check because this is been an
issue that that you that you
raised with me the other morning
I did check with our bill
drafter I wanted to be very
clear that the bill could be
interpreted only one way which
is to say that this bill is
really looking at D. O. H.
oversight and cooperation with
those school based health
centers that are actually in
agreement and you know in.
They've actually applied for
funding through the O. H. and SO
there for our in that
relationship with the O. H. that
doesn't apply to the other
school based health centers that
are perhaps being administered
by hospital system any other
kind of medical providers that
is not an arrangement with the
O. H. so that is true okay so
Mister chair and and senator
when you talk about signing on
page three line six of funding
from the department that would
not include reimbursement for
Medicaid correct that's correct
so that's under HSD and not be
pulled in on that okay so that's
important because I do know when
I know you Representative the
fact that.
We're diverse state and the
services that are provided in
one year the state might be
perfectly fine with that
community that maybe not so with
that the communities and there
may be other services that state
utilized to maybe achieve the
same goal that of that's the big
concern that I've had that every
community has the right to
determine how help those
services can be delivered
Mr chairman Senator Kernan I
wanted to actually dress up
because that was brought up in
the comments just a second ago
as well and I'd like to point
everyone to page two
A provision E. this is I think
the the section that was being
referred to so I wanted I want
to call everyone's attention to
one critical word and that is
for online twenty four so we are
not saying that every one of
these shall be included in the
services provided and school
based health centers were saying
that
Schoolbased health centers shall
provide services through
licensed providers that's what
the shall is attached to and
then we list a bunch of
different types of services they
can do primary care preventative
there's a list of them for
referrals as necessary so that
is a list that is meant to not
be
mandatory it is meant to suggest
that any of these services any
combination of them could be
included in the school based
health care model.
Thank you very much Mr chair for
that clarification maybe there
might be some reporting of that
to be more clear because if
we're
misunderstanding that we we
probably should clarify that
going forward but
thank.
I think that's all I have for
now thank you Senator Kernan
other questions separate.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
So on on page one though we're
you.
Have in the.
There there isn't an exclusion
in that for school based health
centers that are not funded
through the O. H. it just says
school based health center shall
be regulated by the department.
Mmhm.
Areas.
Right so you don't have an
exclusion in there for what
Senator Kernan was just talking
about and I like to remind
people we're not putting
suggestions in here this is
going into law.
So we have to be careful that
our words and this this says
that they would have to.
Absolutely Mr chair Senator
Brandt so I I do understand the
concern I did bring this
language to our bill drafter LCS
I want to assure you that what
we are intending to do I really
want to get right in the bill
language and the eventual
statute I am very committed to
that so she assured me that the
that this does not apply to
those school based health
centers that do not
they do not gain an award for
their operations through the O.
H..
and if this continues to be an
issue I can bring it back to our
bill drafter I can definitely
discuss that with her I want to
get this right so we can we can
discuss that offline if if it
continues to to lead to
confusion if I might.
I think there might be a fairly
easy fix here that school based
health centers.
That receive.
Department health funding shall
be regulated by the department
and I think that six is it if we
were to do that we instead of
rolling this over take you to
the drafters coming back you
know all those kinds of things
but the of Senator yes thank you
thank you Mr chairman you know I
I fully agree I think that
although the the Legislative
Council Service had thought this
was clear let me look at this
just look at section F. here
where it says on page three
races the department to adopt
and promulgate rules for the
regulation operation it seems
clear to yes of school based
health centers receiving funding
from the department so it's
already there for that but if it
needs to be mid morning senator
do I can't that's clear back
there but I think Senator Brandt
brings up a very good point in
section be on page one.
That putting those same words
kind of in just there at the
beginning makes it very clear
throughout the rest of it which
kinds of schoolbased health
centers were looking at I see
nods from various people in the
room and I don't Mr chairman and
I don't have any problems with
that the more clear we make it
the better and so it doesn't
yeah I'm fine with that can we
have an amendment do you have
particular words the the I think
we Mr Chairman your language on
that was was good I think it's
held it then repeated or don't
want to go media are you
watching the schoolbased health
centers.
That recieve know what what kind
of state funding is echo this
yes state funding receiving the
department of health funding.
Shall be regulated by the
department.
This that's good for me that's
is that fine with the clear
centers that meet the
requirement that you're
concerned about yeah I was just
wanted to clarify what send
comments concerned about I have
some of the concerns but that
will will come.
Everybody understand the Ellen
did you make.
Okay.
We're we're just trying to make
sure the secretary got.
After centers receiving funding
from the department of health
comma shall be regulated by the
department to provide services
pursuant to you don't need to
put the part of health just
department because up here in
the previous it's us okay in his
apartment is referred to as
apartment okay.
From the department department
should be regulated by the
department to provide.
Thank you that's fine with me
appreciate that that that would
be a friendly amendment is
friendly man Mr chairman it's
good okay everybody.
What what the amendment says.
We've had a motion and a second
I believe if you'll call the
roll on the amendment.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator my office yes Senator
Neville Senator Pinto.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator so
yes they have so we have the
amendment I think that clarifies
things Senator Brandt you're
still on thank you Mr chairman
and and so my other concern is
and it's not boarded in the bill
which is one of the reasons why
it's a concern but but I I would
like to know is forced policy
wise
I also hate the fact that
departments are giving given
regulation authority again
instead of us doing our job but
a policy wise or parents
notified when their students
when their children receive care
at the centers thank you Mr
chairman Senator yes Christine
would you answer that thank you.
Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee yes so school based
health centers are required like
any other health care facility
in the state to have consent for
treatments and and services
delivered
So they follow all the same
state and federal regulations
for delivering services at any
other clinic and state.
Okay so what what if there Mr
chairman taking someone to
another facility for treatment
they would not transport
somebody to.
That is not that is not.
Thank you and and I think
everyone on the committee knows
my concern Mr chairman about
Mr I'm just not sure this is the
role for schools and expand the
maybe it's become necessary
maybe it's I'm not quite there
yet to admit this become
necessary
I fully support referring to
local
and and getting that care within
the local community but I think
we just keep expanding so much
that is the school's
responsibility that we forgotten
what the school's responsibility
as and that's education now if
we were thriving and doing a
great job on education I might
be willing to look at expanding
to other things but we're not
we're failing our kids horribly
in the state education and get
worse we're gonna continue to
expand what the teachers are
responsible for school districts
responsible for and it's it's a
mountain that they're not able
to cover and I I just concerned
about how much we're putting on
our schools and how much were
putting on the administration
other schools instead of keeping
them focused on education so
that's that's my concern is one
of the reasons I cannot support
school police officer thank you
Mr thank you other questions.
It's not a motion.
Motion for you passed by second
does second by Senator pope your
call the roll please.
Senator Browne the.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes thirteen
the bill yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator all
yes.
Okay.
My vote Representative please go
ahead I I.
Of I just want that
congratulations on this bill
this is kind of their and their
ways and you know ABC to the I
just have a school health
centers.
Thank you for reading this far I
didn't see it here but I'm
assuming if you're gonna find
some way to this.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee the department of
health budget is for it's that
that's even without this is
merely puts it in the law but
they it's the same process and
also they do have thank you.
Thank you thank you.
As we're transitioning to the
next one which is the Senate
joint resolution for the state
board of education thank you.
We have a due pass as amended.
as we transition to the next one
for other people watching we
have on the appropriation
calendar that's going to be kind
of a speed calendar after this
each one will have a maximum of
five minutes these are just
straight appropriations going on
to finance so those who are
planning on presenting please do
not go on long periods of time
about how wonderful the program
is needed because for the most
part this committee's gonna
choose no rack on to finance for
these built in less someone on
the committee has a concern
about whether it should move on.
So just kind of for people's.
Information what what.
If you're passionate about it
the passion that the quickly.
Thank you.
Senator Neville on the state
board of education.
We had a minor political.
Okay for kids and then there's a
page missing Mr yes okay there
was a page missing in the box.
Senator please go ahead thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman this
came about of just numbers
numbers discussions we've had
over the last year to about
education and the fact that
The New Mexico struggles to get
above number fifty in the nation
for in various categories the
used to be a common joke about
thank thank god for Mississippi
because they're always worse
than we were Mississippi's not
down at the bottom of the heap
anymore Senator Kernan is more
up to date on what they're doing
out there than I am because she
spent a little time out that
part of the world the to
Mississippi is a about middle of
the pack now there but twenty
fifth or somewhere in that range
doing pretty well and and great
strides and they've restructure
their education and the key to
their success Mr success of
those those states that have had
turnarounds Education the
stability and that's what we do
not have in our current system
situation over the last twenty
years since we changed our
secretary of education
implemented secretary of
education system we currently
have we've had something like
ten or twelve I don't even know
how many but quite a few of the
under all the governors and all
had to turn over and even in the
best situation will have a
turnover rate every eight years
of the minimum and that's about
the time you start to figure out
if your system is working is
about the eighth year in your
change secretaries reinvent the
wheel and it didn't work so this
is a joint resolution was passed
by rules as a substitute teacher
of associate in your book the
book and then we've been through
as you know etcetera Mr Chairman
we've been through a number of
iterations of how we're going to
structure this new department
that started off which is taking
the current Public Education
Commission converting it to a
board of education and letting
them higher superintendent then
we thought well that isn't so
good with them consider another
option of putting together a
seven member appointed that
didn't necessary so this goes
back pretty much to the way it
was to about twenty years ago
when we change the our
organization of public education
and it sets up a school board of
state school board.
Which would be ten people
elected under the current
Foundries of the Public
Education Commission of
eliminate that particular body
these we staggered six year
terms and the the would at least
initially would follow the the
boundaries of the OPC that it
currently exists extent of those
and it would then allow the
governor to appoint six people
to that those would also be on
six year staggered terms so
these would overlap interject
various given different
governors time would go on so
the point is stability to try to
get something together the board
would then hire a state
superintendent of schools
Senator Stewart spin very active
in helping me structure this as
you have Mr chairman trying to
come up with a system that would
work and everybody's got a
different idea how we structure
the board but this is what seems
to be the one that is most
acceptable everybody's go back
to a similar system the beauty
of that is that in the past we
had three state superintendents
over a period of about forty
years and that's what we want to
get to if we're gonna have a
good education you've got to
have a stable system and that's
what we want to do that's the
essence of it it's a ten member
elected five member appointed
staggered terms six years and
they can only be removed for
costs would be similar to the
board of regents appointed ones
would be similar to the board of
regents at all of our
universities they can't be just
kicked out because of political
whims and so forth I suspect
every sec secretary of education
we've had had great ideas but
never has the political
environment that they have to
exist under just makes it very
intent untenable for them to.
Actually accomplish what the
what their goals are too many
differences of opinions and
eventually it it to sabotages
their position and they they
move on and I can't say I blame
in those cases but we we've got
to do something about stability
and this is the effort that some
of us have not kids on try to
come up with the system that's
what I'm presenting today's this
joint resolution.
Senator before we go out for
public comment we don't see a
lot of resolutions please talk
about how this is different from
a billable.
Structure and process answer go
this will not take effect
immediately first off it has to
be voted on by the voters in the
next general election which
would be twenty twenty four so
we're talking a year and a half
two years out before we actually
vote on it and then it at that
point we would have to then have
elections at the next election
after that which would be twenty
six to elect the PC members they
would be elected in staggered
terms probably about a lot of
some kind of be statisticians
and enabling legislation that is
not done yet would have to do
that next session or two then
the
The process then would be that
the governor would then appoint
the remaining members of the
board so this is not something
is going to to really take place
until twenty twenty seven so
it's a long process the voters
have to approve this at the next
general election is a
constitutional amendment and it
would be on the ballot and
I I might point out that it was
a constitutional amendment to
put it in the current position
that was held on September the
twenty third of two thousand and
three no offense structures and
unusual date it was it was and
we never have elections on
September twenty third in odd
years we always have a need in
years and we always have on the
first Tuesday of the month of
November so this is a was it
more made of meant really been
with the voters one of the time
I can't speak to that but
there's an unusual special
election but that is the process
which thank you up to the public
comment in the room those in
support.
And anyone in opposition.
Okay.
Do I come up as support first
and then we'll go to opposition.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
coalition of education leaders
we stand strong support of this
resolution we believe it'll
provide some stability and our
public education department and
we think the sponsor thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
room in support.
We have one online in support
Meredith.
Action I think yes
Mr chair members of the
committee on Meredith made can
I'd speaking on behalf of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico and the American
Association of university women
New Mexico and we're we're in
strong support of having a state
board of education
and
we have concerns that the
committee this commission would
be way too large we'd rather see
nine people total and one of the
ways that Colorado structures
there board of education which I
think could be considered is to
use a congressional districts
rather than the P. E. C.
districts we know where the
population centers are and that
we would give flexibility
Colorado uses one part
congratulate district but they
have I but anyway having an on
the pin number on the on the
board maybe maybe one or two
from the governor but having so
many people makes it very
unwieldy and I don't think you
need more than nine thank you
very much thank you.
There anyone else in support.
Online okay from opposition
those in the room if you come up
to the Mike please.
What would like to speak.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I mean out of on
executive director of New Mexico
gets can I'm we certainly agree
with senator Neville and many
others who say we need something
to change in terms of leadership
of education in the state of New
Mexico we agree that we need
stability our primary concern is
that this would make education
more political and not less we
believe the education politics
over the last twenty years and
particularly over the last three
or four have gotten particularly
ugly and I would argue even more
ugly than they were twenty years
ago and so we worry by making
this
a bigger issue on the statewide
election ballot and elevating
the PC to a state board of
education those education
politics will create more
confusion and frustration and
conflict among our education
policy makers and we hope that
in the future we got a secretary
of education who can implement a
plan and that you all as a
legislature will step in and
help us execute the plan by
eight taking more of that
authority here in the
legislature I would also say
there's forty nine states that
rank above us and education
outcomes and they all have a
variety of governance structures
and so we're really wanting to
focus on instruction and getting
the instruction improved in our
classrooms as opposed to
changing the governance
structure here in New Mexico
thank you thank you.
That.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico we
appreciate as well the Senators
intent here our concern is that.
We should spend some time is an
education community figuring out
what the right path forward is
you heard in one of the the and
folks who are standing up and
support that they they still
have a little bit of a different
idea and I think the work that
the L. E. S. C. did on
graduation requirements this
interim serves as a good model
for us to have this conversation
as a larger community what is
the right path forward we agree
with the senator that that that
a potential different path
forward might make sense but
just feel like we should have
have more of a conversation
around this so we appreciate you
senator Neville but oppose the
bill as it stands now thank you
yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor Representative thousands
of educators throughout the
state much like the other two in
opposition we do very much
respect the Sanchez intention
with this bill and understand
the issue at hand along with
what the other two opposers us
said as far as issues we would
also like to add that having an
elected and appointed board
could lead to death further
bureaucracy which is something
that I think is a concern and
could also interfere with some
local control over the education
systems locally sell for those
reasons we respectfully poses
measure and hope that you will
as well thank you thank you.
And online I think we have to in
opposition Terry Cole.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee.
We respectfully oppose as J. R.
one you know we've worked with
senator Neville and many things
actually over the years so I
really hate being on the other
side of him on anything but we
do respectfully oppose as J. R.
one we believe that putting a
partially or fully elected group
of people in charge of our
state's education system could
be a recipe for greater politics
and not greater progress all of
us agree more politics is the
last thing we need in education
but as we can see as we are
concerned that this move would
be highly destructive and it has
the potential of creating more
opportunities for the
interference of special
interests and education policy
it's not a perfect comparison
but let's not forget that we put
elected body in charge of
utility regulation and ended up
with a daily part of this
function and corgi see can make
you in addition lawmakers are
considering bills this session
that are front and center
because of the history of poor
governance of school boards all
across the state we're concerned
that the same thing that
happened with a state school
board finally our most important
COVID the number of adults
decision makers and our public
education system is not driving
our students and expectedly low
academic performance we can add
more deck chairs to rearrange
them but they should still going
the same unless we become more
students center and relentlessly
focused on growing high
performing public schools of all
times replicating innovations
and practices that work
requiring every child to read
fifteen seconds please.
And requiring the highest level
of training and development
right thank you Mr chair I
appreciate the opportunity thank
you Terry.
And senator fitzgerald.
And she's not online okay
Center in comments where we go
to questions from the committee.
I think it's some of the point
opponents pointed out some of
the best arguments for the that
I would like to
mentions stability's is the
issues they've talked about
that's different all over this
country that is true I gave
Senator Kernan something a
government CSL every state has a
different system but the ones
that are succeeding have a
stable system of some kind and
that's this may or may not be as
good as some of some other state
I won't profess that it is but
it it would offer some stability
again the evidence is there
forty five years three state
superintendents that's the key
issue that I'm trying to get get
back get us back to then we can
start to address all the issues
that we're talking about as far
as more time in classroom with
all of those kind of concepts
that of professional educators
know a lot more about than I do
you can't get there if we don't
have stability and this would
give us a much better chance of
taking the politics I generally
think that taking the politics
away from the the top latter the
governor's office would have a
lot to do with making this a
stable system and help in our
education that's all Mr chairman
I appreciate the opportunity
thank you questions from the
committee.
The current.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator developed I have visited
about this over over the interim
and
we've looked at what other
states have done through the
NCSL report and and they do all
kinds of combinations of what
we're talking about some have
Superintendent a point about the
governor are school chief others
have a combination of appointees
and elected and I think this is
a good balance I remember in two
thousand three and Aussies
former representative Rick me
here in the audience and I
remember when we had this debate
I was a brand new legislator not
turn to too many people that it
by me and I think maybe at that
time was something that governor
Richardson wanted he wanted more
control over the policy that you
cation and we moved in that
direction and it probably work
for while I think it was pretty
stable under his administration
and then certainly under
governor Martinez I think just
one and that there was a lot of
controversy there but
I think it's time to really
reconsider what we're gonna do
and going back to what to the
senator said about Mississippi
there's no question that it was
a combination of consistency of
this funding and policy that was
adopted by the legislature in
Mississippi that brought them to
where they are today moving up
in the next scores from the
bottom of the barrel out New
Mexico to about mid way and much
of that was the consistency of
their state school chief over
time over thirteen years she was
in place and and she was able to
reach out and work with
individual communities of
promoting letters training which
we're finally doing and that's
going to be a huge difference
for New Mexico as we teach
teachers the science of teaching
reading and that's why
Mississippi one of the reasons
that they've been so successful
another reason I think that we
have to say that they have been
successful is our fourth grade
reading proficiency requirement
and we tried that a couple years
ago under the previous
administration I carried the
bill I think two or three times
and never got it through and I'm
kinda said we didn't because
Mississippi did that eight or
nine years ago and they simply
do not promote to.
In the can't read by the time
they're in fourth grade and they
have many exceptions for
students with disabilities with
children with language issues
but they simply don't do that in
the first year that they
implemented that law fourteen
percent of the kiddos repeated
but over time I think children
and parents realized I'm gonna
have to learn to read and
teachers realized they had to
know how to teach reading and
through the letters process
that's what they're doing in
Mississippi and now they've seen
great success but it was over
time it was under the leadership
of one state school chief and so
what I like about the bill and
we went back and forth and
discuss the fact of these
regions and you can almost take
two of them and put them
together and create instead of
the ten you could do five and
then reduce the governor's
appointment to agree that maybe
that's something maybe which
should I don't know if we can do
that but
I do think it's important for
regions to be represented and I
like the fact that the governor
can only point
two members of her political
party or his political party and
only two members can be
appointed from the sand county
so that does spread out
everybody's Representative that
not too much I mean if you look
at Bernalillo you've got
Albuquerque and and potentially
that could be very well
represented with.
To to appointees and one elected
so I think it's a fair way to do
it and I do think it's time to
really consider doing something
in a different way because what
we're doing now simply is not
working and every time you have
a change of administration
everything stone out the window
when it goes both ways it's not
about just the Democrats doing
it or just the Republicans doing
it every eight years we have a
shift and that's not fair to our
children it's not fair to our
teachers they learn one system
and then the next time there's a
new governor you have to start
all over again so I I really
think we ought to consider this
an
You know of I wish we had a
little more conversation during
the interim with members of the
LFC that we have it before us
and it's been done before other
states are doing something
similar and so I really do I
think we've got to make a
decision are we really gonna
trying change education in New
Mexico we're just gonna keep on
doing the same thing thank you
that's all thank senators center
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator I I appreciate the
The thought of this I am I
probably will support it.
But I do think if we can't get
it through this year that Matt
has a good suggestion I'll CYFD
You know we've talked back and
forth about how many people
should be on it I'm not sure
that matters I'm not sure if it
was thirty or if it was ten that
would make a difference
you are you gonna have more
opinions but you're you know in
the end you're gonna vote and
make a decision one way or the
other who is going to be the
secretary
what I do know is that what
we're doing right now is not
working right under this
administration we've had three
secretaries and right now we
don't have one.
So.
Four under this administration
so right now we don't have one
at all so you know that makes it
you know I'll tell you it was
really difficult the session for
secretary to resign a week into
the session we're trying to work
with him on legislation and
everything that you've kind of
figured out with him now is kind
of in the air.
and so that stability I think is
really critical and it's
something we don't have
education's one of the things
that shouldn't be political but
it has become one of the most
political issues in the country
and
You know so I think by having.
Someone pointed are not wanted
someone well as the hired by the
board of education that you
would have that stability long
term.
Hopefully hopefully wouldn't
have what we have in our local
schools but instead maybe run a
little more like Rio Rancho this
at the same superintendents and
so began.
you know we need to have that
stability.
Within our state because this is
what what's happening is a mess
you know we we have one
superintendent they come the
secretary that come in and set a
whole set of rules and then we
six months later we had another
one and then he didn't even live
here.
And we had no idea where we're
going under under him then we
get another one in the I thought
that the agency staff sign house
was actually had things fairly
stable.
And the cause of a selfie needed
to quit.
And so the this is been back and
forth and honestly I don't think
for our schools and our
education state New Mexico has
any idea what direction we're
going right now.
Except down that's been the
direction for at least the last.
Five six years.
but you know we we should allow
parents to have a choice where
to send their kids because that
would be terrible so I guess we
need to do this and stuff so
thank you Mr chairman I do
support the idea.
We can always do some fine
tuning on it but this work this
way this.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
that's all.
Thank you Sir pope.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator Neville.
Just a few questions on this so
we're we're setting up four
state board and the
superintendent what would happen
to the position of
secretary with this this would
eliminate the secretary of
education and the PVC that's in
the the title there it
eliminates the species well we
would then have a state school
board that would be empowered to
the entire state superintendent
of would run the program and and
the PC the public education
department would go with this it
will transfer over.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
and I agree I I think the way
you lay this out definitely
would be some more consistency
you're dressing representation
politically
geographically here.
But I guess if we can have
explain how.
Maybe those the politics of
getting things done.
How would this be better than
what we have now and the reason
I bring that question up is you
Senator Brandt brought up
politics and we see that one on
actually been our state and it's
happening at school boards at
the local level how would that
not happen at the state level
you can never eliminate politics
I won't argue that we can get
rid of all of it the the ideas
that we would elect people from
across the state so all the
whole entire state would be
Representative they have an
input and what happens with
education and they would just
hire the superintendent service
superintendent be the leader who
would develop programs and
policies and so forth but the
board within determine whether
those are going to be
implemented for not
right now it's one person that
and who's the secretary of
education who determines it when
that person changes the whole
game changes the whole system
changes.
If we have a board even if they
change superintendents from time
to time so there would be some
stability in the board because
you'd have the ten elected
they're staggered terms of
that's the other thing nobody to
the whole thing that shift every
you know every six years or
whatever only to every every two
years to would go art hello
however we set this up on a
random deal
a few of them would go off in a
few more would be elected some
would be reelected but there
would be a lot of stability in
the elected portion the
governor's appointments are
staggered as well their six year
term so heard there would be
overlaps into the next governor
as time goes on so you wouldn't
have the political upheaval that
you have from the governor's
changing so we would stabilize
the appointed twins we stabilize
the elected ones yes there's
politics I can't tell you
there's not going to be some but
there's not going to be one
governor or one education
secretary saying let's uh let's
do the reading this way or do it
the fourth grader in whatever
the any of those policies that
need to be determined can be
determined by a group in a body
and stabilized and the
superintendent and would
ultimately be the leader course
would be a in a in our area
where I'm at are superintendent
stay there a long time we rarely
have a change of ownership and
it's we really have changed over
there city manager county
managers and that makes a lot of
difference in what you see as
far as the results of any of
those governmental bodies and
they're all controlled by
elected.
Words and so forth but the
stability is the important part
is as far as if we're and and if
if it doesn't work then you can
make a lot of noise and change a
lot of things the legislature
can still implement with we
voted on a couple things today
legislature you can still
implement policies of excuse me
health care.
Or whatever so it we're not
taken all the politics that
we're not taking decisions of
the Legislature totally away
from the deal but as far as the
day to day operations it would
change dramatically from what it
currently is and lose my voice
sorry Senator our.
Thank you senator so really and
is the stability that we have
going on when we have a new
administration coming in we have
the stability of members that
are staying on and and
essentially
whoever is our next governor is
were to pass.
Really they would not have as
much influence on new secretary
and that turned over on what
we're doing education it's
really
having the opportunity to
a point a few members to have
that influence on the
superintendent for the policy
that the superintendent would be
implementing it would allow the
governor's voice in the process
but it wouldn't allow the
governor's control of the
process that's the big
difference so overall it would
be a superintendent basically
Running education policy in our
state with the help of us as a
legislature passing laws and
senator I would point out to
Mister chairman Senator of point
out that we don't change college
presidents very often why
because we have a stable border
regions that the governor can't
order the president to be on the
board of regents the only ones
that can do that there remove
for cause only the governor
can't switch regions because
they don't like what's happening
so that stability has been
established universities for the
most part not always we have a
good chair and then but the
facts are we don't change
university presidents because we
have a stable situation as far
as the politics go.
Mr chair Senator how with the
role of I guess in this position
the role of of.
Oversight of our public charter
schools hello hello that come
into play would be absorbed into
the board of the PC would go
away which now manages charter
schools the board of education
with and take on that
responsibility nothing
significantly change.
Mr chair thank you center for
Ramos thanks for asking the
questions
you know I I don't know where
Madam is still I I do like the
stability alike we've laid out I
like that the representation
what you've done there I was a
little wary of it just being the
board initially but now I
understand the superintendent I
come from a community where I
grew up in Colorado where was
actually a small town where it
was.
That's a small town where we
actually did have a more we
actually had a city council
running this the community and
having that it was like nobody
ever got anything done or
decisions because it was like
everybody was worried about
reelection so nobody really
wanted to take the heat in the
that executive or be the person
to make the decision so that
would be a concern of just four
kind of dictating policy of the
state but having a
superintendent makes me a little
more comfortable with that I
don't wear then on this Senator
but thank you for asking the
questions and the thank you
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you Sir my us this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you senator Ortiz
I think up this is worth this is
worth the conversation you know
and if it doesn't get through
this year than maybe during the
summer and we can decide once
and for all I not worth fighting
about for five years but it is
some to consider now but I just
have some questions on the
language.
Mr Chairman center the
So the board will have fifteen
members fifty correct the
fifteen elected I appointed
thank you and currently refresh
our memories the.
The current Public Education
Commission has ten members ten
ten districts that's correct to
these would be the same
districts Mister chairman
Senator these are the same
districts that are currently
status because they're already
set up under the the
redistricting of which took
place compared.
And then as you know Mister
chairman Senator all of our.
Constitutional amendments of.
Went to the next general
election because I was only
thing we had
In our Spanish polities and
school boards got elected in
some in October seven March
seventh February but now with
the exception of two or three
municipalities everyone the the
election is now in November of
odd numbered years so we might
want to get in the habit of
Of using you know if it's a
sixty day session joint
resolutions.
go to the voters in the next
regular election and then if we
pass one in the thirty day it
goes to the next general
election that we would have to
wait eighteen months
And I think those those two or
three towns maybe that'll know
Jim towards that November
election also
The keep in mind Mr center the.
You know the up.
We're gonna use the current
Public Education Commission
districts in till the next
redistricting.
Nothing theoretically nothing
prohibits redistricting at any
time we do it every ten years
but constitution we can do it at
any time
to because I noticed the two
thousand three constitution
members gentleman just said
shell had tell have these
districts until the next
redistricting and then
And then there's this.
Granary Mr chairman center the
So I guess if it gets passed by
the voters.
In twenty twenty four.
Fund on page three lines
seventeen through nineteen just
as the Public Education
Commission shall constitute its
powers and duties until replaced
by the elected members of the
state school board so it will
get passed.
In November of twenty twenty
four secretary you know
certifies it in December and
then boom that the the Public
Education Commission becomes
this.
This board the governor can
appoint immediately up.
After that.
But we would have to do an
enabling enabling legislation
that very next year very complex
in a building legislation.
so we we want to say that it'll.
That it will essentially go into
effect July first of the
following year that we we can do
the enabling act.
Maybe maybe maybe not and then
also
Because I'll be this two year
kind of gray area.
For the Public Education
Commission will become the board
but only have the legal
authority of the Public
Education Commission.
You will not have the authority
of.
It'll be this greater where the.
Well maybe not but some to think
about the board will have the
immediate authority to hire
superintendent.
The.
But the public education
department within the.
With the executive would still
exist in its current form I
believe
But I do believe Mr descent
conclude I mean that the
economists say get the
incentives right the the
political side to say get that
get the institutional structure
right and so we have to get the
institutional structure right I
think some of the misgivings
over so still when we
restructure the PRC there's
kinda issues in my own time
with.
with personalities within the
local governments it's just a
question of whether it's just
the circumstances of the day or
whether the institution is not
is not correct so at this time I
think.
I think the institution itself.
I'm not ready to change it at
this point but.
But I'll definitely take a look
at considerate and I'm just I
don't know what the what the
institution was before two
thousand three.
it's not it's not because I'm
reading the constitution but it
doesn't have the old language of
the two thousand two
constitution.
sort of we're going to go back
to that in its entirety but I do
know that
Mr keep in my yes yes Mr might
please the prior to two thousand
three was almost he was very
very similar ninety five percent
with this is currently this is
taking a specter some technical
more modernizing like no more
than two of the same I mean most
no more than three the same
party no more than two of the
one County we've put some little
things like that and there's
structurally it's almost exactly
the way it was prior to that
constitution minute as far as
what you're talking about how
this would go into effect this
would be voted on in twenty four
if it passes the renewable
members would be elected in
twenty six they would assume
office in January of twenty
seven the governor would appoint
those additional I for January
for approval of this legislative
session they can function as as
a members and school board until
conference confirmation so it
would all is simply take place
January of twenty seven as
winter thing which isn't far
from the redistricting process
that would happen again so we
could fix that you know in the
things like that at that point
in time so in the PC goes away
the duties are assumed by the
new board I think it all run
smoothly we do have to have
enabling legislation on how do
we stagger the terms and things
like that we've got to figure
those out I think that's all
been done before so it's not
rocket science for obscenity
absolutely thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator just.
Not with regard to that and on
page three lines ten eleven it's
as appointed members may be
appointed before January first
twenty twenty seven so
theoretically the gov could
appoint folks under could
appoint COVID four pokes rate in
in January of twenty twenty
five.
and then lastly of these these
persons will then run for
office.
In the up in the general
election produces I think we
should consider them running for
office in a regular election.
They are partisan we have Mister
chairman Senator their partisan
collections we generally put the
partitions on even years the non
partisans on the odd years do I
know this service center that's
why suggest the being a regular
election so that the not be
parties.
That you know my original bill
was that way that made to
members nonpartisan that this is
this is about the third or
fourth.
In that I've just come up with
to catch just assumed I'd be the
one that's most ex it might be a
tough sell as well right thank
you Mr thank you see another
Pinto.
And thank you senator members of
the committee on page.
Two nine twenty two tribal
representatives do we have that
defined in the manner of we just
thinking one.
The reason I'm asking is because
we.
Not each tribe nation and
publicists say ninety quorum we
have a majority of.
You know the public to gather
together in the the end with the
nation I think to
representatives would Mr better
Senator this is common language
we put in a lot of bills very
appointments no it's not defined
it could be defined in the
Enabling legislation we could do
some more there but is not
defined in the constitution
that.
And in lieu of the
you know if they could see the
instability in the sense of the
litigation that was with the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit this of
the turnover and not being able
to
You know we're still in this
limbo of are we meeting the
needs are not of the of the the
lawsuit.
But I don't think one member of
the board is enough commission I
think I understand there's
having that representation but
also that I think that term
limits maybe is of a better than
trying to do this whole change
is just trying to change the
term limits because when you
talk about changing commission
to board are there other
statutes when we talk about the
charter schools that have to be
amended in which this is all new
language but it's not striking
out or
Changing the other language in
which the it would say
commission and that would have
to be changed board would be the
function of the enabling
legislation and that would have
to take place probably of the
first session following the
passage of the structures
amendment as far as no there's
two members elected the current
I think it's district one in
five one of them is our part of
the world the northwest of the
other one is the Gallup grants
into.
Comes into the H. R. but closed
Albuquerque I don't know I think
chair closer Sheila Jones is
occupies one of those positions
I don't know but the other one
that so there's potential for
tribal representation and and
other districts by election and
certainly the redistricting that
Senator I just this was talking
about that could be addressed
more accurately.
And chairman's Committee.
I'm not sure whether more is
better or less is better because
when you talk about being you
know that many people together
desist when do you speak more
for my area is the created
committee on the committee on
the committee and the
subcommittee to do this
committee's work to do that to
tackle this and it seems like
you delay things you have so
many people coming in to decide
something that takes even longer
to get implemented because
everybody has their own.
And yet in that and even when we
talk about even
members you know what if there's
a time and in that.
Instance to who's really going
to decide when they're not
meeting their their duties right
now I think we agree that that
we already feel like there's
some people out there that are
not meeting those duties and
which we liked amid them into on
the boards.
But do we continue to
Lingus can it change the system
so many times that we're not
really able to pinpoint where
the issues are.
We know there's issues right
now.
But it's we've done a lot of
changes so much that I don't
even know if the implementation
of some of those changes that we
have actually took the fact or
been able to really see any
results
as far as them being implemented
for school year.
So I understand about stability
because of our our own issue up
in the enough and in that area
Still it's still.
But the.
In a way I feel like it's too
many people that have too much
say.
From us to the NM we just put
more barriers between how we're
representing our constituents to
the governor and then back this
way and it seems like it's more
of a.
You know even having
blind about that like twenty one
about members of the same
political party when you're
trying to say it's not
political.
but to actually have those two
words in the bill it.
It's it's political and so are
we creating a more.
Just so we can.
I guess
On call I don't know what other
use what he's but to
make a favor for someone else to
say okay we're gonna do this for
you to do this for me thank you
Because our even our higher ed
board regents are at odds third
there Todd number.
This is an odd number mixtures
and it's fifteen it's on.
In this odd
but unlike fifteen do we really
need fifteen.
people to of that something for
our our our our children on
education but thank you senator
I understand where you're mmhm
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator
couple of things and I've worked
with the sponsor and meant to
sign on and as one of the co
sponsors for this having worked
in education under the when we
had a state superintendent of
schools and.
My feeling it felt less
political than that it feels
since then
We've gone round and round as to
whether having served on a
regular school board to five
members fifteen member board is
big and unwieldy.
But then people reminded me that
that's what we had for thirty or
forty years and it worked fine
that it was not problematic and.
That the real role of the board
is to hire the superintendent to
run the schools in to oversee a
broad policies and direction
with the superintendent not to
make every single decision about
education all the way along the
line of which I think is a
really important piece of it
we've talked about making it I
members combine the ten the we
get each one into two into one
to reduce it.
But then some people commented
that it's hard that there are
more communities of interest
around the state for that that I
that should be Representative on
there and so I backed off on on
that plan I think it's important
I think something different than
we had before is the six year
staggered terms which slows the
the turnover in any particular
direction which reduces the
politics then also that there's
never a huge turnover that
there's always some stability
and balance and the fact that
the governor can't take off
people who were already
appointed by prior governors
provide stability across
politics with all of that I'm
very in favor of this when I was
with the school board
association when this the change
occurred under Richards and I
tried to warn people don't do
this you know it be makes it
more pull everybody said it's to
reduce the politics it makes it
more political and that's
exactly what happened and
education for kids should be
less political we will never get
rid of all the politics and
whether we have it during the
general election or have it
during the off year elections
where the apolitical ones
everybody knows what policy
what.
What that the politics of the
people there are and so we're
not going to eliminate that I
think this is the right thing to
do it changes it between
administrations we have a
current governor that is not
able to run for reelection and
so we're not it's not a poke in
the eye to the particular
governor or particular party but
the next governor would be it
would fall under this system I
think it's the right thing to do
for our kids end as mentioned
the stability of there are
everything across the country
from completely appointed
completely elected hybrids of
every Brandon nature out there.
Again it's stability that is
most important for education in
order to move forward and those
of us who have been in education
for a while we certainly have
felt the whiplash of over the
last couple of administrations
and the the changes in the state
super are that state secretary
of education so I'm very in
favor of this and I know we
would you would brought a
committee sub that moves it to
seven.
But in that discussions with
people I don't think I'm
comfortable with the fifteen
yeah and we already have the
structure in place for where
those districts are they pick up
north southeast west Democrat
Republican areas so that there's
wide representation for all of
those and then it's incumbent
upon the voters to make sure
that their voices are heard
through their elected officials
so
I guess more I don't really have
any questions we talked
extensively about all the
different things
So we have a motion for a do
pass second by Senator Kernan
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Department center last.
No.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
The.
Yes Senator soul yes we have we
do you have a due pass two
hundred six to vote and I
believe it now goes to the.
The chairman says he will
probably roll it out okay.
Thank you as we indicated we
have this by bills SB four
hundred will not be heard today
which are straight up
appropriation bills we're kind
of on a speed calendar here
we've got a little over half an
hour to get the I bills done
Senator Diamond you've got the
first two and so brief
explanations of things anyone on
the committee who wants a more
in depth look at any of these
please feel free to the state so
on weekends but otherwise.
We're on the speed calendar
thank you Mr Dimon thank you Mr
chairman members of the
community this is a straight
straightforward appropriation
nonrecurring expense of general
revenue funds of one million
dollars this money will go
towards marketing and promotion
of New Mexico signature crop New
Mexico green Chile it's and it's
a rural.
You know what I want to before I
turn it over to my expert
witness is Mr try to stay the
New Mexico Chile Association I
do want to note it's one million
dollars appropriation
nonrecurring it will revert if
not spent in one year there is
an imho you with the chili
Association and New Mexico State
University who is the fiscal
agent of this is really New
Mexico State University who will
be administering the program I
did before I turn it over to
Travis I did want to note that
on the back of the FIR it it
does say that this is a
companionship Bill to yours Mr
chairman Senate bill one eighty
eight establishing the official
state aroma so really if we
don't find Chile we can't smell
chili.
I do want to give just a moment
still that line.
You've just a moment to Mr
Travis state to to kind of a
just give a rundown of the
marketing program that they have
with New Mexico state thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee as a senator said
there is already working and
when you between the two
association and the New Mexico
New Mexico state university's
college of ag and so this you
Senator money the system's
already been set up already have
a working relationship it's a
matter of just getting all the
players put together so with
this will include an NDA the
chili peppers to New Mexico
State University the chili
Association together up to
expend the funds within the year
to promote our signature crop
the state appropriation research
money we had a lot of great
successes and so we want to
market and promote the New
Mexico industry the work being
done in New Mexico state.
Thank you and are we gonna
continue the billboards up in
Denver for the governor out
there about how good New Mexico
Chile is yes we will.
those in the audience just a
show of hands in support.
Is there any opposition.
Okay we're not gonna take public
comment I think everyone's in
support questions from the
committee.
If not a motion.
Yes.
And and you know REC is not by
no means disparaging of the.
Yes Representative a motion for
a no Representative land
finances their second second by
Senator Pinto if you'll call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Maestas yes Senate Bill.
Senator Pinto yeah Senator pope
yes Senator souls yes.
Please so you have a six zero no
record on to.
The finance committee thank you
and Senator Diamond you're still
up on the bioscience Business
accelerator Senate bill three
sixty six yes Sir I'm gonna have
executive director of the
bioscience Steffi to fo do join
me up here to Fiji to the G. yes
this a Senate bill three sixty
six is also an appropriation of
general funds three hundred
sixty five thousand dollars this
funding will go to the
university of New Mexico for
their clients bioscience
authority this is also a one
here
of funding that will revert to
the end of the year if not used
I do want to give the director
just a brief moment to explain
not just the mission of the
bioscience but what they're
three they're six hundred fifty
thousand dollars appropriation
request will go to.
Thank you chairman Senator
Diamond so we are the by lanes
Authority we were created in
twenty seventeen is a state
agency to help promote the
expansion of the bioscience
industry throughout the state we
are administratively attached to
the University of New Mexico
which is why the at
appropriations they're having
difficulty hearing you so either
please project a little more or
you can use the hand Mike and
hold the button down.
Thank you.
Can you hear me now but it's
better okay wonderful so just to
reiterate the by lanes Authority
is a state agency was formed in
twenty seventeen to increase the
amount of bioscience industry
throughout the state we are
administratively attached to the
University of New Mexico HSC but
we are a state agency and so
this appropriations will be used
to fund a bioscience business
accelerator that the bioscience
Authority will be facilitating
throughout the entire state it
will hire a network facilitator
interns and mentors and all
three of the research
universities including UNM NMSU
and New Mexico tech to be able
to help facilitate networking
collaboration between industry
and academia one of the pieces
that we feel is missing
throughout the state of New
Mexico in terms of their
bioscience is defective we map
the infrastructure of the
bioscience industry and
researchers in the state we feel
that this is a really important
step to take to be able to
facilitate those collaborations
between those two to be able to
create successful businesses
once these partnerships are
identified that facilitator
would also help to identify
funding opportunities and help
to do trainings and facilitation
of proposal to be able to submit
to these funding opportunities
again this is a statewide
initiative though funding will
be going to the university of
New Mexico.
Yes this is the right
appropriations bill of those in
support.
Thirty one in opposition.
The.
Any questions from the committee
Mr chairman Representative
motion Bruno REC.
Seconded by Pinto if you'll call
the roll on a no rec to finance
committee.
Requests.
Hey can we have.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
biases yes in the bill yes
etcetera etcetera so that
Senator pope yes Senator so yes
we have a
no respond to it appreciate your
time Senator Brandt if you'd
like to come down presenter
bill.
People go on.
Senator Ingle.
Educational broadcast television
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
a very simple bill here what
this does is it makes
appropriations to the board of
regents of you and them New
Mexico state and eastern New
Mexico university for the public
television stations as all of
you know we have a
A line nice amount of money
coming into the state and our
public television stations the
ones I am familiar with which is
all of them are have a little
harder time you know getting
support and this would be the
add another hundred twenty five
thousand dollars in recurring
revenue two revenue H. one of
those programs that these
various public public stations
we have that's what this bill
does and everybody is treated
the same amount of money so I'm
here to carry out phone behalf
of the all of us here in the
Senate that value public
television.
Thank you those in support in
the audience.
Thirty one in opposition anyone
no one online.
So questions from the committee
or motion.
Motion for a no passes do you
know do pass no rack.
Without without recommend that
do pass without recommendation
seconded by Senator Hickey if
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Both for all.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan so my SS yes Senate Bill
Senator Pinto that Senator pope
yes Senator souls yes so you
know record on finance thank you
Mr mayor the committee made it
rise from the dead there.
We've got a shot at it yes Sir.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Over
to share funds
from okay.
Kind of the same thing these are
straight up appropriation bill
so we're on a five minute clock
please.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
members of the committee we are
here with to present Senate
bill.
I'm sorry excuse me.
Three six six now I'm sorry
Senate bill three eighty six
which is U. N. M. health Spanish
education program Mr chair this
is a simple appropriation but we
do have with us this morning Dr
plaza and drive to until Lujan
who would like to say just a few
words and support if I could Mr
chair.
Yes please.
Mr chair Senator is good morning
I have to hold the button down.
Thank you good morning when I
yes my name is Veronica plus
that that detective of the
language equity initiatives with
the school of medicine so we're
here to advocate for their
health education
in Spanish for our next
generation of health
professionals New Mexico has the
heritage of being at diapers
multilingual state and after the
president pandemic we all are
well aware of the need for
health bilingual health care
perfect professionals in our
state
hi Sarah in the U. S. department
of health and Human Services had
identified that our state thirty
Out of the thirty three
colonies.
Thirty two of them have a
shortage of healthcare
professionals in I School of
Medicine graduated a hundred
nineteen
I'm out doctors last year among
them on the ferry where
Hispanics in so the funds just
SB thirty six appropriation will
help us to support the health
education of the health health
professionals not on in
disqualifed medicine but the
college of nursing pharmacy and
the college of population health
thank you.
Quickly please Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
nobody should tell in I'm the
chair of the department of
psychiatry at the university of
New Mexico I asked to say a few
words today just that testimony
the reason why I'm not wearing a
tie apologies is because I was
at the psychiatric emergency
room last night and we saw a
perfect example of lack of
mental health equity the patient
had been seen one of the clinics
spent a patient with
developmental disorders the
parents did not speak English
and the patient what the
translator what the actually the
the the staff member who saw him
did not understand what the
patient was saying and the
patient was sentences will to
the image to the psychiatric
emergency room that's just one
example second less simple
lost in translation as as you
can tell from my accent I'm by
link by link will there's been
many cases that I've been in the
psychiatric emergency room and
where the translation has not
been perfect and that can be a
matter of life and death and it
is not that we treat with our
language we do but most
importantly we make Gallegos
only would what we hear I need
psychiatric conditions and again
we make decisions of life and
death not understanding well
Help me
better serve my Spanish speaking
community and I just wanted to
point out that pharmacists are
That we are able to communicate
that in their native language so
thank you all for listening
today and for supporting higher
education in New Mexico thank
you.
Would you like me Madam as well.
The medical student.
Yep hold the button.
Allow windows yes Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Evelyn Lozano I'm a medical
student at the university of
mint New Mexico representing the
student body I was born and
raised and educated here in
Santa Fe and I strongly support
this as we know and as Dr
deposit mention New Mexico is a
multicultural multilingual state
and Spanish has been has added
to the multilingual aspect and
heritage of the state for the
past millennium and so I think
this bill will help better
prepare students like myself who
will be in a few years serving
the community and speaking for
myself plan on staying in the
state serving the thirty five
percent of the population New
Mexico which is mostly
monolingual and Spanish and so
thank you as my colleague said
thank you for supporting and
yeah thank you for the support
thank you both of you hurry up
we need you that.
The government thank you Mr
chairman I just want to
compliment the young people that
have come today and I think
maybe some of you called my
office and you have learned how
to have to do your job and I got
the message and so your work was
you did a good job thank you.
Thank you.
Motion.
Senator Pinto motion for a no
wreck on to finance seconded by
Senator Hickey and if you'll
call the roll please Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey yes
Senator Kernan center my SSS San
Miguel yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator so yes
you have a no rec unanimous no
wreck on to finance.
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair I just wanted
to quickly comment that this is
consistent with the bipartisan
language access bill that we
passed last last session so
thank you very much for this
thank you
on Monday we're going that we
have a fairly.
Full agenda
we will start again at eight
thirty we'll see how we're doing
how many bills are coming over
from the house at that point as
to whether we need to continue
to to meet early part.
It got rolled over because all
of the analysis were thinking we
were just changing the walls and
rooms and stuff in.
