Um, and Mr. Munoz is no stranger
to New Mexican, New Mexico. He
lives in Albuquerque. Uh, he
started off as the New Mexico,
I'm, I'm not sure exactly the
title, but working on on a
community schools in New Mexico.
I went from there to being the
national director of the
Community Schools movement and
is now the executive director of
Education commission of the
states, which provides research,
technical support, uh, other
kinds of things about education
in all of the.
50 states. Uh, we're very
fortunate to have him here today
and then he'll be shadowing me,
uh, in the legislature until
about one o'clock or so, but uh,
Jose, if you would please and
tell us about what education
commission of the state does and
how it can be helpful to
legislators and also I think
you're gonna talk about the
education landscape in the
country right now.
Definitely, thank you, Chairman
Souls, and thank you honorable
uh committee members. I thank
you for the opportunity to come
speak with you all and, and
actually share some New Mexico
uh some trends across the
country that hopefully provide
some insight or some
confirmation to your 2025
legislative session as the
senator Soul had said, um, some
of you may recognize me or
remember me for those who have
been the opposite side of really
advocating for different
policies for community schools,
which I was banning.
to Washington DC for 3 years and
one of the only good things that
came out of COVID is my board
allowing me to move anywhere, so
I came back home and live in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, where I
reside right now with my wife,
and now our 5 children, uh, one
of them being, I know it's New
Mexico State day, but one of
them being a UNM, you wanted
them being a UNL graduate. They
all now, all but the one who was
a UNM graduate, uh, the other 4
live in different states as I'm
at that stage.
your life as an empty nester
with the.
5th and youngest turning 21 this
year, being a junior at the
University of North Florida, uh,
just in Jacksonville, Florida.
So it's an honor to, to come and
come back home and speak uh to
everyone. Uh, if you could do
next slide, please.
Yeah, just before we get
started, I just want to share a
little bit about the Education
Commission of states for those
who may not be familiar with us,
and in some ways we may be
supportive to you during the
legislative session and ongoing.
So ECS is a a national
nonpartisan education policy
organization that was formed
back in 1965, but through a
compact interstate compact for
education. All 50 states, the
territories, the District of
Columbia, assigned the compact
uh with the goal that states
should collaborate and share
ideas as they worked.
challenges and policy changes.
We're kind of unique in a couple
of ways. Uh, one, first we uh
actually work across the entire
education spectrum from a cradle
to career, the cradle to career,
uh, and so then second, we have
a very diverse membership. We
serve all policymakers and
professionals throughout the
states, but as you can see
through this slide right here,
uh, there are representatives
for each state, 300 of them
currently across all states in
which Senator Soul, Senator
we have a great representation
as chairs of the Senate and the
House in New Mexico, the 33
secretaries who presented this
morning in that spectrum,
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham,
and then uh the president of New
Mexico State University also
serves on there. Um, we have an
opportunity to bring together
governor's office and state
departments of education, state
boards of education, higher
education department, and
legislators.
big impetus is we want to
stimulate some of the learning
and cooperation across the
political and professional
forces of education, just for
the purpose of advancing an
excellent education for
everyone.
We feel that learning experience
and information by learning
ourselves from every, from every
single state.
One way we can quickly support
you uh during the session is by
providing a written response to
information requests. You may
have one at your tables similar
to this, such as this that
prompted this presentation. We
typically takes us 48 to 72
hours to provide that to you on
any education issue, uh, each
state has a liaison.
Unfortunately, Gabriela
Rodriguez, who's New Mexico's
liaison. She couldn't be here
today, but that happened because
I actually live here, so.
Gabriela's in uh the state of
Washington, uh, today, uh,
supporting, supporting them.
But as RECS commissioners and
Senator So's Representative
Romero have Gabriel's contact
information if you need to reach
out to her or I can email you as
well after this presentation,
after this presentation.
If you could go to the next
slide, if you would.
Uh
A little bit about how we work.
So we have an amazing policy
team. Uh, they're reviewing
every piece of introduced
education-related legislation
around the country and they
maintain a database on our
website at UCS.org.
On education policies from
preschool to post-secondary in
the workforce.
Um, they're also looking at
things like State Department
initiatives, governor's
initiatives, and work of state
boards of ed and higher ed.
And they're using those to
inform monthly policy releases.
I'll share at the end how you
can connect to that in a more
readily available as soon as
they're released instant. Some
of them.
Of the most utilized ones, we do
50 state comparisons where our
policy team takes issues and do
deep dives on relevant key
questions within each of those
issues state by state, you'll be
able to see that on the website
that uh on that database. Beyond
our research and reports.
If you would go to the next
slide.
We bring education leaders
across the nation together just
to learn from each other at our
at our convenings. Our largest
event is the national um Forum
on Education Policy, where we
bring a little bit over 600.
Policymakers and professionals
together and just to learn from
each other in some great
networking opportunities. This
meeting actually provides folks
to get firsthand information
from states that are doing um
some very innovative policy
solutions for what they're
facing. We just finished uh
closing our RFP session now and
that's in review. So the next
one for 2025 National Forum is
in Salt Lake City, Utah, on July
9th through 11th.
So I hope to see many of your
faces there again.
Finally,
Our team, how we can support
you, uh, they're available to
discuss some policy plans with
you, consult and propose
legislation and testify as
legislative hearings and interim
committees were often invited
just to come in as an unbiased
third party to give a national
overview on a certain issue and
offer examples to foster, to
foster some examples for you to
consider. We can work with the
state legislators, one on one,
we can provide policy
consultation to your teams.
facilitate conversations if
necessary within the state
agencies and and task force just
to support the goal of setting
up some technical assistance for
you to make some the best policy
decisions you can. Ultimately,
uh, we know that you're busy, we
know that you that you have a
lot on your plate. We just want
to make sure that you understand
that we can be an extension to
your policy team uh to use us as
that resource. Now, I'm gonna
shift
To what we're seeing nationally
when it comes to education, all
this learning. If you can go to
the next slide.
And I apologize because there's
some animation so when I caught
out some animations here, if you
go ahead and click that first
one.
Sorry, I can't see this right
here, so if you see me looking
back.
There you go, just keep those
right there.
We, we track every year, like I
mentioned, all the 50 states in
District of Columbia uh
legislation to summarize
education bill that is enacted
in 2024, you see up there, we we
viewed over and analyzed over
7200 bills.
We also respond to information
requests, which is the one I
shared with you, uh, so far,
last year we did over 400 of
those.
And then 3, we track and
summarize education policy
priorities as expressed during
Governor's state of state
addresses. So last year there
were 46 of those and this year
currently, I know we're
analyzing the 26 that have been
done currently. That report will
come out.
And in later in March as we
synthesize it with the National
Governors Association.
So this gives us a purview of
kind of what what's on the top
of mind of policy thinkers, uh,
top, top of mind policy
thinkers, which actually lends
to the trends I'm gonna share
with you today. And if you can
go to the next slide.
These are the top 6 trends from
2024 listed here, it's starting
to trend, uh, the same with the
governor, state of the state
addresses currently, so you
might find some uh familiarity
to you on these topics. It's
gonna dig a little bit into each
one, next, please.
So for good reason, next, one
more. You might as well go ahead
and do 3 clicks, just pull them
up there. There you go, thanks.
Teaching is always long been a
focus of state policymakers, so
we know that teacher quality is
the most important in school
factor to influences student
achievement. This warning some
substantial attention from
policymakers. The first one is
around pathways, you see, uh,
into the profession. I heard
this morning some discussions on
that, so this year states
expanded or created, grow your
own programs as well as teach
your residency apprenticeship
programs, which I hear from
other people that people lean in
to learn from New Mexico as
well.
bit better prepare aspiring
educators with many of these
programs initiatives coming at
no cost.
One emerging trend is state
attention to stipends or other
means of compensation for
student teachers, just to ensure
that those completing their
clinical experiences that they
can complete it without any
undue financial burden.
Keeping qualified future
teachers from the classroom.
Uh, we also have seen states
take a more creative approach to
holistic staffing in recent
years, including investing in
strategic staffing models or
models that break down the
traditional one teacher, one
classroom structure.
We've seen attention to the full
spectrum of professionals as
well as building from principles
to substitute teachers to bus
drivers even and how all those
roles contribute to the impact
of student learning and teacher
working conditions.
So continuing the 3rd 1 right
there, continuing the trend from
the last several years, there's
many states that have been
examining barriers at that
certification of licensure may
post the entry into the
profession. So I'm just working
to ensure that licensure
requirements are meaningfully
related to teacher quality. As
an example, there's at least two
states that uh Utah and
Connecticut, particular that are
reexamining or removing their
teacher performance assessment
requirement for licenger.
Many states as well have created
a revised licenses for specific
teaching roles as such as a
career in technical or special
education teachers. So it's
another trend, another trend
I'll talk about later is
attention to teacher
compensation, which of the next
slide if you would.
Leads to some key areas of
interest as I dig into Kate K-12
funding.
There you go, OK 12.
changes to state K-12 funding
formulas uh typically these
changes have been minor and
tweaks in the existing formula,
uh, such as increasing the base
level of funding per student to
better keep pace with inflation
or as a policy decision to
increase the adequacy of
investment. However, this year,
There were 2 states, I know
Colorado and Mississippi in
particular enacted major reforms
to overhaul their funding
formulas. The next circle, the
next circle there is about the
targeted, is that the right one?
Yeah.
Targeted funding, some changes
to supplemental funds allocated
for certain student populations.
Several states made changes for
special education and English
learner services in particular.
As an example, like Virginia
adjusted their EL support.
The state now differentiates the
number of EL specialists that
the state helps to fund in
schools based on the English
proficiency of the students.
The final circle there is about
increasing, increases for
teacher compensation as I
mentioned earlier. These changes
included states adopting a
minimum teacher's salary across
the broad states. So this may
sound familiar to you.
As, as in New Mexico has taken
on stage search ventures as
well. You can go to the next
slide.
And just go ahead and maybe
bring up the three circles, so I
don't have to keep saying that.
Student health, as we know, is
an ongoing area of focus for
education policymakers in a
research indicates that many
students, uh, the first point of
access to quality health
services are actually in school
settings.
And the connection between
student health and student
learning is consistently clear,
so the first trend that we've
been seeing in policy.
Physical health and access to
health services includes actions
like increasing the number of
school health professionals,
adjusting the services allowed
to be administered at school and
providing access.
Um, to medications and other
self-life saving equipment as
well. This ranges from small
adjustment like allowing nurses
to administer a certain
Prescription to larger efforts
like establishing school-based
health centers.
Another continuing trend around
nutrition and the provision of
school meals to students either
during the school day or outside
of school hours, including at uh
after school and summer school
programs, some states have also
considered the expansion of
school meals to a broader group
of students with more states
proposing such as New Mexico,
free universal meals for all
students.
Uh
There's about 8 states that
currently do that and I see
Virginia.
As exploring that as well.
Mental health and wellness are
critical part of students
overall health and rare, and
And our indicators of
educational engagement academic
success, so states have sought
to expand to mental health
services and opportunities
during school hours and school
sites. They've also sought to
increase other supports for
students and staff, and finally,
See is health becoming
intertwined with other ed policy
issues to create a more
comprehensive view of student
health, for instance, uh, a
states are exploring chronic
absenteeism.
They have identified and
approach underlying issues
including physical, health,
mental health and school
climate. So some states have
expanded definitions of excused
absences to ensure that students
can take
Mental health days.
On, on the next slide.
I'll go into post-secondary
trends.
The post-secondary space are the
most activity in financial aid
for uh high demand fields. So
states continue to address the
high demand workforce fields by
offering financial aid and
support of pathways to
individuals in specific.
High demand fields such as
education and healthcare.
For example,
Washington, where Gabriella, the
New Mexico liaison is now
created the Washington Health
Corps Behavioral Health
Scholarship Program.
That encourages healthcare
workers to work in critical
shortage areas by providing
scholarship and loan repayment
opportunities.
Another noted trend is in
admissions, in particular,
states examined the use of
legacy admissions based on
family relationships and
proposed changes to direct or
automatic emission policies. And
finally,
Uh, we noted, we noted and
noticed changes to
post-secondary funding
specifically uh outcomes-based
funding.
Uh, we saw several states
explore and create funding
systems that incentivize the
outcomes. We saw a mix of bills
that addressed
altering current policies and
others creating new process to
distribute those funds.
On the next slide
And at the beginning of the
education spectrum, uh, on our
youngest learners.
Some trends in recent policy
activity include workforce and
provider supports.
Um, the EC infrastructure is
still rebounding from COVID and
with federal funding no longer
providing supplemental support
states.
To to support the state, states
are stepping up to help sustain
both the ECE workforce.
And providers who employ them.
What we see if states are
incentivizing workforce entry by
improving compensation and
creating better career pathways
with the current and potential
ECE workforce.
States are also removing
barriers for providers by
providing grants or subsidies in
supporting quality improvement.
Finally, the expanding access,
there's several states have been
working to increase access to
early care and education
programs and services. Actions
included a resetting subsidy and
reimbursement rates.
Reforming zoning regulations
that can increase the cost of
childcare.
In studying their state's unique
context for improvement and
efficiencies such as coordinated
enrollment.
Which creates some regional or
community strategies for
simplifying enrollment processes
across different kinds of
providers.
And then early literacy and
numeracy.
There's substantial momentum, as
you know, to change how early
reading is taught.
Uh, many states enacting
legislation that requires early
leaning instruction to focus on
evidence-based practices.
Um, such as the science of
reading and requiring
departments to develop
guidelines to integrate.
Those principles and to teach
your preparation programs. We've
also tracked about 9 states that
have enacted some comprehensive
legislation, uh, aimed to
support early numeracy
development.
Which is a growing trend, so
this includes training,
professional development,
coaching, curriculum materials
intervention, and more.
On the next side, I'll go back
to the other end of the
spectrum.
it's a post-secondary trends.
I think we're
I think we're off on the trend
here.
Should really to post-secondary
trends.
There you go, sorry.
I apologize, I'm not able to see
the slides.
That's the right one. Thank you.
So we, we saw some substantial
attention to workforce training
in 2024, including career and
technical education, uh, which
continues to be a popular topic
going into the, into this year
as well. So states, they have
increasingly focused on creating
some pathways in both secondary
and post-secondary settings that
that provide students with some
opportunities to build some
knowledge and skills that
support their preparation for
future education and careers.
So one of the things that
mentioned in there is a student
debt for high demand fields.
Uh, as noted in post-secondary
states they enacted legislation
that addresses student debt.
For those entering specific
fields and occupations. The
focus is often on high demand
fields within that state, uh,
and across the country within
the workforce at the state or
regional level.
Also work-based learning
pathways. Many states actually
considered or passed legislation
focused on supporting pathways
that incorporate work-based
learning with CTE and classroom
learning in both a secondary and
post-secondary setting.
So states also supported and
implemented policies related to
work-based learning that require
partnerships.
Across agencies and industry
partners to support access to
work-based learning and pathways
to future education and careers.
In regards to funding CTE and
Workface workforce pathways,
states have provided funds to
support some new and existing
programs to increase CTE and
career connected learning
pathways.
Often there's an emphasis on
increasing participation or
prioritizing funding for
education and training, it's
specific industries once again
in states that's been the common
theme, the specific industries
often priority given to the
programs that focus on those
industries and they are
intensified as being um high in
high demand.
And
Next slide
I'll share some other trends
that went backwards.
Forward again.
Go ahead to the next one again.
Here we go.
And this slide, you could go,
just, that's good right there.
So there's some other trends
that have been evolving and
emerging across the states.
So there's several that
watching, of course, increasing
funds and paying more attention
to policymakers, the emergence
of AI.
In school settings and other
technology related concerns such
as cell phone brands, we see
that in a number of states and
post-secondary forability.
Some, some states have continued
to invest in grant initiatives
and programs that can make
post-secondary options,
affordable and accessible to all
students in Mexico's ahead of
the game, and Lassie school
choice, especially private
school choice, it continues to
grow as a policy consideration.
There are 3 main policy areas we
observed in that and that's
funding for choice programs,
student and family eligibility.
And accountability and oversight
for the programs. This is one
thing that we expect to
continue, of course, in the
years ahead.
And the, the, the final slides,
those are the trends across the
country, but as I mentioned,
we're nonpartisan group.
We don't advocate. You can go to
the next slide if you will.
We, we don't advocate for any
specific policy solutions. We
can't tell you what's best for
New Mexico. You know our state
better than anybody else, but we
can tell you what's happening
across all the rest of the 49
states in the District of
Columbia and territories and how
that's working out, we can share
that with you. One quick way to
get real-time information is to
Join our LinkedIn page for
Education commissioner states
where every new release we have
out, you'll get pinged right
away on your LinkedIn account.
Uh you can also visit our
website at ECS.org where you
could look at some of the
databases of the 7200 bills and
a 400 information request coming
out and was top of topic, a
little deeper dives and look at
some deeper dive reports on
that.
Um, or you could
Utilize Senator Souls, Senator
Soul's connection and email us
to Gabriella who could pay more
attention to any specific
requests you may have, or you
may need a quick report produced
to you in the next 48 to 72
hours doing legislative
sessions. So again, I wanna
thank you all. It's a privilege
to be able to come and speak to
you once again in my home state
of New Mexico. Thank you,
Senator Solis, for inviting me.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it. Now we've got a little bit
of time for questions. I'm being
called over to rules for a bill
I've got, so hopefully I'll be
back before too long, um,
Senator Pope will take over in
the meantime, but he'll handle
the questions. Thank you very
much.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation. Do we have any
questions from the committee?
Looks like we don't.
But I'll give you an opportunity
if there's anything else you
want to close with or.
Uh, so I, I guess I mentioned,
most of you may know me from my
previous role as community
schools in Mexico is very dear
and near to me as I've been
working here.
since 2008 in New Mexico, my
wife and
Children, some of my children as
I as we have 5 were born in New
Mexico, uh, but I get a chance,
I get a chance to
Speak with people, go visit
states, every single state since
2017 working on the national
level.
And I have to tell you that I
have such a sense of pride for
New Mexico. I'm in my 2nd year
in this role, coming in here,
and I just want to make an open
commitment to to you all that uh
we're gonna highlight the good
things out of New Mexico. We're
gonna bring people here so they
can see the work you all have,
uh, despite some of the things
we see on the national news, uh,
you all, regardless of how hard
it is in relationship building,
you all work together in a
bipartisan way, and I got to
tell you, I'm
So proud of that and that is
uncommon currently in our
country, so I'll, I'll just
encourage you to keep doing
that.
Relationships are always hard to
build if anybody's married, you
understand that, and if you stay
married, you understand that
more that you can work through
it. So I appreciate it as my
wife and I also lead our
marriage ministry at our church
in Albuquerque as well too, so
thank you uh once again, I'm
looking forward to highlighting
New Mexico as I continue my
tenure in my new role as
president of Education
Commission of states. I hope to
see you in July.
Thank you for coming. It was
great meeting another uh.
Albuquerque West Sider. So thank
you for coming in.
Thank you.
So with that, um, we're gonna
switch up the schedule a little
bit. I know I was going to be
up, but I'm gonna wait till
Senator Sos comes back on SB 10.
And so what we're gonna do is go
ahead and move to SB 13.
Um, if Senator Schendo was in
the room, he hunt.
Be available
So, um
We're gonna go ahead and, and
move on to Senate Bill 19,
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you
have the floor center. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. My first bill of the
session and one of your first
bills of the session. So great
to be with you. Um, I think you
have a committee sub in front of
you, so.
I can set the bill up, you can
do this up or we can start
talking about the sub, if you'd
like to move that.
Well, what we'd probably want to
do is go ahead and uh make the
motion.
I'd like to move the committee
substitute for discussion
purposes.
The 2nd
All right.
that's been approved.
And we are passing around the
sub right now.
Senator, you can go ahead and
begin. Thank you, Mr. Committee
chair. So this is a bill to
require that new university
regions received 10 hours of
training.
Within a year of
being appointed to their
position.
The, uh, the what the committee
sub does is it makes 3 changes.
It says it number one, we're
adding uh governing boards of
community colleges to this
legislation. Right now we have
Adjusted of regions of what they
call Section 12 schools in the
Constitution which lists all of
our universities and our 3
special schools, which is NMMI.
Go for the deaf, go for the
blind. What the bill, what's
the, with the subadds is the uh
governing boards for our
community colleges. So, uh, some
felt that was important and I
agree and I've reached out to
several community colleges and
they thought it would be helpful
to have uniform training.
The other thing it does is it
adds the gift act in one of the
modules, the two-hour training
modules that enumerates um
ethics laws in New Mexico that
they have to be trained on. We
felt that the gift Act was an
important one, kind of an
emolument issue, um, to be aware
of that and sometimes they're
involved in high profile visits.
The third thing he does, Mr.
Chair.
Colleagues wonder if this
microphone's better.
is it moves its training
requirement to happen for one
year from when their appointment
to 6 months from when they're
appointed.
Probably even then could be made
shorter still.
But that's what it does and uh
with that I have to stand for
questions.
Thank you, Senator.
So, um, if I could just get a
show of hands in the crowd.
quarters
Of this bill of committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19.
Can we get a show of hands on
any supporters in the room.
Do we have any opponents in the
room?
Right?
Uh, online, do we have any
supporters?
None.
Any opponents?
Thank you. Um,
So I know we had one supporter,
Doctor Page, would you like to
come up and speak?
It's important.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Cedric
Page, uh, professor emeritus
from UNM Los Alamos and uh
regent at the New Mexico
Military Institute. I fully
support this bill.
In terms of its benefit to the
institutions that we as regents
and serve, uh, it will provide
opportunities for us to really
understand the leadership
responsibilities that boards
have for our institutions.
Uh
We have uh at NMMI, uh, several
efforts to have retreats where
we would cover some of the same
material, uh, outlined in this
bill and I leave the institute's
Board of Regents and a couple of
weeks, uh.
Uh, I, I believe that those
efforts will continue, that we
will be strong and in terms of
our efforts to uh support uh uh.
The the the the goals of this
legislation so with that uh
offer my full support and uh
encouragement uh for the
committee to approve this bill.
Thank you, Doctor Page.
Um, and with that, we don't have
any other opponents, um, just a
reminder to folks that there
will be 2 minutes for, for all
public comment. So reminder to
folks, and we will be timing it.
Um, usually we give time for
folks to address the comments.
That was positive
you anything else to say,
I didn't actually, I was kind of
explaining the sub but didn't
explain the bill so much, maybe
I'll just take a minute on that.
As we know, our university
regions have very important
jobs. They hire university
presidents. They set tuition,
they set priorities, they decide
on infrastructure really chart
the direction and run a
university.
And
Sadly, we have no qualifications
for regents who are selected
were one, you know, we have find
the highest performing schools
in the country have
qualifications, they have
vetting processes. I have
another proposal that you'll
probably see creating nominating
commissions for that. I think
that's super important, but
Regardless who you pick, they
Received no formal required
training.
And uh there's a little bit
offered on a voluntary basis by
HED very few have been offered
it. You officially received more
training this morning with your
presentation, the most
university regions when they
start their job.
And so with this is an attempt
to do, I know in my government
service perhaps Senator Na and
others who have, you know, you,
Senator Pope, who served in
public service. No, you, you get
training and and it helps you
know red lines, best practices.
I think this can be incredibly
beneficial, and I think we owe
it to our universities and our
kids and, and taxpayers that we
have the best regions we can get
and that they're trained, so
that's why I'm bringing this
bill forward. And I would say
this is also modeled after what
we
did last session where we
required training for local
school boards K312.
So with that stand for
questions.
All right, thank you, Senator.
Um, do we have any questions?
All right, so Senator Nova, it's
up first.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, Senator, for bringing
this bill forward, um, I am
certainly uh in support as a
graduate of a community college
as well as you and I, um, I do
have some technical questions,
though.
In terms of sort of the
accountability measurements, um,
in the given case that a member
refuses to take, uh, the
required trainings.
What are the consequences or how
are we going to be holding them
accountable, um, and then also
how will the 6 months time frame
be implemented because that's
sort of a quick turnaround. Um,
so what are the
The steps for implementation.
Good question, good question,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Nava, um,
yeah, people, some people are
asking about the accountability
because it's not really in this
bill.
Because I'm not
I'm not focused on a punitive
measure of someone doesn't do
it. I, I, I, I believe that once
you create a new policy
requirement, it becomes kind of
second nature and standard.
Sometimes though, it does, it
can't get ignored certainly even
with a penalty. So there's not a
penalty in here, but I'm not
opposed to adding some sort of a
requirement. I think we need to
think through it. I wouldn't
want to do it on the fly here,
um.
But something maybe uh you know,
I was talking with Senator
Ramos, maybe they can't.
Serve
Uh, and another future regent
meeting until the requirements
are made, something along those
lines, uh, but
We should those that are
interested, we should continue
to talk about it offline and
figure out what an appropriate.
Remedy is as far as
implementation question you
would ask, you know, once a
region is appointed and they
begin serving, I think that
clock starts ticking.
And um
You know, um, a region can be
appointed by a governor and the
reason we use this word
appointed is they're often not
confirmed for a while, but
they're appointed. And the
moment they're appointed as far
as I'm concerned, the clock
starts ticking as long as that
governor is in office, says the
governor's not in office,
probably not fair.
necessarily for the clock to be
ticking, but.
That's what I think about.
Senator,
A me
Excuse me, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Chair. your breath
away.
And um thank you for bringing
this very important, Bill.
Um
I, I have
Worked with boards is my.
Um
Boss and
Many different venues.
Um
As well as served on many
boards.
And
One of the things I
Often sees that.
Um
Ors really don't know how to
beat boards.
Um,
in medical boards and hospital
boards.
There is a guru in the nation
who really
Not for profit hospitals.
Goes round and
Uh, uh
Does, uh, a two-day program of
how to be an effective board
member.
And um,
So
This
10 hours of education, I think
is, it's critical and uh being
sure, and I don't know how you
do that, that you have an
effective
Qualified trainer.
In this is critical.
And just as an example.
One of the things that I
learned.
That I think is really profound
is that
Boards
Are an entity and some people
say they only have one job.
Fire, fire, the CEO.
And not micromanage.
If they don't like what the CEO
is doing, they can counsel or
they can fire.
And that's really important and
a lot of board members don't
necessarily understand that.
Um
Who
is the I'm a board member and I
didn't like the opinion.
And so I'm going to talk about
it in the public and
I know you can't do that.
Um, this guru Jamie Olikoffin.
Not for profit healthcare
organization said at the end of
the day,
Or
Speaks with one voice.
And
If there's a vote and the board
comes to a conclusion, the board
member supports that vote
publicly.
Uh, can certainly talk about it
with other board members, but
publicly.
Supports that vote.
The board speaks with one voice.
And I, I bring those two
examples up because in my
experiences,
So many boards don't do this, so
I think this is really
important. I'm not asking you to
put those points in just as the
example.
Um
Secondly, my observation is, uh,
I think we, while we're not a
board here in the legislature.
Each of us could do with 2 hours
of training on the Constitution.
Um, it would be great if someone
could reduce it to a 2 hour
episode of, uh, or what are the
key points, but you know, we
don't always know.
Um, and so I'm just, you offered
an opportunity on that.
Uh, my third point and this is
just because I get to sit on
this panel and make a point, and
I'm sorry, everyone.
Um,
But the, the, the other point
is, and this is in another bill
another time, but it is about
boards.
Um
Boards particularly in
Technical education of one sort
or another.
Um
Need to have some expertise.
On that board in some of the
individuals.
And I'm, I'm just, I'm gonna lay
it out here. I'm looking at the
border regions in the University
of New Mexico.
Um, I, I worked, I was a
Associate professor there. I
headed the faculty practice.
Um
And is our current president
said, and I think we can all
agree, healthcare is common.
And, um, let alone academic.
Yet, I look at that board and I
know there's someone who's been
on a little tiny hospital, uh,
CEO, uh, that does not encompass
all the complexity of a
$3 billion medical center. So
I'm hoping that the governor
when looking at new board
members on that board.
Gets someone who understands
healthcare. Um, it is very
complex, but I want to apply
that principle, and I mean not
in here, maybe your next
committee just
Um
That
You've got to have, I mean,
that's what board members bring
is is some expertise. I know it
all. It's some expert.
I think that we would look
forward to it, but I want to
thank you for bringing this
forward. I think that the idea
of people, if they don't get the
training, you know, these are,
you're a professional when
you're on a board.
And, and to be a professional,
you've just got to do that and
if they don't, then I would
definitely have the board chair
counsel that individual if it
doesn't happen, then maybe
whatever the removal of that
individual may be, but that's an
internal.
Oh, anyway, again, um,
Something I've thought about and
some bills in the future, too
many for this session, but thank
you for bringing this one.
Thank you, mister.
Chair, appreciate the ability to
uh make some come.
All right, thank you, Senator,
Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Senator Steinborn, I like this
bill. I really do.
Um
I think it's very clear in your
intent here whenever it says
requiring.
Requiring
Because it's requiring members
to have to take.
Uh, 10 hours. It's requiring
higher ed to develop and
Provide the training on it.
Um
The other one I have, and then
it says shall complete.
And then under bed it's also
higher ed shall develop.
I think that's very clear there,
the concern was made earlier.
about if they don't what what
happens then I think that's.
Grounds for removal if they're
not willing to do that if
they're going to be a part of
this commission just to
send in Hickey said they have to
work unified to be one voice.
And Mr. Chairman, I, I think
that uh.
What we're looking at here in
this substitute bill that we are
now discussing.
does make perfect sense. I think
it.
clarifies a lot of what may be
going wrong with different.
Regents
And I think it will open their
eyes, especially whenever you're
talking about the gift app.
So Mr. Chairman of one other
statement I would like to make,
I think it might be a good idea
if all appointed commissions did
have to take some training to
understand what they're supposed
to be governed.
Because we do have a commission
that's appointed to the game and
fish. We have a commission
that's appointed to be members
of the racing commission.
Several other ports are the same
way and it's not gonna hurt
anybody to know what they are
talking about.
So Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much,
Senator Steinborn, for bringing
this forward.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Next up,
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Senator. Um.
Going to reiterate slightly, I
also really appreciate this
effort to codify something
that's been hit or miss a little
haphazard and optional into
something that's required, but
it's not really required unless
there is some kind of
consequence, and you can
consider an easy carrot.
Um, Mr. Chair, if you don't want
to go for the hard penalties,
which is published and make
public make available to the
public.
The records of the regents who
have finished theirs, maybe they
get a blue ribbon on their
picture on the website so that
the public is aware um that
might be an easy one.
But my other concern has also
been mentioned and it's the
timeline. I agree with you, Mr.
Chair and senator entirely that
they need training soon after
their appointment.
But the December 31st, 2025,
also includes the timeline for
creation, and I don't want our
materials to be less than
stellar because they're rushed.
Um, so I hope, have you spoken
with HED about the time they
need to create really great
training.
Well, I think they're FIR speaks
to it a little bit, which is
they proposed creating online
modules which concerns me a
little bit.
Um, I think they did say they
wanted to seek out subject
matter experts.
Personally, I would prefer that
they bring people to Santa Fe
for some high quality training
and maybe that'll include videos
from experts. No, they haven't
spoken to a timing. They haven't
even addressed that December
31st timing for current regents
so.
Um
I hear you, and I would hope
that even though you know you
have to catch the people that
are there now and catch up those
people that
That would not necessarily, they
wouldn't.
If they have to do something a
little quicker for them that
they would still get it right
for the future, right? So, but
it's a really good point and I
think all of us, we can send a
message that we hope if we pass
this, that we want high quality
training.
We want people to maybe even
come in person.
What is the most impactful, and
we, we certainly want to make
sure that regions take it, not
that they can turn on their
computer, disappear, and then
Say that they took it or there's
no accountability on that end.
So I'm with you on all that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator.
Kind of on that piece as well,
the training materials, um, do
you think it needs to be in the
statute itself or could be done
by rule, a waiver system for the
institutions that already have.
A high quality training, maybe
from the association of the
governing boards of
universities.
Because some do that already,
um, is there gonna be some kind
of system where if the training
is equivalent.
It can be waived.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
thought about that and after
conversations with some of the
regions, I don't think that'd be
a good idea, and I'll tell you
why. Um, I think if we
standardize this, and this is
high quality.
Subject matter covering very
thoughtful delivered areas that
we want them to cover. Current
training from universities may
touch on that. Certainly they're
very focused on their needs as a
university. I think that's more
appropriate for them to probably
be doing is that we allow, and
then they don't have to go into
this training that this is
covered by the state, it's
uniform, it's high quality, and
that they provide training
relative to their university,
their needs, their board, board
cohesion things Senator Hickey
was talking about. So I don't
think we
want to do that because I think
they'll get less than training.
And it'll be one off training,
right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So the intent is this
is the base.
And the universities do
supplemental that they.
necessary.
Thank you.
Thanks, Mr.
Thank you, Senator. I don't see
anyone else on the list. I'm
sorry, Senator Boone.
Chair, members of the committee,
Senator Steinborn, I too.
Greatly appreciate you bringing
this. I think it's uh.
I think it's very timely. I
think there's been some examples
just recently where we really
need this to be applied and, and
uh to be in instituted and I,
I've, I've seen personally on,
of course, lower.
Lower boards, but, but I've seen
the need there too. I mean, you
know, people come on and, and
sign on to do a job and they
don't really have an inkling of
what they're supposed to do, so
I think it's very important and
I appreciate you bringing it.
And uh where's it go next?
Well
Sorry. Rules, Senate rules. I'm
just curious. Thank you. Good
question. I should have known
the answer to that.
Uh, Senator Rio.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I move that the.
Mitty substitute the adoptive.
For consideration.
We'll move on that motion.
Um
My questions were asked, um.
But I would just add to kind of
look at.
Making sure folks follow
through, whether that be a
penalty, whether that be
Uh, with Senator Figueroa
mentioned.
Where it's highlighted the
training the blue ribbons.
You know, I just think there's
Be a little more
Persuasive to make sure that
folks follow.
And I think that's really the
in.
We want qualified and trained
people.
Uh, thank you for bringing it
forward. Uh, we have a motion 2.
If we could call the room.
And her boom. Yes. And her fell.
Yes. Cinder Figueroa.
Under Hickey? Yeah.
The Chernova
In Ramos. Senator Thornton. Yes.
Senator.
Yes.
We have it pass.
Or
Right. All right, Senator, you
have a due pass 8 to 1.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
colleagues, Senate joint
resolution 7 is the
constitutional amendment
creating nominating commissions
for these regions so that we can
pick the best people we can find
if you want to sign on to it,
you're welcome to. Thank you,
Senator. One bill at a time
Next up, Senator Shindo.
With Senate Bill 13.
And the Fleurs yourself.
Let
right
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the Education
committee.
Yeah
Good to be here this morning.
Um
I'm gonna give you a little
background on this bill. This is
a bill that was introduced at
the uh.
The last 60 day session passed
unanimous through this uh
committee and uh on the Senate
floor I believe we have one,
a negative vote, uh, and then we
just ran out of time in the
house.
And so, uh, this bill is
particularly important, I think
because uh where we are today.
As, as tribes.
Not only in New Mexico but in
the country.
I'm gonna read a little um
excerpt from
Um
Uh
The federal boarding school, uh,
initiative that Secretary Deb
Holland initiated a few years
back.
And just a paragraph uh from
that, uh, introduction between
1819.
Through the 1970s, the United
States implemented policies
establishing
And support Indian boarding
schools across the nation.
The purpose of Federal Indian
boarding schools was to
culturally assimilate American
Indian, Alaska native, and
native Hawaiian children by
forcibly removing them from
their families, communities,
languages, religion, and
cultural beliefs.
While children attended federal
boarding schools. Many endure
physical and emotional abuse and
in some cases died.
That's the first paragraph of
that report, and I know that.
That report is pretty extensive
and if you had a chance to read
it.
You know, it's unbelievable what
happened to our kids, not only
in this country but across
Canada. This, this is so
important because studies show
that of the 140 indigenous
languages that are still spoken
today in the United States.
The fewer than 20 are projected
to survive beyond 2050.
All of New Mexico's indigenous
languages are classified as
endangered.
Or vulnerable
Is it me or is it?
What, what I would do, Senator,
is maybe turn it off right now.
Push it back cause it'll pick it
up. Yeah, there you go.
try it though. OK, all right,
that's cool. um.
All of New Mexico's indigenous
languages are classified as
endangered or vulnerable, this
crisis is direct result of
federal boarding school
policies, uh, today, 90 90% of
the native students in Mexico
attend public schools, yet these
schools did not adequately
support native languages and
cultures.
Uh, so with that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members Committee, I'm
John here at the table with our
governor from Hamas. Many of
you, uh, senators that have been
here before, know for many years
he was our sergeant at arms, but
as we have in our communities,
uh, every year we get appointed
and uh.
This year, uh, he was appointed
to serve as our governor for the
Pueblo of Jeme George Chando
happened to be also my uncle, my
my dad's youngest brother.
And, uh, to his left is uh Kevin
Sendo is also director of
education.
And I'm gonna have the governor
say a few remarks.
And then turn it over to Kevin
to kind of set the stage because
this has been in the works for
almost a decade, and I think you
know, there's a lot of things in
the FIR that aren't necessarily,
you know, it's confusing, but I
think we could clarify a lot
through the presentation of uh
Kevin the education director
kind of set the stage of why
we're doing what we're doing so
with that I'll turn over to the
governor of Amos.
Great senator, you could just
turn off your mic.
Good morning, Chairman, Vice
Chairman.
Committee education committee.
Of
Like you
Open this with the.
Where in my language.
by me
was she told you she hate you.
All of
You know
With the Don.
Long
and
Well,
you know.
Well you know do you
do
that and the clock is only.
Mm
Good morning to committee uh
education committee members.
That little
Prayers today said this morning.
is addressed to each and every
one of you.
First, addressing each and every
one of you spirit.
And then addressing each and
every one of you as a person.
That that is our our teaching in
the Native American language.
And that is
Oh, what we're losing. We talk
about diversity.
In our state of New Mexico.
Uh, us as Native Americans,
we're, we're losing our
language.
Um
Fair to see
But uh that is uh sort of uh
kind of the reality that we're
in at this point in time.
And with that, with that in
mind.
Yeah
of Heus is always priorities
prioritized language and
education of our children.
And then established the first
two native language.
And cultural-based charter
schools in 1999.
In 2001, respectively, we have
always looked at, you know,
innovative approaches to evolve
and improve education system
serving our children and youth
in 2012.
The hemos tribal council
approved the formal conversation
of our Head Start program to
full immersion in our heinous
language this transition was
fully realized in 2016.
In 2021, Haman formalized.
Our relationship with the
University of Hawaii at Hilo to
develop and pilot.
A heinous language emerging
teacher licensure program.
In 2022, Ham is with the support
of Governor Grissom.
The state and federal agencies
opened our new alter early
childhood learning Center,
dedicated to teaching Hamus to
our infant toddlers and Heart
age.
Children.
In the same year, the tribal
council formally established a
Hamish K6 immersion pilot.
To grow by 10 kids a year as
means to further strengthen the
Hamous language emerging
program.
In 2022, the legislative
education Study Committee
LSC invited our emergency school
to learn more about the efforts
and to see firsthand the
instructions and learning
happenings with our children.
Following this visit, the LSC
legal team worked with Hamus to
develop, to draft and develop a
Senate bill 482 state tribal
education combat School Act.
First introduced in 2023 by
Senator Veniceendo in 2023
Senate Bill 482 was supported by
the legislative Education Study
Committee.
And uh New Mexico Public
Education department, New Mexico
Center for Law and Poverty and
all the public council of
governors.
Now we are here in 2025 once
again promoting.
And supporting the passage of
Senate bill 13.
The state tribal education
compact school act as a means of
prioritizing our native language
and further strengthening to
true tribal ownership over the
education of our children.
With that being said,
I look forward to a
A do pass
On the education committee.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, George. Senator.
Thank you, Governor Chairman,
thank you, um, turn it over to,
turn it over to uh Mr. Sendo,
education director for the
Pueblo Jama to kind of further
explain.
And then from there we'll, we'll
go to the committee for
questions.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee, and these are
very directional, so you don't
have to be real close to them or
anything, just it's sort of your
direction, you're good. OK,
wonderful.
Um, I shared on Kevin Sendo,
education director for the
public of Fame, and I'm going on
my 26th year as education
director for the tribe.
Um, as governor stated, you
know, we were one of the first
tribes to lead in establishing
native-based charter schools
under the New Mexicoch Charter
school law.
Um, and one thing to note is
that, you know, due to our
limited capacity for um
Um, economic development
opportunities in the area where
we're at, we've always looked at
systems change, looking at the
education systems that serve our
young people and looking at how
we can work with them to be able
to help them accommodate and
prioritize our goals of language
and culture-based education, um,
with that, um, not too sure if
many of you are familiar, but
Hamus led the charge in 2003 to
be able to amend the charter
law.
To make state a charting
authority, um.
When we established our
riverside charter school was a
new conversion school.
The school existed formerly as a
mission school, 2 years as a
tribal school and then it was
converted to a charter school
when we introduced the Waua High
Charter School was seen as
competition to our local public
school.
And so the local school district
denied Ami the charter.
We appeal to the state and the
state school board at that time
overturned the local board's
decision.
What that
Experience we had in him as um
was not a, a good one.
We had um community members that
were being forced to choose
whether they supported a tribal
initiative or the public school,
and it was not a good
environment.
And so in order to avoid that
for any other community in the
future or any other tribe that
wanted to establish a charter
school that may not have had a
good relationship with the local
school district. We look to the
state as an option.
And so thereafter we uh worked
with the charter school
coalition to amend the state law
in 2003 to make the state a
chartering authority. And so
we've always looked at education
reform and innovation, not only
for Haus but for all New
Mexicans and how we can benefit
from that.
What
is different from then and now
is that 20 years ago, majority
of our kids within our charter
school system, K8th and 912.
Were fluent in the Hamous
language or coming as first
language speakers.
You fast forward 20 years, we're
seeing a shift.
We English is becoming the
dominant language.
So we're looking at options that
can enable us to continue to
Raise our children as first
language speakers. And so we've
looked at the emersion option.
First with our Head Start
program in 2012.
And then looking at options in
K6 because what we recognize and
realized was
If our kids were immersed in
Haus through Head Start and even
earlier at childcare.
Once they transitioned to the
elementary school system whether
it was a BIE.
For charter school, they were
losing what they gained within
one year.
Regardless of the efforts we
took to include educational
assistance to assist with
transition because the medium of
instruction remained English in
the BIE, the public, and the
charter school, which is still
the same today.
The language loss was
significant of what they had
gained, and so the tribe then
looked at establishing a K 6
immersion.
And from 2012 all the way to
roughly 2015, majority of our
emerging efforts were supported
through private grant dollars.
But as we move forward, we
realize that working with the
state and the federal agencies
are gonna be key in helping to
promote and continue to promote
what we were doing here.
And so as governor shared in
2022, we hosted a meeting of the
LESC.
For them to see firsthand our
emergent schools and the
teaching and the learning
happening within our community.
As a result of that,
Our first request to the state
and LESC as a tribe at that time
was could tribes become charter
school authorizers.
Because that was the avenue that
we had new, and that was the
avenue that it worked for us in
the past.
But as the attorneys for the
LESC looked at the charter law
and we began to talk.
Consensus was to give tribes
full authority and control over
the education of their children
from the standards to curriculum
to assessments that are to be
tribally defined.
Then the charter law would not
be the avenue because she would
still be under the public
education commission and the
state.
So then we looked at other
models Washington state and
Alaska, where the two that were
most prominent were compacts
existed where the tribes in the
state similar to gaming
compacts, water rights compacts,
negotiated what these schools
would look like operated by
tribes on tribal lands,
prioritizing language, um, and
culture-based education. And so
that's how Senate Bill 482 in
2023 evolved, and that's what
we're continuing to promote
Senate Bill 13 as a
means to continue to prioritize
tribally defined uh language um
based schools.
In 2023, the companion bill, um,
that supported technical
assistance centers to support
tribes in developing their own
standards, assessments, and
evaluations did pass.
So that work is already
happening. Two sites to be
identified to support the
development of tribes that want
to further their education
systems, prioritizing language
uh within their respective
communities, so that's a brief
summary overview um of the work
that has led to this, um, one
thing also is that.
Te licensure program. The reason
we went with the University of
Hawaii because no such licensure
program existed within the state
or anywhere on the mainland.
University of Hawaii had a
college of Hawaiian language.
I was tasked to work with
specifically um.
developing teachers to teach
within the Hawaiian
languageimmersion settings or
language-based schools.
When we first approached
them.
We had to go to the Hawaii State
Senate.
To also have them revise the
charter authorizing the College
of Hawaiian Language to be able
to accommodate other indigenous
languages.
And once that action was taken
by the state of Hawaii, we were
able to formalize our
relationship and since we've
been able to work with the
public education commission
committee public education
department and Indian Education
Division and the early childhood
early care department to help
support.
This pilot as a means of being
able to successfully initiate a
licensure program that we can
bring back to New Mexico,
working with our in-state
institutions and the tribes to
develop a licensure program
locally. So that is some of the
uh updates that I wanted to
share to give a brief overview
and the work that has happened.
To support not only Hamas but
all the other tribes in New
Mexico and investments that have
been made both privately by the
state and federal agency.
Just, just one more comment, uh,
the bill that you have in front
of us today is the substitute
bill that came out of the
judiciary.
And so, so then passing went on
to the Senate floor and passed
on and so forth. So that's kind
of the starting point for is is
what's the uh judiciary
Committee substitute.
Yes, thanks and for, for the new
members, what that means, bills
that don't get all the way
through the process start over
at the beginning, but this bill
as written is where it ended up
in judiciary or, you know, after
it passed the floor but didn't
get over to the house. And so
it's got to start over at the
beginning, but it's been through
these steps, been vetted several
times, that doesn't mean we
can't make changes, additions,
look at it again, but this is
not a bill starting at the very
beginning, so to speak. Anything
else, Senator?
Mr. Chairman, uh, no, I think,
uh, we're right here.
Time for questions from the
committee. Thank you, uh, at
this point I'd like to go out to
the people in the room, uh,
first to show of hands, those in
support of this bill.
Anyone in opposition of this
bill.
If a few people would like to
come up and speak, you have up
to 2 minutes to speak.
Uh, in support of this bill,
we'll go to people online and
please try not to be redundant.
Everybody is in support. We do
have other bills, so please be
respectful of the time, but you
have up to 2 minutes.
Uh, may need to be turned off.
Thank you, Chairman Souls, um,
honorable members of the
committee, I'm James Mountain,
and I am the chairman of the All
Pubblo Council of Governors and
the uh on behalf of the 19
pueblos, the 20 pueblos that
also includes our sister Pueblo
down and his uh hisled del store
in El Paso, the El Pablo council
of governors, uh, fully supports
this, uh, Senate Bill 13 and ask
the uh favorable um.
Um, action of this committee,
uh, for this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
I hope, uh, Alicia Chrismetic on
Maasekinahannawitz,
the University of New Mexico
last touch,
um, our social, uh, New Mexico
native Esan.
Um
This actually
pass the Senate Bill 13 on
education, it was not a dust
swan,
um, good morning, chair and
community members. My name is
Alicia Carris and I'm a proud
member of the Sanchez Domingo
Pablo and I'm known as Bulcots
in my community, and I am a
lobbyist with New Mexico need to
vote, and I'm here today
speaking in support of Senate
Bill 13. The only reason I am
able, why I'm able able to speak
to you in the cars language and
stand here before you, is
because
I was supported not only
culturally but linguistically in
my community. Our unique culture
and language is integral to our
identity, and it creates the
foundations of our values.
Personally, learning my language
and culture instilled confidence
in me, carrying myself as a San
Domingo Pueblo woman, uh, to the
point where I was able to
undertake the responsibility of
representing our state as Miss
India New Mexico. In order to
keep our languages and cultures
alive, we need support not only
in the home, but in the
classroom as well. Thankfully,
we have school districts that
have been supportive to include
indigenous language classes with
fluent teachers. However, our
native students are surrounded
by the language for only 45
minutes to an hour. And as soon
as they walk outside the
classroom, it is back to
English. With this bill, we will
be able to ease the challenge
that families face in choosing
to hinder their cultural
education for a westernized
education. This bill is not only
a benefit for our tribal
nations, as it benefits our,
yes.
Uh, our entire state. So,
continue to, we want to continue
to incorporate our language and
cultural symbols, such as ours
and symbol that we all are
dawning today proudly. And so
this is the opportunity to
invest and uphold support. Thank
you so much.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee and
Governor Shendo. My name is
Conrad Chino and I represent the
Pubs of Taos, Achea, and also
the center on long poverty.
Um, Mr. Chairman, this bill, um,
Encourages tribes to really
begin to assume.
Control of.
The children's education.
As well as to exercise what many
education stakeholders in tribal
communities are calling uh.
Education sovereignty.
But in addition, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, the public I
represent also believe in the
importance of high quality
instruction.
As well as highly effective
professional teachers.
As well as the development of
appropriate curriculum, which
includes um
Indigenous language instruction
and learning.
In addition, the
Two pebbles that I represent.
Also support comprehensive
oversight.
Of the flow of funds for public
education, that includes both
state and federal dollars.
And the last point, Mr.
Chairman, um.
The travel education at Taos
Pueblo.
As designed
An education plan.
Around the vision of an ideal
Tao pueblo.
Graduate
That includes the following
qualities, one who's grounded in
cultural values centered in
confident.
Educated and knowledgeable of
the pueblo's tradition and
history speaks their language
and lives their culture and is
engaged in the public community.
And for those reasons, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, we believe SB 13.
can begin to implement and
fulfill.
Their vision and their plans, we
asked for the company's full
support. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Drew Sutter. I'm the
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblos of Aleta, Owinge, Santa
Clara, San Felipe, and Zuni. We
rise in strong support of SB 13.
I won't belabor the points, but
the points made by the by the uh
by this by the sponsor and his
experts will be strongly support
the legislation and urge you to
pass it.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico.
Um, first, I just want to thank
the senator, the governor, and
Mr. Schendo for their work that
they've done, um, in pursuing
great educational opportunities
in their community. It's made a
difference for their community
and for the state, um, with,
with their actions regarding
charter schools. We support this
bill because we see that
mission-driven education that is
free public and open to all is
beneficial to communities.
That's shown by our many
charter.
schools that already serve
native communities, but the full
requirements of public education
make it difficult to deeply
engage in tribal language and
culture the way uh the sponsor
and and his uh his support is
talking about here today. So we
support this bill to give those
communities that opportunity.
Um, I'll also note that 30 years
ago when charter schools were
just being discussed, the
conversion schools, it was
probably a scary thing with a
lot of concerns of a drastic
shift in what public education.
looks like.
I would offer that today we're
having a similar conversations
30 years later. Thank you.
I go to I hope uh chairman
committee members is gonna sit
on the pi competition.
Uh, good morning, everyone. My
name is Jay Garcia. I'm with the
Pueblo of Santa Ana. Uh, I stand
here before you as a tribal
councilman, lifetime member, but
also registered state lobbyist
on behalf of Santa Ana Pueblo
and on behalf of Governor
Armillo and our tribal council.
I am authorized to state that we
support Senate Bill 13, and we
look forward to your favorable
response.
Santana is in the early stages
of developing an early childhood
education center in language
immersion, so we, this will
greatly help us in our
endeavors, so I, I appreciate
everyone's um.
Um, support,
so more drops that say to you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee. My name is
Loretta Trujillo and I'm the
executive director of Transform
Education in Mexico. We're a
statewide coalition that came
together to advocate on behalf
of the students named in the
Yazi Martinez lawsuit.
Um, I stand here in full support
of this bill for the last year
and a half, we've engaged over
150 young people across three
parts of the state, including
native students, and I bring
their, their message forward to
you.
Uh, this lawsuit made it clear
that New Mexico has a
constitutional obligation to
provide a sufficient and
equitable education for all
students, particularly native
students. A key pillar of the
court's ruling is the
recognition that language
preservation is essential.
To educational success. Language
is not only a tool for
communication. It is the
foundation of identity, culture,
and self-determination.
Senate bill takes a significant
step towards addressing these
systemic inequities by creating
these compact schools.
Which will provide tribes with
greater autonomy to design and
implement educational models
that our students called for.
For too long, indigenous
students have been denied access
to an education system that
fully values and sustains their
linguistic and cultural
heritage. For these reasons, we
stand in full support of SB 13.
Thank you.
I did not greetings, honorable
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Tara Villa
and I am a member of the public
of Hema. I'm a registered
lobbyist with the Mexico Native
Vote, and I wanted to share our
support of Senate Bill 13
because it empowers tribal
sovereignty and education,
giving tribes full control over
curriculum assessments and
learning standards, and also
builds on proven models in
Washington and Alaska, and as
you may have seen within the
agency's analysis that there are
some challenges within the
states.
with uh implementing uh compact
schools, however, the state of
New Mexico is already in, in the
lead with developing uh the
technical assistance centers
which are going to be
implemented this year under the
the leadership of Governor
Grisham and the Mexico Higher
Education department. So we
encourage you all to um have a
due pass on Centel 13. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, Lily
May Ortiz, I'm the legislative
liaison for the New Mexico
School Board Association and the
New Mexico School Board
Association does not have a
position on this bill. We
neither oppose it nor we support
it, but we would like to bring
to the committee's attention
that this legislation will have
a negative impact on the state
equalization guarantee on the
SCG and as you know, over the
last two years, the SCG has been
studied extensively and resulted
in the understanding that there
is not
enough money available for all
of our schools. So if this
legislation is passed, it will
reduce the already lacking
resources for public schools. We
would like to bring that to your
attention and also to the FIR
that talks about the $900
million impact. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Let me turn my mic back on, uh,
and none of the three online one
wish to comment. So uh questions
from the committee.
No.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Sundo, Governor, thank
you very much for bringing this
forward.
I will start off by saying that
as an English language learner,
as an immigrant, uh, some of my
biggest and closest mentors have
been our Native American sisters
and brothers, and I am extremely
grateful for that. But with that
comes an understanding that I
think is relevant to our tribal
communities, and that is the
notion of maintaining our first
language and for me el espanol.
And if it wasn't for my parents
who pushed it upon me.
Many of the Spanish language
courses that I attempted to take
just did not really work.
Um, and I will be just frankly
honest because this is really
impactful for our students.
The notion of cultural
competence is important and it
has not been
Prioritized in the way that it
should have been it, it should
have been over time and a lot of
the data and a lot of the
analysis and information that we
have is very clear, and I want
to point out to the FIR where it
says that one, that out of the 8
Native American languages spoken
in New Mexico, only 7 are taught
in school districts.
I believe one of the folks who
commented mentioned something
about feeling confident because
of owning their native language,
and I can tell you that that is
absolutely true, and perhaps
Some other folks may be against
that and.
In terms of of placing shame
because of where we come from,
who we are and what we
represent, but the reality is
representation matters, and
sometimes it might take some of
our own people sitting in these
desks to be able to acknowledge
it fully, and I'm very, very
proud to also represent Senate
District 9, which encompasses
and includes San Pueblo, which
stands in full support of this
bill.
And I carry a big
responsibility, uh, to my
constituents and personally on
this matter, I would also like
to note that LESC, if you look
at your analysis, uh, they also
believe that SB 13 will present
an opportunity to help the state
more fully to respond to the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit by
allocating targeted funding
fostering culturally sustaining
learning environments and
aligning teacher demographics
with those of their students.
Again, representation does
matter. It does. Uh, according
to the LESC, research suggests
that incorporating Native
American languages and cultures
into academic settings can
improve educational engagement
outcomes.
Go out and ask the students.
That's all you need.
And they're here
And it's very clear to us. I
think this is absolutely
necessary, and I really do think
the sponsor for bringing it
forward, I would just have an
additional technical question,
uh, Senator Sendo, um, in terms
of uh.
The implementation of this. I
was wondering if um if the ste
schools will will be complying
with federal requirements for
special ed students. Um, that is
one question that is, that was
in mind and I'd appreciate any
insight.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman thank you
Senator Nova. I'm gonna turn it
over to, uh, our director of
education.
Chairman Senator Nova, um,
Well, the goal of intent is to
be able to inser serve all the
needs of the students and so
incorporating those um
Regulations that exist that are
gonna fully support serving the
needs of all our kids, whether
they're special needs and and
other needs in other areas as
well too, cause there's also
behavioral, social, emotional,
all those areas that need to be
addressed when you're looking at
a child holistically, and the
goal is to ensure that all those
services are provided adequately
on to our children.
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
gentlemen.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senators should know, Governor
and director of education. Thank
you very much for your
presentation. I appreciate that.
I very much support uh charter
schools, and I believe local
communities.
Know best about what they need,
especially when we're talking
about uh.
You know, indigenous language
immersion and and and if your
community believes that it's
necessary for your kids to
learn, understand their culture,
to move forward. I, I fully
support that. My biggest concern
and and I want you to help me
understand this a little bit. Is
that
Um
I feel like this is moving us in
a way toward a sort of a
balkanization of our school
system and let me explain. If I
were to replace all the language
in this with uh African American
students and we were to create
our separate schools.
And then some German Americans
decided they wanted the same
thing and we had the same sort
of thing. My concern here and,
and, and I know this is sort of
way off the
Pardon my pun off the
reservation, um.
But the question I'm having is
understanding the needs.
My concern is that this this
separates.
The schoolchildren or the the
children in your community.
Uh, possibly from the rest of
society and then how does that,
how do they overcome that going
forward, so and so maybe you
could help me, maybe break that
understanding. I'm just trying
to understand where we're headed
with this because I, I can see
this continuing down a path that
may not allow us to, to do what,
what we all want is for people
to be fully um educated adults
and supportive of our
communities.
Thank you
and thank you, uh, Senator
Gordon for, for that question.
Um
It's interesting, um, let me
just give you an example of my
life.
I was born and raised in Hamas.
They speak a word of English.
And here I am
With you today.
Nothing about balkanization,
nothing about anything.
I think what we're doing here.
And when you think about the
federal policy that existed for
over over 200 years.
The systematically do away with
our language, our culture, our
spiritual or cereal way of life.
And we are fast forward trying
to reclaim that.
We're indigenous to this land.
I don't want my children.
be foreigners in their own land.
Why do people come to New
Mexico?
There's a spirit up about this
place.
People
Can feel it
You know why that is?
Because our people
still speak to the spirit of
this place.
Our songs.
Through our dances through our
ceremonies.
Through our initiations.
Your way of life that was given
to us the instructions that were
given to us as people and the
language of how we're supposed
to survive in this world, the
5th world that we live in.
That is why we're trying to
reclaim for our children.
None of us spoke.
Word of language when we're
raised by our parents.
It didn't separate us from
society, it strengthened us.
I went to college and I was the
only.
Indian kid
has survived
The University of Colorado.
Thank you.
you know why that is?
Because I knew who I was.
The foundation of who I was as
an individual.
Speaking my language and knowing
my values and what I was raised
with.
There was nothing
That could deter me.
And that is the same thing that
we're trying to establish with
our young children, because
right now our children are
confused.
It's like building a house if
you have a solid foundation.
That house will withstand
anything.
And right now, when our children
don't have a solid foundation.
That's not
Just Indian kids, it's all of
our kids. We all want to raise
our kids with a solid foundation
of the values.
Of the things that our parents
and our communities taught us
whether you're Indian, native,
non-Indian, African American.
Whatever it is, German.
We're a nation of immigrants.
But I'm not going to allow.
You know, whether it's the
federal government.
Or the state government.
Make my children foreigners in
our own land.
That is our responsibility as
leaders.
Thank you, Senator for your
question. Thank you Senator. I
appreciate that. Senator
Thornton.
Yeah, we don't take additional
comments from the audience, but
Anything else, Senator?
Chairman Senator Thornton, I
think the other piece that's
important to recognize here is
that
Uh, Native Americans have a
political relationship with the
federal and state governments.
That is different from other
minority groups.
And I think that's what
distinguishes this act and what
the tribes are asking for from
any other group coming in and
trying to move forward with such
an endeavor is that there is
that political historical
relationship that exists um with
indigenous communities, uh, and
both the state and federal
governments and so understanding
that and
You know, one thing
That is important to understand
is not only the grounding.
But
In order for an individual to be
able to pick up another
language, a second language.
They have to be grounded in one
language.
And as Senator Shendall shared,
that was true for us and a lot
of the people in the audience
who grew up.
first language speakers, they
were able to transition
seamlessly into English.
What we're seeing now is that
our kids are neither grounded in
the language or in English.
That's why they're struggling
academically.
So our goal is to ground them in
our home language so that they
can be successful in transition
fully into English.
I worked over 20 years with our
charter school teachers and I
always ask our language arts
teachers.
You know who your fluent
speakers are. How are they
performing?
And they'll tell you
The fluent speakers are the ones
that transition to English
better. They write grammatically
better.
He can speak it better.
And it's those that aren't
fluent in the language that
struggle.
And I think there's research out
there that shows it and that's
kind of our goal is we wanna to
ground our kids in a language.
And we would prefer for it to be
our home language and then
transition them into English.
And also for Hamus, we're
looking at international models
of education that are
multilingual, multicultural.
Whereas the US has an
English-based, almost an English
only model of education where
other languages aren't fully
embraced as a part of the.
Aren't fully embraced as part of
the education system as our
young children are growing up.
And the most
Prominent place where language
learning naturally happens is
when they're infants taller.
That is when language needs to
be instilled and then developed
and further reinforced from
there.
Thank you. We can't keep the
comments to a lot shorter. We
need to get to a vote. We've got
a number of other bills and I,
I, there hasn't been opposition
to this bill. So let's, let's
move on. We could, Senator
Thornton, anything else? No, Mr.
Chair, thank you very much. I
also, I also survived the
University of Colorado Boulder.
Senator so you can skip me, uh,
you know, the, the sponsor
responded well to the questions.
I don't.
out, Mister Chairman, thank you
very much. I appreciate y'all
being here today. I do have a
few questions. I'm not seeing
any appropriation in your bill,
Mr. Chairman, and um senator
Sindo, can you explain why there
is no appropriation attached to
this.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senators
out uh.
When these uh compacts are
developed or they're, they're
literally gonna be, you know,
public school within the
reservation, so the SCG will
will follow. So that's why
there's no appropriation to who
might be listening out there
and then just one more comment
on that. I know that uh the uh
individual that spoke last
talked about the SCG. There's
many federally uh.
BIE funded schools.
And I think the majority are on
the Navajo reservation.
I don't see those schools
converting over, so we're not
trying to create another.
system. This is very narrowly
focused. So I think that FIR uh
errors in that that it's reading
more than what this.
Bill is going to do.
Uh, there's no way that the
Navajo Nation is going to
convert all of their schools to
language because there's a trust
and federal responsibility for
the.
as well and that funding
mechanism is probably not gonna
allow for something like this to
happen. And so it's, it's very
uh.
I guess narrowly focused so that
FIR I think it's kind of
confusing and we're gonna try
and clarify that as we move
forward.
Thank you and Senator and
others, please make sure we turn
our mics on and off. It's when 2
are on at a time that you can
possibly get that, that
feedback, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, you don't like all
that loud noise.
It wakes us all up.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. There is some
clarification I noticed in the
uh analysis from I think it was,
uh, the Justice Department, I
believe that's where it was, and
it has to do with page 6, line
14, sectarian practices they
requested that may be a
definition be added so there
would be no ambiguity there.
Have you noticed that?
Mr. Chairman, Senators, yeah,
that's been noted and I think we
may have uh
Uh
Amendment or something just to
add additional so that we can
clarify on that. Mr. Chairman
and Senator Shindo also on page
7, line 4 and line 6 when it's
talking about capacity.
I know that there was a problem
there from the Justice
Department. They wanted a
definition there. And while
we're on that, talk to me about
capacity, what is the intent of
saying capacity in that role.
What page 7 did you say? 7346 is
used twice there, and I would
like a clarification.
I believe that's speaking to the
capacity of of the school size
or
Or clashing it's the way I'm
reading it right now. OK, well,
I know that, uh, the analysis
wanted the definition of that so
you might make note of that,
yeah, so sectarian and the
capacity were the two, I think
they were noted on the FIR.
And uh what was the other thing
come through the chair.
Mr. Chairman
I also want to note that.
I, I do have a question. Let's
see if I can find it whenever
they're stating the languages
that were.
Brough forward, can you tell me
why?
Here it is.
On the FIR it said that uh of
the 8 Native American languages,
only 7 were taught in school.
Can you tell me why the
Mescalero Apaches were not
reported. Do you have any idea?
Oh
He
just turn it off, Mr. Sher,
Senator, uh, is that, I, I'm not
sure.
Yeah
OK, I didn't know if you had any
insight on that or not.
And Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Shindo.
You said that in 2012, the Hamus
head start started this
immersion program K through 6.
I didn't, maybe I just missed
it.
How was that progressing now or
has that also been lost whenever
they those youths went on to
start the middle school, high
school.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, senators,
I'm gonna have, uh, the director
speak to that. Thank you very
much.
Director and please keep your
answers short. We have other
chairman Senator, um.
The um
Kids that he went through the
immersion program uh as we
transition in 2012, um.
What I shared earlier was that
what they had gained within the
2+ years whether they were in
Head Start or starting at
childcare and the immersion, um,
they were lost within one
calendar year once they entered
whether it was a BIE public or
charter school system.
Because of the focus on English
medium as instruction and just
naturally our world is inundated
with English, so it's
everywhere. And so,
two coupled together, the
language loss was a year um that
we experienced um in a lot of
the kids and that's why the
tribe chose to establish the K6
immersion in 2022.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that
response. I
I was concerned about what what
it was actually being said,
Mister Chairman also.
Senator Shindo on the analysis
that we received from PED.
Oh
Under the state tribal education
compact schools would be
required to comply with
non-discrimination laws.
Clarify that for me.
If you can or maybe if somebody
from PED would like to clarify
that, I would appreciate an
answer.
Do we have somebody here
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Kittyan Monika. I'm the
assistant secretary for Indian
education under the Mexico
Public Education Department, to
my knowledge, and I did the bill
analysis, I don't remember
integrating anything related to
that, if you could clarify, Mr.
Chair, please.
Juanico
OK.
On the analysis from PED.
the
And
3rd page of the analysis under
state tribal education compact
schools, it stated in their
comply with non-discrimination
laws.
You want me to pull this out so
you can take a look at it.
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, that was
not again part of my analysis,
it may have already been
language that was there.
Senator, I think you're looking
at the LESC analysis, not the
PED analysis, potentially
someone else said, I don't know.
I'm just trying to make sure
we're all looking at the same
thing, Mr. Chairman, at the top
of the page it says agency name
and code PED 924.
That's what somebody else who
indicated.
OK.
I was just kind of curious what
the intent was whenever that was
stated from PED.
And Mr. Chairman, the only other
thing I have to say is I
appreciate.
Every different facet of our
society being able to go back
and trace their heritage.
Uh
Whether you're Irish American.
Danish
Native American.
Scottish.
I think that everybody needs to
go back and be able to trace
their heritage, Mr. Chairman,
that's all I have. Thank you
very much for your responses,
gentlemen. Thank you, Senator.
Other questions, Senator Pope.
I'm overdue pass on Center bowl
13. A motion for a new pass
seconded by Senator Figueroa,
uh, Marianne, if you'll call the
roll, please.
boom. Yes. And out.
And
Yes.
Yes.
Senator, you have a new pass.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
you.
We are due on the floor at 11.
Uh, we're gonna go to Senate
Bill 10. We heard this bill last
time. We got through the
questions. Uh, I believe Senator
Pope, the is coming back with a
bill that has those changes, uh,
so hopefully unless they're
Questions about anything dealing
with that, I think we're mostly
down to, to taking a vote on it,
but certainly we're open for,
for questions if there's
something new that has come up.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, in
front of you was passed out and
this, this is the uh committee
substitute.
That has the Edison changes and
what was done was the term
public and private school to
remove K through 12 from the
bill, um, those changes were
made, so this is, uh, the final
bill and the updated bill.
Uh, for the Hazyville, so I
don't know, Senator, if you need
me to make another motion to do
not pass.
Prior Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 10.
And a do pass for um
Discussion purposes on the new
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 10.
So, thank you, Senator. Uh, so
we have a do not pass on the
other one and for discussion to
do pass on the new one. And so
we are on the new bill and any
of the changes made with that
Senator.
going to do is to move this bill
for discussion.
Thank you, Senator. My
apologies. Uh, we are on
discussion on the new bill. Any
discussion?
Just clarifying, Mr. Chair, it's
0.230145.2.
Yes. Thank you, sir.
If not, is there a motion,
please?
All my commotion.
OK, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I was noticing Miss uh
Senator Pope, thank you very
much for bringing in this.
New bill
I do have some questions
concerning it though.
Can, uh, I think this is on the
ER. Let me make sure it is.
So I don't guide you to the
wrong place.
No, this, Mr. Chairman, this is
from the, the analysis from
higher ed.
I don't know if you've had a
chance to see that or not.
I have looked it over.
OK, maybe you can explain to me.
Um
I, I don't know what the clear
act is. Can you tell me what
that is about?
If you're April Mr. Chair,
Senator, I can't get a specific,
but um there is a federal law
for reporting and so that's why
we matched and used that clear
react and.
OK, because it does take their
fines and penalties for failure
to comply with the act.
But I Correct. And, and the
reason why that's in there is,
um, that's already federal law,
and so, OK.
Yes, Mr. Chair, my apologies,
there was one other thing and
now I can't seem to find it.
Golly.
Um
Mr. Chairman
Is this bill pertinent to just
Higher Ed
It this has no effect on your
High schools, middle schools,
elementary schools.
All of that, Mister Chair,
Senator, that is correct. So
with what we had done on the
previous committee substitute.
Was K through 12 with the public
and private schools with section
12, and 3. We've removed it
totally from the bill. So all of
this legislation.
Das would just higher education.
And Mr. Chairman.
A senator Pope.
In here, is there any sort of
Consequences for not reporting
Hazing.
Mr. Chair Senator, um,
The consequences are not in this
bill, but right now with the
federal law and the requirements
of reporting, um, I, I don't
know if they have the
consequences, but it's. So, so
you're basing this over what is
in feds.
Correct, Mr. Chair and Senator,
because we wanted to match and
then I also didn't want to
overburden overburden higher
education or have duplicate
reports because it was already
the federal requirement.
OK, Mr. Chairman, my last, I
think it's my lesson I finally
found what I was looking for on
page 3, let me see if it does
mirror with the.
Substitute that you brought in.
It be
And Mr. Chair, Senator, things
might have slid up a little bit,
and that's why I was off a
little bit whenever I was.
Looking at this.
Mr.
Chairman and Senator Pope, I'm
kind of confused over section B.
Under
I'm sorry.
Section 3B whenever it's talking
about.
It starts at the bottom of page
2 of your committee substitute
going on up to the top of page
3, whenever it says no student
or other person in attendance at
a public or private
post-secondary educational
institution.
May intentionally.
Face another. I, I'm confused
here. What are we trying to?
Point out in that particular
with that particular word
intently faces another.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
This is some of the language
that
Um, was also used, I believe,
even in the AG's bill and some
of the uh federal language, and
I think this is kind of the line
used, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um
That really hazing is something
intentional.
And not something that's really
done accidentally or something,
you know, and so I think this is
really drawn the line that when
someone does this or is charged.
They knowingly did this.
Um, it wasn't something that was
done unintentionally.
And then they're charged with
hazing.
And so that's why Mr. Chair,
Senator.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I'm
still kind of confused over
that, but if it, if that goes
along with what you're trying to
get accomplished there. I'm not
going to pursue this.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Pup
you're stating with the
beginning of the 2025 Fall
academic term is I'm not seeing
any.
Operating costs to for the
schools to implement this and
maybe their student handbook or
whatever the case may be, is
that going to be a concern if
this bill does pass?
Mr. Chair Senator, it could be,
but um the way we looked at it,
um,
talking with the schools and I'm
sure there's a little pushback.
They're already doing some of
this reporting when it comes to
Sexual harassment, sexual
assault, and, and reporting and
updating and information on
websites, um, and just like the
committee set up as well.
is looking at some of this
stuff, I think, um, will be some
of the same folks putting a lot
of this data and reporting and
information together.
OK. And Mr. Chairman, Senator
Pope, whenever you're talking
about that in particular,
reporting it and everything
else.
There is going to be an annual
report made, and I'm assuming
that's going to be to HED uh
yes, HED, is that correct?
That is correct.
And whenever that is done.
If there seems to be a problem
at that particular institution,
what will HED?
be authorized to remedy or.
Take control of.
Mr. Chair Senator, I
Didn't lay that out in the bill.
Um, a lot of it is, is for that
oversight for HED and for us.
To handle these situations, but
also the transparency.
For students and parents. They
really know what's going on on
the campuses to make those
decisions on whether a child
should be going to that.
Mr. Chairman,
In my opinion, this is strictly
my opinion unless there's
repercussions going back to that
school to remedy that problem.
It hasn't been remedied.
I think that's a point where HED
should step in and make those
changes at the school itself is
not willing to.
Protect the students that are
going to school there, instead
of those students having to
change.
institutions
and I'm kind of concerned that
that is not included in there.
Because I think that the
Schools themselves should take
control of what's happening on
their, but if it's not gonna be
done, HED has to be able to step
in there. Do you agree with
that, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Pope, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
agree.
I would like to see Mr. Chairman
and Senator, I would like to see
that included in this where it
is very specific because I want
this practice to stop just like
everybody else does.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Pope.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Figuero.
I move but do not pass onen bill
10 and a due pass on the Senate
Education Committee substitute
for a bill
that we have a motion for a do
pass on the substitute.
There a second
We've been through all of this
section in the last session, you
know, and so this really we went
through it. This is only a
change on things at this point
and we're on a a do pass at this
point. Uh, we had indicated that
I hadn't seen others is, if it's
very quick, please.
Jared, there's a quick question.
It was just one question. Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Polk.
What is the difference between
the federal law, the stop campus
seizing Act.
And
The current edition that you're
doing in the state. In other
words, with the, with the
current law says that requires
campuses to research-based
hazing education, prevention
programs, help students make
informed decisions about joining
Hastings campus organizations
require institutions to publish
on their campus website, their
hazing policy.
And a report that identifies
student groups that have
violated the policy. That's all
in the federal law. So what is
above and beyond that? Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Mr. Senator,
the differences are the
penalties.
So you have the misdemeanor for
hazing and you have the
misdemeanor for failure to
report.
Thank you for that.
Thank you. We're on a Du pass
motion. Is there a second?
Say by Senator Hickey. Marianne,
if you'll call the roll, please.
Tinder boom. Oh.
yourself.
Yes.
And Senator, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 10.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We argue
on the floor at 11. That's gonna
be the last bill that we have
today, uh, my obligation to make
sure that we get done and people
can get to the floor on time,
uh.
In the future, please, when we
have a bill where we had a full
vetting, we're sending someone
away to make some specific
changes, typically we do not go
back through the things that did
not change on the bill. So
please try and get your
questions during the first round
rather than if there's a change
where there were not changes in
that area.
Yes, ma'am.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I do want to
show my appreciation to you and
to the education departments for
being here this morning
providing us with breakfast and
everything. It was very
informative. We got to meet a
lot of the people that were
integral in helping to ensure
that our young people are
educated. Thank you very much.
Thank you, yes, we have full
house, great food, there still
is some food, please take some.
See you all on the floor in 5 to
10 minutes. Thank you.
