I'll tell a little bit more
about myself at the end but as
we're doing introductions you
know I'd like to hand it over to
Senator Kernan Senator Kernan is
a dear friend and long time
educator and so please get you
back on this committee senator
if you give a brief introduction
about who you are what your
interests and things are then
handed off to the next Senator
of your choice.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
it is good to be back on this
committee have served on
education for many years and
that for the last three I
believe I I had to to move off
of that in it's good to be back
so I am representing Senate
district forty two which is only
adding Chavis counties down and
the secretary of these part of
the state I live in Hobbs I'm a
former educator I'm retired I
taught first grade for many
years and while I was working
for the Hobbs district had the
opportunity to set up pre K.
programs in for school districts
in southeast New Mexico so I'm
very familiar with pre
kindergarten also just very
interested in education even now
and am so happy to be on this
committee I think I will just
send it right over to Senator
pope and love to hear something
about our new senator on the
committee.
Great thank Senator Kernan hello
po junior and I'm state senator
district twenty three northwest
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
I'm a retired Air Force officer
but I actually was hired to be a
substitute teacher I'm here in
APS unfortunately it happened
right before a COVID in March so
I've been at unable to do that
but I'm actually thinking of
going into teaching as a career
so
I'm gonna really enjoy being on
this committee
thanks everyone who's walking
bass walk me so far and and the
Senate and I will pass it over
to Senator I think more Niki so
I will pass it over to you
potential.
Never and ready with that button
You're always tries a.
Thank you Senator pope.
It's an honor to be introduced
by you and also to be a member
of this committee my background
is health care and has been for
eighteen years and when I decide
to run for the Senate my
constituents told me that their
number one and to issue with the
economy and education and so I
decided to roll up my sleeves
and get involved as a physician
I am very very passionate about
early childhood education that's
kind of where right then
opportunity begins and having
each in New the actually
prenatal as I learned on the
rest of Navajo reservation over
seven years have the most
opportunities and assistance of
the family can ask is just
critical I through okay that's
what a lot of my constituents to
worry about and then also higher
education and higher education
there's an editorial in the
journal of the think about
expanding residencies in New
Mexico the seven knows we need
more physicians for will running
woefully short and I want to do
everything I can to assist with
that and also job training and
community college is to cancel
Act so I'm thrilled to be here
and still to be with that.
Right college thank you very
much and I'm gonna pass it over
to my desk on my desk mate
Senator Michael Padilla who are
I'm learning is that zero
broadband and that's fantastic
because that's part of
education.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Dicky thank you Mr vice
chair Senator Michael Padilla.
Then in the Senate yes my ninth
year and this is my thank you on
this committee spent six years
as the vice chairman of this
committee and learned a lot from
our chairman and all of his
years of experience at almost
every level in education
Representative the southwest
part of the Bernalillo county
which is some of the most
historical areas of New Mexico
and then also the southwest
Mason which is one of the newest
parts of New Mexico so there's
quite the difference I've got
going on in my senatorial day
all day long.
You have a couple of successes
in the last eight years nine
years one one districts past the
hunger free students bill of
rights which sure that every
child has a warm school lunch in
the same school lunch that their
their contemporaries have making
gross social emotional in the
lunch room and they can
participate in all the things
children are are doing our goal
there was to say
the focus of our children based
on their studies if we truly
want to
close the achievement gap we're
gonna have to of these heroes be
able to focus in the second half
of the day as well I know
Senator Kernan others
Representative the bell future
date this not and that was the
first part of the day.
On the second part of if you
will
and so I think these things are
so important hunger so important
you are you're hearing is the
growing in your stomach the last
thing you're.
Teachers trying to
second takes along with the last
couple years since the creation
of the early childhood education
and care department.
Work on that issue for two years
or a contained in the Senate and
for all that I was able to get a
lot of other very wonderful
people including a lot of those
on this call right now I think
almost virtually everybody here
everybody here that was in the
Senate voted for that on the
Senate floor I got that through
and and and now we're creating
that.
It's a great thank again closing
at EGP gap this doctor if you
mentioned.
Doctors under the table while
dimension the first thirty six
months of a child's life is but
eighty two eighty four percent
of synapses of the brain is one
of those first thirty six months
and we are truly doing ourselves
a disservice with fifty four
percent of our budget for not
focusing on preparing the raw
material and so we we we expand
or more than half of our state
budget on public education and
it's as though we were making a
movie but we have the rights to
the movie and and now we do some
very excited about that I'm
going into the future I want to
continue to focus on early
education focus on hunger in the
schools and then also social
work in high poverty schools
because a lot of these children
I need some some help and and
hand up you know and all that
I look forward to working with
everybody on this committee I
think what's beautiful about our
legislature is we all bring such
diverse backgrounds and we put a
special ingredient Health
indicates stand up and I'm just
excited about that so thank you
Mr chairman thank Mr Meister.
To hand over to senator Neville.
Thank you Michael well I guess
My degrees are primary primarily
an agricultural and agriculture
and economics but I ended up my
education background is mostly
in higher it.
It turns out about in the
eighties our work for New Mexico
State University go Agpiece and
I was the in the development
department as director of alumni
relations and I was also a.
Are to the annual giving
campaign which is largely male
and that kind of thing so I got
spend little time several years
down in New Mexico state before
I started a business I got into
the real estate business that
was part of what my family did
we work in agriculture primarily
but we had a lot of real estate
interests and so forth so that's
how I got into the real estate
business back in San Juan County
and that to.
B. because of starting up a new
business I need a little side
income so I ended up being an
adjunct professor at San Juan
college talk to real estate and
finance and those kind of things
there for quite awhile so higher
it is mostly my my background
and and I spent a lot of time
with San Juan college trying to
figure out the funding formula
for junior colleges and and well
higher in general and that's
always a always a battle how you
keep everybody funded fairly and
so anyway that's my background
of say the last ten years or so
on Senate finance and LFC is so
I've got a pretty good feel of
the of the budget we're worth
the money comes from work goes
and so good to be back we're I
got a little spare time that was
kind of a concert hall consuming
kind of a deal so Preciado Mr
chair looking forward to working
with you and let's see let's go
to Senator Pinto.
Good morning everyone it's nice
to see everyone here and I'm
excited to serve on the
committee again last year was my
first year as.
And already been to three
sessions it's been very
interesting.
thank you senator Neville
working with senator Neville and
several senators I represent
district three the killing in
San Juan I Representative to
school districts Senate
Senator dot consolidated schools
and got we can we County schools
predominantly Navajo reservation
probably over ninety percent of
my district.
And it is a it's been an
interesting time especially with
education I was a teacher before
I well I got my.
My education is mainly in the
business finance and I started
to get my masters in education
became a teacher I worked on the
Navajo reservation B. I. a
school public schools and it is
a lot of work that needs to be
done and I really look forward
to bringing education for I
think we did a lot of good
things this recently that have
come to par especially with
transparency and making sure our
money is spent effectively is
one of the biggest things I'd
like to see and also see our
educators.
Get a raise get what they
deserve especially in my
district we have lost a lot of
industry along money long with
the closure with PNM and likely
even the
Refinery in Jamestown and I
think we're about to lose the
paper mill to so my eight two
industries in my district our
health care and public education
that's where a lot of my.
Employers are and are a lot of
my people are employed within
the district and that it is a
challenge especially when we
talk about early childhood
education because we do have the
Navajo reservation and their
head start program.
It's even right where I live I
got both.
I have the Navajo Nation head
start across the wash not even
I'm probably two miles away and
then I have the elementary
school right there within
walking distance.
I don't want to see them compete
but we do have challenges fires
infrastructure for our young
children and I've seen some
really dilapidated head start
facilities that are safety
issues that in even with the
fire and stuff I I'd really like
to move things for to make sure
that not just our schools are
safe but that we do have access
to the police and fire
departments and emergency
services with the in a.
Representative I did within a.
Reasonable amount of time that
they can respond to our children
and if in case of an emergency
so those are Google my
priorities and my district and
I'm sure you'll hear from me
throughout this the session
about my concerns.
I would like to pass it on to
Senator Brett.
Morning everyone good to see
everyone's faces and good to be
back on education again for
another year of like Michael
Padilla then on this committee
every year I've been in this
legislature so this is my ninety
year before that I served on the
Rio Rancho school board for four
years my wife is a teacher
although she took a year off
this year so we could travel
then COVID hit so that was so
we've done almost no traveling
of but you know it's good to be
back and it's good to be looking
at the issues yeah we have some
serious problems when it comes
education our state everyone
knows we're we rank
we need to start working on
addressing those things some of
us have been trying but we
haven't obviously been
successful in that so hopefully
we can set aside partisanship
which I think Service rules
really tries to do with this
committee and I really
appreciate that hopefully we can
set aside our partisan
differences and actually work
together for the betterment of
of our children.
because it's it's we we've been
waiting too long to do that it's
time for us to get to work and
actually fix our education
system our state correctional
Graham.
We need to always remember that
education is about our kids it's
not about us it's not about the
adults in the room it's about
the children that right now are
not getting a good education in
New Mexico and so we really need
to work on getting that fixed we
need to work on getting our kids
back in the classroom.
in those two things we really
need to address the session
thank you I'm not sure who
hasn't spoken yet so
Mr chairman I'll pass it back to
you.
Thank thank you senator and yes
back to the was the right one
and a little bit more on my
background is along with center
the Senator Brandt we have
served together since we all
came in this is eight years ago
so this is our ninety year
serving together on the Senate
Education Committee I'm very
honored to chair the committee
again my background is I tried
to retire about three or four
years ago after twenty nine
years and public education and
this the kids and went back it
was teaching part time up until
this last year so this last
spring when COVID hit I when we
finish the legislative session I
went back in the classroom and
we had about a week or two
before everything went virtual
and so I've had experience
teaching in a virtual world and
it is not good education in
spite of the best efforts of our
teachers and their hard work it
is not good education but it's
the best we have at this point
out and so we certainly all are
working on trying to get our
kids back into something that
that looks more like what we all
no one believed to be much
better for education my
background is I have a
bachelor's and master's degree
in psychology and a PhD in
interdisciplinary which spans
education and psychology to me
education is just applied
psychology I you're trying to
change oral connections and such
and that's all psychology on how
people learn and understand I
taught at the university in the
college of education I've been
back with the staff at community
colleges at the university I've
been in middle school principal
an elementary school principal I
served eight years on the New
Mexico school board I was.
Elected in the leadership of the
school board association and
very proud I was the first
master board member in the state
of New Mexico I still very
probably have that jacket with
the patch on stuff work for
having done that and then back
in the early two thousands I
went into the classroom were I
was a math teacher I taught all
levels of math AP statistics and
AP psychology in gifted
education so I have a wide range
of backgrounds in education and
all kinds of different levels I
jokingly I'll tell people I'll
talk education with anyone
anywhere for as long as they can
stay at that I'm not gonna get
tired of it before they get
tired so it's when people ask me
how I liked being a senator I
often will correct them and say
I'm a teacher and an educator
being selected as my public
service so that's you know I do
myself as a teacher an educator
first.
So again welcomed everyone on
the committee and some specific
introductions where they didn't
say Senator poke is our vice
chair of this committee which is
wonderful to have you as our
vice chair is one of our new
members coming in I think will
do a wonderful job and senator
Neville is the ranking member on
this committee and so I'll be
working closely with him as far
as any details technicalities or
other kinds of things they'll be
first lines of contact for how
we're we're working our way
through all of the committee.
Couple of other introductions.
And you people just keep a very
short no fifteen seconds thirty
seconds or whatever but let me
call on some other people just
reductions and then merry and
will have heard you more about
some of the structure of how we
need to run the the meeting in
this virtual world but most of
you know very instead a route
who is the committee secretary
for for this committee and so
then if you'd like to just kind
of a brief comment how long
you've been doing this
particular job before we get
into the details that you need
to later reintroduced.
Hi I'm very instance right and I
have been with the legislature
for the last nineteen years
since I retired from the
telephone company after thirty
one years of those nineteen
years seventeen years of it has
been in a Senate education.
So I pretty much know all of the
people associated throughout the
state and it's a fabulous
committee everybody's always
really good working across the
aisle and I'm very very happy to
be here again as always thank
you.
Thank you very and so obviously
huge amounts of institutional
knowledge about this committee
and it's going to be different
this time so we're all all
learning and expanding our
palette of experiences and
skills the next Carmen Gonzales
who is one of the school analyst
with the car if you like that
you give a very brief
introduction Dr Carmen Gonzales.
We I'm Senator Mimi Stewart
analyst and she has asked me to
keep attending these meetings
because she is now in rules and
she really misses Education but
I'm I'm a retired educator I'm
actually vice president emeritus
at New Mexico State and after I
I left New Mexico state I came
back to my hometown which is
Santa Fe and I flunked
retirement went back to work at
Santa Fe community college is
there vice president for
students.
And of retired from there and
then I ran for the school board.
And now I'm on the Santa Fe
public schools board of
education at the worst possible
time anyone could be on the
board so that's me thank you
thank you Carmen we've got
several of the LFC analysts that
are with us today and if one of
you you'd like to pay just to a
very quick round of
introductions I'm not sure all
the spaces are going to be on
when we have our regular
meetings but today's kind of
course you hear the voices and
see people so you're trying to
put a face to that so blessed
you do a quick round of
introductions of the LTSE staffs
are.
Yes chairman sold.
The Hawker I am the deputy
director at LAFC looking forward
to working with all of you my
background is predominantly in
higher education.
With a focus on health care
education and I will take it
next to Jessica.
My Mr chairman and members of
the committee and a senior
policy analyst LFC that cover
college and career readiness
issues as well as all of our
school choice issues to reach
out about those topics anytime
between you all.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Emily Hoxie I am a senior
policy analyst New Delhi SB not
early childhood education and
extended learning time program
looking forward to working with
you.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members my
name's Tim to develop a senior
analyst with Ellie as C. this
will be my fifth session with
Ellie S. C.
I focus primarily on assessment
and accountability issues as
well as capital outlay and
public school transportation.
See all.
Thank you.
Mr chairman members good morning
my name is Chelsea Canada I'm a
senior policy analyst with the
legislative education study
committee my policy areas that I
focus on for the committee are
the educator workforce and
educator quality for free to
contact me with any of those
questions related policy areas.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the Senate education
committee my name is ritually on
senior policy analyst chair LESC
I is a responsibility involve
construction and school climates
agreed to be with you this
morning look forward to
supporting you and working with
you the session thank you.
Currently not on Mr chairman I
Joey Simon who specializes in
public school finance and our
director Rachel gradual who will
pop on in a little bit thank
you.
Thank you very much I haven't
seen as at least on my screen is
sunny blue one with the LFC or
anyone from LFC.
He is also in the house
Education Committee right now
okay we'll send the is one that
we will see regularly as the end
of the education expert on the
legislative finance committee so
we will often have sunny in our
committees very knowledgeable
about education education issues
and and finance with those from
the head John set up if you are
on and would briefly introduce
yourself and anyone else in the
peddlers honor who we might see
in the.
In the committee.
Good morning Mr chair members.
Thanks for having us I'm Johnson
the policy director at the
public education department
you'll see me on a pretty
regular basis you might also see
our deputy policy director hi
Donald one of our policy analyst
the state us us for this too
often out.
Thanks for having us.
Thank you anyone else from the
head I think that was all that
we had there
in is an open door on as the
major analyst.
I don't think so but he may be
on page.
Thank you we have the two
analysts for the Senate Democrat
Education Committee of doctors
I'm just if you and how we would
like to briefly introduce
yourselves and your background.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is Stephen
Sanchez
retired educator after forty
nine years I threw in the towel
last year and it's an honor to
be back with the Education
Committee I've spent the
majority of my career in public
education teaching our
elementary middle school action
faculty member at
New Mexico State University
where I received my PhD and our
administrator in the Los crucis
public school system so it's an
honor to be part of this
committee again thank you for
extending the invitation to me
Senator souls and it's great to
see Senator Kernan back I she
is.
A ray of sunlight.
I agree Holly.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Holly Duffy this is the third
year as an analyst with the
Senate Education Committee they
have a background in education
as well teaching and different
pedagogies and cultures around
the world and I currently work
with the public education
department has a project manager
for I literacy initiative for
structured literacy thank you.
Thank you that was very nice to
give her some leave of absence
to come and work with us again.
And last March hello would you
like introduce yourself so
people know who is pulling the
strings behind the scenes on our
our web or are you master.
Of course good morning everyone
zoom authority for this session
so any presentations that you'll
need to make please feel free to
email them to me issues you guys
would like to bring up as well
so if you have any questions
about soon or need to make any
presentations please let me know
I am very very available and
it's very nice meeting all of
you I can't wait to work with
you.
Very good and Rachel did you
want to do a brief introduction
now would you want to wait until
we get to some of the logistics
of the committee's going to go I
don't know if you got to get
back over to another meeting
where did you hide your
presentation we can do the other
things you.
Up to Mr chairman I do you know
I put some some short stuff
together just to talk about
really who we are and Ellie S.
C. and how we can support you
during session and I do see you
know two brand new faces to the
committee I think on your
committee you've got Senator
Kernan and senator Neville who
have been on the finance
committee who probably
understand some of what I'm
gonna talk about already and so
would.
We need to do one on ones we'd
be really happy to do that as
well.
My name is Rachel drugs on the
staff director of Ellie S. C. I
have been with Ellie S. C. I'm
going into my sixty year now
part of my job here I work for
the finance committee helping
helping the Legislature craft
and education budget started
with the legislature in two
thousand five is part time staff
doing similar work to what Ali
and Stever doing and others
So what we do here at LAFC LAFC
is a bicameral bipartisan
interim committee of the
legislature so it will meet all
throughout the interim in here
K. twelve issues and higher
higher and issues related to
teacher preparation programs
only so LESC doesn't have the
authority to hear other higher
at issues outside of teacher
preparation programs.
Lee and on COVID times we would
be traveling across the state to
meet and different communities
see what's going on in different
communities what challenges they
have what successes they're
having
we didn't get to do much of that
this year so I'm hoping that we
get to do some more that coming
up in the center
Working with education
stakeholders so superintendents
school boards charter schools
colleges of education other
school staff nonprofit advocacy
organizations to really try to
learn what's going on in public
education around the state.
Over the past four years we've
got a particular focus on really
for sort of buckets for five
buckets early learning teacher
and school leader recruitment
preparation and retention career
technical education and
multicultural education and then
really how do you build a system
so each of those things you can
do individual reforms that that
address symptoms but how do you
really get in and systemically
make changes so the education
system works for our kids and
that includes.
Resting and really thinking
about governance and
accountability issues not work
we started really four years ago
with the con national conference
of state legislatures report no
time to lose so you'll hear
probably in and read through our
analysis a lot about no time to
lose the national conference of
state legislatures put together
a group F. twenty two
legislators nationally and they
try to answer the question why
is the US education system
stagnant why are we seeing other
developing countries jump pretty
quickly ahead of the US and
those were.
Those are really that the court
buckets that that report
identified.
So we have we will likely
continue that focus over the
interim but you will see us
right about that and benchmark
the US inventor New Mexico
against other high performing
policies both internationally
nationally and locally.
So yes see right now we've got
six policy analyst three support
staff Vanessa and I as your
deputy director and director
staffer here to work for you
guys during session so we
transfer from staffing Ellie S.
C. which ceases to exist during
session to staffing House and
Senate at.
Staff will do research work they
prepare briefs there helping
Ellie S. C. draft legislation
and assisting individual members
with request and then we do that
same type of work for you guys
during
During legislative session so if
you've got individual questions
about education about a policy
about what's going on in your
district about re opening
guidelines unit you name it you
can ask and we will if we don't
know the answer we will track an
answer down for you attract the
right person down for you a lot
of times that's Mr Santa and PED
and so we're working pretty
closely with them as well to
make sure you guys have access
to the info you need.
We're going to provide an
analysis for each and related
bill so you will have that
in front of you so every K.
twelve bill and bill that
addresses teacher preparation we
will analyse
and we're here to really help so
if you've got questions about
how we can help you are you need
something feel free to reach out
and Center souls we've got a
staffing listed telephone
numbers that will send either to
use so you can push it out or
directly to members at your
preference
Keep things you're gonna want to
get familiar with anything
somewhat Senators souls wanted
me to to talk about is.
Sort of our funding system key
terms you're gonna hear things
to keep an eye out for and I
will forward each of you guys
that the sort of the new member
orientation in the presentation
we're doing for
House said right now but you're
going to hear us talk a lot
about you're going to read a lot
about the public school funding
formula which is also often
called the state equalization
guarantee or SCG that's where
ninety seven percent of your
public school funding runs
through the public school
funding formula
Nikolai's funding formula so
treats equals equals I. E. any
any kindergarten student across
the state generates the same
amount of funding and then it
treats on equals equally amongst
the on equals but I New Mexico
according to everybody else so
if your kindergarten student
with no special ed needs you
just get funded as a
kindergarten student but if you
have special ed needs you
generate the same amount of
funding across the street across
the street across the state or.
Or your needs
you'll often hear us talk about
ma'am you wonder what the heck
is a ma'am
we right sometimes thinking you
understand what we're writing
because we live in this every
day so madam or membership is
student enrollment on particular
dates
Program units in these are all
really funding formula
terminologies that that we talk
about program units every factor
in the funding formula will
generate program units and so
that's a pretty big thing if the
bill creates program units and
it has funding or isn't funded
or the estimates for program
units aren't accurate impacts
how how dollars are distributed
across the state.
The other big.
Terms that you guys will here
and I think these are you know
very quickly above the line
below the line and categorical
and.
I work with legislators who I
work with for a decade
additional asked tell me where
above the line is and so what
that refers to the funding
formula but it also refers to a
line on a spreadsheet that the
appropriators are using to
designate how much money is
going through the funding
formula so if you hear above the
line think about formula
funding.
If you're below the line think
about special program
appropriations made to PED that
they generally don't have a lot
of guidance on how to allocate
them a lot of flexibility to set
programs up and support students
and then you'll your categorical
or middle of the line and
that's.
A chunk of money it's about a
hundred twenty four million
dollars right now that's
appropriated through other
formulas or for other specific
things that are guided by
statute so Indian education
standards based assessments
transportation is the largest
categorical appropriation you
make which is pushed out through
a funding formula.
What am I missing Senator souls
this is sort of a high high
level.
Will rejoin think that's exactly
appropriate I remember yeah when
I first was doing this the
school board and other people in
the first on the committee yeah
if you told me everything that
you know about the formula and
the the budget everything like
that it's a bit overwhelming so
will continue to to dole out
drips in pieces and stuff as
people get more work into with
it again thank you for your
offer to do one on ones D. tail
both on funding formula but on
any other kinds of issues as
well as the Ellie S. C. really
is there to work for all
legislators on education issues.
We are in the country in having
an L. AST to just study
education issues and similarly I
always think of New Mexico as
being very unique with the
exception of Hawaii which is
just one school district for the
entire state where all of the
funding formula funding flows
through the state the districts
there is not a local match so to
speak about property taxes to
fund the the operations of our
public schools which is unique
and insurers that we have much
better equity across the state
the most other states would
have.
So our our staff Senators souls
you know we are non partisan
staff so we are here to support
across the aisle both political
parties and we probably are I
did not stick to politics but
would not ignore stick to
policies so our job is really to
work with you guys on good
policy what does research say
Senator pope and Senator Hickey
if you guys ever want a one on
one crash course on some of this
we are we're more than happy to
give it to you and
at your convenience and then for
those of you that have been on
the committee clearly were
always welcome always more than
happy to do that as well
We're in the building partially
out of the building so we'll get
you as a contact sheet that
gives you contact numbers in
areas of policy expertise of our
staff.
And I think that's the last
thing we have an annual report
that we are in the process of
finalizing edit some will get
printed and it will give you
narrative section tends to be
about eighty eighty five pages
this year there's a lot that's
changed with the pandemic in a
lot of the the report addresses
that but then it's also got a
section of data charts and
graphs and you guys will each
get a hard copy of that
hopefully in the next week and a
half or so and it's a good
starting point
To know what's been going on.
Thank you Rachel and for the
entire committee at their
particular issues or things
where as part of our meetings
that you would like half hour an
hour presentation from the alley
S. C. on a particular topic the
gives background or history or
something of that sort please
let me know when we'll try and
schedule that in obviously as
we're able to keep up with the
work load of actually hearing
bills as well and so for any
committee member if there are
you you want to kind of bone up
on a particular topic or issue
or get more information for the
entire committee please through
me make sure and I'll lab
enlighten Rachel or her staff to
come and use more presentations
as you are better prepared I
always try to be very cognizant
that you don't want to overlook
people with too much information
because as a teacher we know we
get to budget them new things
are pushing out other things
before they're solidified in
your braids that that's usually
not good education.
Thank you Rachel I appreciate
that the broad overview of.
First yeah very quickly just
take questions from the
committee or Rachel at this
point before we move on to more
some logistics as to how will
run the committee through this
New World.
Mr chairman.
Yes please thank you Mr chairman
put my hand on the virtual so
So yeah.
Well All I what I did there yes
so I move my eyes chairmanship
over to our business tax
business and transportation or
call them six for nine years as
well and one thing that I've
always valued is Rachel's
ability to bring as director LFC
to bring a sort of financial
forecasts as well because she
has such a strong background
coming from LFC to begin with
but I believe that was part of
your career records and
So what are we going to have Mr
chair sort of a brief I'm kind
of where things stand because I.
Mentioned in my introduction
about the you know.
A little over half the budget
state budget it's it's in our
purview and you know and and and
LAFC's Perkins and so I kind of
like to ask a request that we
have as you've done in the past
Mr chairman any sort of a high
level brief on what's going on
because it looked as though we
were going to come into a
disaster then things look better
because we started work on
started driving around for and
then of course with the by
demonstration coming and there
was a huge decision made on day
one I think it's going to
probably have some impact on how
quickly but what are your
thoughts your chair how we can
yes I know that that's going to
be we're going to be able to get
a lot of these I'm not I so I'm
gonna keep the drop on social
workers part a school to try to
get it done but I know that's
going to cost the state twenty
million dollars so you know I'd
like some guidance.
Thank you etcetera but yeah and
I will look it over meetings on
Wednesday probably not possibly
on Friday or next Monday and
some as the finances as we get
started kind of solidify a
little bit of just a similarly a
fifteen minute half hour Max
overview of where the budget is
now in which way is it trending
in and such not overly detailed
but just broad broad stroke and
I'll try and get that scheduled
sometime within the next couple
of meetings.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
it.
Other questions or comments from
committee members.
It's not Rachel thank you very
much I appreciate it.
Senator so.
Excuse me senator Senator.
Cannot get Dr Senator Hickey.
Thank you I'm find myself
confused and funding raising my
hand figure out the second
thank you Mr chairman Rachel
I would like to take advantage
of talking with you and
As much as learning about the
formula that we proposed to form
forward as we get other natural
resources renewable energy aware
that role might be in the future
and then
I need a crash course in what
we're doing and early childhood
early childhood education and
and training for particularly
technical jobs are renewable
energy and what role we
compliance.
And that out of the have my
assistant get in touch with the
set up time I thank you very
much for making that offer thank
you Mr chairman Senator Hickey
my direct extension is four
three three zero in the building
ninety eight six four three
three zero
Have your person give me a call
well thank you very much.
Thank you I see Center though
trying to get my attention and
Center pope I thought I saw your
hand up but it doesn't show up
now we're still okay Senate
Bill.
So those senators told the the.
Webcast right this meeting.
Yes so I would advise just for
security reasons about giving
contact information out
especially for more staff just
for security and safety that
when we try that email verses
shouting it out publicly for
others to contact you okay.
Thank you.
The other comments from
committee members.
If not let's talk some of the
just logistics of running the
Senate Education Committee
through a virtual web process
and we're all new to this and
how it's going to work we're
going to try some things if they
don't work please members tell
me this isn't working and and
and certainly if you've got a
suggestion that would be
incredibly helpful we're going
to try it and see and then we'll
make adjustments along the way
if we need to one of the first
things the meetings will run
Monday Wednesday Friday from
nine till twelve we're gonna try
and start right at nine o'clock
and we got a hard stop at twelve
if we're in the middle of the
bill we have a hard stop at
twelve and I'll trying to
monitor that we don't start a
link the bill at five minutes
till twelve but if we're in the
middle of the bill and it's
running longer than we expected
we'll roll it over to the next
meeting of some of that is so
people are able to go get a
lunch before the afternoon
committee meetings get started
at one o'clock and then also
make sure that we trying to stay
on track in that were fair to
everybody as we go through so
please be aware if you're
carrying bills or other things
that you know that that time
limitation it's worked
relatively well in the past we
were always able to get our
members down to the floor on
time pretty close to on time I
think all of the other
committees we we're actually in
a meeting with the committee
chairs that this committee got
some compliments for having that
stop time that people knew that
we were going to be off for that
doesn't do we need to go all the
way till twelve o'clock if we
get our business done we could
be done before at twelve o'clock
stop trying.
The.
Let me see I'm gonna turn lots
of this over to Mary and to talk
about how we run the committee
where you're going to find I
ours and various other pieces
for it so I'm very and if you'll
come on in trying to tell us
what you need in order to run
the committee effectively so
that we are staying within the
law on getting bills right now
getting them back all of those
kinds of things and what we
think is going to be how to run
the committee smoothly from your
side as we get started so merry
and if you would please.
Okay everyone we're going to
begin first with the R. one
introduction that we did not
have a little bit earlier and
that is our committee assistant
this year which is Kim gaveled
on and Kim you feel just moved
into mine and give them a little
background on you.
Sure thank you so much Merion so
this is my third year working
here at the Senate and that if
you receive an email from me
you'll see my full name with the
extra E. that my mother put into
my purse certificate so it's
Kimberly dot gavel known and
we're figuring it out so
whatever Marian needs all be
sure to follow up quickly for
her and the thank you so much
more and.
Okay Kimberly is going to be
responsible for doing all of our
scanning as far as information
that is going to be I use like
amendments that will come before
the committee so that they'll be
shared on the screens as we're
discussing different bills that
require amendments at some
point.
The first thing I'd like to talk
to you about is the agenda
process agendas are going to be
available at a minimum twenty
four hours in advance of this is
so that they can be put out on
to the legislative website get
to all of the members of the
Senate Education Committee and
their secretaries as well as at
the legislative website they're
also going to do and what's
happening section this year
which I looked out over the
weekend and it's really quite
nice
We've had a few issues with
agendas so just as an FYI from
now on we will be setting
agendas and a WordPerfect
documents.
PDF document and it will also be
copied into the text of each
email that you received from me
so they'll be three
opportunities to see the agenda.
some people have to have the
word perfect document because of
the legislative work that they
do so therefore that will go to
them and I know it can't be read
by law to keep so the PDF to
take care of that do you have
any issues with the genders
please let me know.
One of the things that you will
see this new on the agenda yes
there will be a paragraph at the
bottom of each agenda that
indicates how the
The public and the lobbyist
we'll be able to participate in
the zoom meetings they will each
be sending an email to a email
address that is specific to the
Senate Education Committee and
at that point we will indicate
that we have received your email
and send them an invite to the
next to.
What we're going to ask them to
do though is that when they do
participate that we would like
to know what bills are on are
going to speak on or be yes or
no on but in particular that
they would like to speak on it
so we can make sure that these
people will get an opportunity
to express their opinion.
on the agenda is also we're
going to have to have a cut off
time for public participation
and that is because we.
We need to have that list to be
able to invite all those people
put them in the waiting room and
get ready for them to
participate the next morning it
is what we talked about is that
we will have the cut off time
the day before committee for
instance next Wednesday is our
next committee they're cut off
time will be at three o'clock on
Tuesday afternoon that gives us
an opportunity to have two hours
to put together the list get the
invites out and
Have our time before our resume
authority has to leave at five
PM.
There will always be exceptions
so on Wednesday morning if
somebody or someone you know
needs to be invited to the
committee you can get hold of me
all of you have my email address
telephone numbers etcetera and
we will make sure that those
people are.
In the
Invited to the committee for
that particular day.
This year as senator soul saying
is completely different it's
completely different for me and
for all the staff that is in the
building so it's going to be
challenging but we will be good
about it
first off what you've always
been getting paper in the past
now everything is going to be
online for you bills FIR and
Ellie S. C. analyses will be
online when you pull up the bill
those other items are listed
below it you'll be able to click
on them open them up so what you
probably have to do is have the
Legislative website open on one
side additional meeting open on
the other side and be able to go
back and forth between the two
items.
amendments will be coming to us
we hope to get them as soon as
possible we will not we won't
have a hard
time on those because some of
them do have to come at last
minute so we're going to work on
those and I see Senator Brandt
you have your hand up Sir.
Yes I can wait until you're done
though.
Okay thank you
One of the items about
of amendments and Committee subs
is going to be a work in
progress
really long amendments and then
Committee subs are going to be
something that we're going to
have to just work with as we get
them
if something comes into
committee and it's a on a bill
that we're working on say today
and we get this huge amendment
and or sub for that particular
bill we will probably end up
having to roll that over to the
next meeting to be able to get
the information out to all of
the members so they know what
we're talking about it's almost
impossible to scan a an
amendment or a committee set up
that's many many pages long and
be able to go through them on a
meeting like this but would be
able to electronically give you
a copy prior to the next meeting
and as I say this will be a work
in progress and going to see
what happens with that
particular item.
When we have comment on the
bill.
Our zoom authority McCall mark
hello she will be managing the
people that are in the weight
room.
As we come to each bill she will
be bringing those people in we
will have public comment first.
And the.
Senator souls has discussed this
as we have in the past a two
minute maximum on the comments.
And at mid cap Micaela will be
the person that is
should be keeping a watch and as
senator souls says it's timed
and she will meet those people
at that point and then we'll go
on to the next person for
comments.
After the public comment of the
members will come in and then as
senator Brandis don and I'm sure
a lot of you have been in this
process but raising your hand
the of the zoom.
Which is down in your little
there's a little smiley face
down the bottom it's called
reactions if you click on that
you can find a little hands up.
Or you can do a little I'm okay.
Okay.
And let's see the last.
The I have to tell you is that
because of the zoom meeting.
We will be requiring this year
to do a roll call vote on every
single bill that goes to our
committee it's very difficult
tests to for me to see all of
the members that have said if
everybody's in the affirmative
or and then at end up with a
negative or something so we've
decided that a roll call vote
will be the easiest way and the
most transparent way to our the
public as well as the members
and other people that help us
with the committee.
And I believe Sander Sauls
that's all I have to say unless
someone has something I know
Senator Brandt does and then
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very in and out you
can see why we are so fortunate
to have her and all of her
experience with the the
committee here I think that we
will be smoother than lots of
others Senator Brandt you have a
question Sir well thank you and
I just I just want to say that
I'm so glad that Merion is back
with us you know she really
helps keep this committee going
and keeps this committee
organized a merry and you know
we've always posted what Bill
number were on I think that
would really be a good thing for
us to try to do somehow with the
soon maybe on you have a next to
you or just hold it up something
else where people can see that
was something that Sir souls
initiated and that has really
worked well and I think in this
environment it'll really help
people know what bill we're
working on if they jump in a
little bit later on as soon
meeting so I just want to
mention that that be great to
keep that going the second thing
I'm in my office in Santa Fe but
I I have after I got the second
monitor that I can connect to my
computer and so I'm keeping all
the paperwork on that second
monitor so makes it a lot easier
this is just a suggestion for
you if you can get a hold of the
second monitor ask I. T. the get
you want you can even take home
with you it really is making a
lot easier for me to be able to
help that up there plus it's a
larger monitor than my laptop so
makes it a little easier for me
to read as I get older
And then on the public
participation I'm just trying to
so the.
On the bottom of the agenda is
is going to be the information
on the website and the email
address for them the emails that
I understand that correctly.
Yes
To your first point was and I
did forget to say that but do
you see work more calla is at
this point zoom authority.
She will be going.
Her window will not have not and
will no longer have her picture
which she will be doing is she
will be putting up the Senate
bill that we are working on in
that particular frame so that it
will always be there for
everyone to see so every time we
change she will change that Bill
number until we are finished
with that one and change it
again.
And then as far as the
participation is concerned the
we have our own.
Committee email address which is
SEC at N. M. Legisla- go to the
people will be told to send an
email to that address with the
bill that they want to speak on
we'll get an email and then
through that email process we
will be contacting those people
and telling them that we
received it we will send them an
invite to the next meeting.
And I know you probably don't
know this for other committees
but is that pretty much a
standard that we're gonna use
across all the committees
because it'll get really
confusing for not using a kind
of the same.
Mode across.
Yes that is that we have that
committee chairs are going to be
meeting regularly to try and
standardize things and and you
give me credit for having the
bill number that was Mary Ann's
idea I just nodded my head and
said yes.
And that also is being adopted
by all of the other committees
we got a lot of credit for for a
good idea that will help keep
everybody on track and the
process for going to do public
input is we are trying to
standardize across the various
committees so that it will look
similar and the public will have
to learn seven or eight
different processes for how you
get on and do things we'll have
to check on how that works I've
got a little bit concerns that
somebody pops under the meeting
that morning and wants to be
able to participate and they
weren't in by three o'clock and
how are we going to manage that.
But this is how we're gonna
start out and see how it goes in
so please continue to give
feedback as to how we can make
things move there so that that
would be all want the public to
be able to participate I think
most of us wish more public
actually wants to pay attention
and care what we do up here and
so we're we're certainly trying
to make that along with the the
difficult requirements that
doing a virtual committee up but
soon as well so thank you very
much well that's great night at
I think it's good to have that
standardize is going to be
really important also gonna be
really important then the
committee agendas are out as
soon as possible and circles of
always been really good about
that not playing games of adding
things to the last minute so I
appreciate that as well the last
thing is on the subs a long
amendments Merion I really
appreciate you covering that a
little bit
but I think the key is make sure
the Sanchez no to get those and
early so that we have them
available to us and you know
sometimes we've done amendments
on the fly I think that's going
to be almost impossible as we're
doing this stuff virtually and
it's it's already been confusing
enough when we've done in
committee Merion you and I have
been sitting there is B. being
ranking member trying to get all
the you know the language right
and you know it's it was hard
enough in committee I think it's
very virtually impossible in
this virtual environment excuse
my pun but that's here's just
something that Sanchez gonna
need to know you need to get
that in and not try to walk it
in at the last minute thank you
Sir full appreciate your
leadership on this committee and
hope hope we have a great year
thank you Senator Brandt and
your comments about amendments
if it's something that's a one
or two words it's clear and easy
we may be able to do on the fly
if things get more complicated
than that we may roll that bill
over so that he can get worked
out everybody gets a chance to
just see process and understand
what it'll be and so I'll be
working with Senator renewable
as the ranking member as to
whether this is getting too
complicated can we roll this
over.
either from my side or from from
the Republican side as to yeah
we've of bills getting too
complicated will trying to
manage that.
As we're able to begin again
compliments to merry and she's
the one that had the great idea
this not being adopted across
the center so you're very very
much pleased with that Senator
Kernan I hate to have.
Thank you very thank you Mr
chairman I think the first thing
I don't know if it would be
possible to get more callous
maybe contact so if I'm having
trouble that architecture very
quickly would that be
appropriate or something that we
could do just in case
absolutely.
Case
is wonderful to work with she
she doesn't right role we are B.
or anything when I ask them
questions about how to make it
work so far.
Good to know because I am in
that category secondly we talk
about public participation that
is bills are introduced and and
for instance if I have a bill
that I'm going to present but I
have an expert you know how we
used to bring them up to the
table and sit next to them will
how do we are they also going to
be invited the same way so we
will know who those people are
we just need to let they still
need to send an email to be sure
that they're in the waiting room
correct they'll be treated like
a regular participant that I'm
just going to call them in as I
present the bill is that how
that works.
My understanding is yes they
will be in the waiting room and
so mark tell that will have them
flagged as the expert on your
particular built to then make
them wide when it's appropriate
for them as you as your expert
is how I I think it will work
yes it all.
Just making would be so very in
just when I when I when we
schedule a bill for a Senator
what I will do is I will contact
them you know as a sponsor and
let them know that they need to
provide those people as their
expert witnesses so they don't
have to go to any email will
just contact them initially okay
so that we know that they have
received the email the invite
and that they will be in the
waiting room to be the expert
witness for each sponsor.
Check perfect that's very
helpful just another question on
I'm I'm going to operate with
the a second monitor as well so
but I think I heard you say that
online just like we always can
pull of the bill online with FIR
and the at some of the the
analysts will also be able to
put that on the same website
because that usually different
as any that don't typically I'm
not sure where to go to get all
of that contact information.
Senator the only one that's on
the bill will be the Ellie S. C.
analyses.
Okay and there there were the
FIR is and then at right below
them I believe is where it says
Ellie SAT.
So which website we go to
provide that because normally if
I'm looking up the bill I just
go to the legislative website
noted bill Streicher is had a
different this is a different
site it's it's the same at that
place okay so you're going to
bill finder and you find it that
it has all of the other
information below so for
instance when we get to where of
bill has gone to another
committee before us when you can
bill finally find the bill the
F. I. R. O. B. there even the
committee report will be from
the other committee all of that
information is right there with
the bill okay thank you that's
that's going to be helpful and
Mr chair just curious as a bill
passes out of a Senate
education typically we read the
report out on the floor and then
it moves to the next committee
so all of the bills that we do
before February first we'll just
basically said in committee
until those are read out on the
floor on our floor session I
can't move to the next committee
until they can read out
correctly correct yes that's my
understanding and that we will
have the floor session I and I
think it's Monday the first
we're all of the committees will
beat out all the bills that
they've heard through this week
and then that will get
distribute the next meeting that
will go to work committees
before we come back to read out
were built so rather than do it
on a day to day basis this staff
of about a week's worth of bills
that will get read out at the
same time got my final question
is with regard to making motions
and we know most of the bills
that come through education many
of us are going to be pretty
close an agreement on a lot of
those things and and so that in
the case where maybe there is
So I'm.
Opposition or some it it's going
to be really difficult because I
know often time she'll take a
motion made eight how do we know
who's first in line with their
hands raised to make a motion
because you know I can get a
little sticky not so much in
this committee but across the
board that is a huge part of
what we do is strategically
about these bills so have
Senator.
Senator Kernan are you getting
able emotions in this committee
not in this.
So it.
Which are going today
the house typically we're gonna
try and use the here raising for
normal type things but it
certainly is the type thing that
if you need to interrupt or
break you in for something of
that sort then you would end and
you can try and break in as it
were in a regular meeting we're
going to try and keep it the
hand raising on the normal
processes but certainly when it
gets to where you need to
interrupt for a point of order
or something of that sort those
are incorruptible types of
things that we're gonna try and
manage that with us.
I think thank you Mr chairman
point.
Sure Senator yeah you know I
don't like on that point this
time okay.
I'm not.
I apologize I don't know that
word phrase but all I was going
to say is why don't we just use
the technology and and just you
know if you're you put the word
motion first you were the first
one raise your you know in the
chat function that might be
helpful to you I don't know but
that motion no okay seeing some
I don't I don't
function open are available.
The and so my understanding is
for these meetings we are not to
have the chat and doing the chat
function as available and so I
think it's going to be more
again on normal course of events
raising hand but interrupted
that's what's appropriate.
The New Hampshire raised is
someone watching the order in
which because I know it's okay
okay mark Alice she's.
Works.
Committee secretary and senator
souls were all watching.
Very good that's all I have been
very and thank you it's so good
to see you and all of the
familiar faces Dr Sanchez said
really looking forward to being
part of this all mute myself and
thank.
Thank you when I signed up with
Senator Pinto and then senator
Neville and senator Sankey or do
I have those in backwards order
all orders correct I've been
asking people to quietly amused
themselves when it's their turn
and then I'll lower your hand
your time is is up to.
Okay thank you for that Mr check
and I think that was one of my
questions too about the two
minute warning for so public
comment was how we're was that
would be able to find out where
the dean did they're gonna think
them are we just cut him off.
And senator what I was thinking
is I may get like a little
paper here yeah that I I can
hold up this is fifteen seconds
and then come up with two
minutes yes develop had a
fifteen second warning to kind
of wrap it up in the done
a lot of that is being
consistent with the any of the
speakers that people sometimes
go on and on without the.
Saying a whole lot in so that we
can control some of that.
Maybe we color coded and use a
yellow card to say here your
morning are your yield light is
coming on.
For your stop right either speed
intersection or stop right yes
yes and Marion what committee
room are you in because I don't
know for the rest I'm getting an
echo.
but just from her when she's
talking so light that it.
Anything to do with the
committee there are two
computers and here.
And whenever to are working this
close together it since an echo
it will be fixed because we're
all getting had sent the.
Talking.
We have to figure out how the
work that it should eliminate
that particular item I'm problem
okay with the reverberations
okay because I think they're
gonna be looking for you because
they did that tex I T. that that
we're getting an echo from you
and I know you're capital it
was kind of like I don't know
which room to choose and what
I'm and three eleven but okay
well hopefully someone will come
by and get you situated there
okay we've done all right on
this for two weeks now.
Thank you Mr I think
Senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman just to
clarify I think I heard and I
want to make sure documents will
be prepared and sent to us in a
PDF or word format is did I hear
that are not.
I think I did but I wanna make
sure because I WordPerfect on
apple computers or iPads or
iPhones.
Yes I think that we it's gonna
be sent in three different
formats that work perfect but
then also a PDF I had the same
trouble picking up some of the
things but then also agendas are
actually going to be sent as
part of the text in the in the
text portion of that so they'll
be three ways of getting the
agendas if you want to make sure
on that so that we've we can
read the staff.
I'm sorry just as an FYI
amendments and things like
Committee subs and those kind of
thing they also come in we're
perfect and so we will make sure
that they are done and PDF so
that you could read them as
well.
Of and I know that you said that
they would be available on the
legislative website analysis and
so forth the bill itself what
about in the drop box so we can
use the drop box and have all
this information in the drop box
as well.
Are are we is this committee
using Dropbox I'm not sure I
know.
And.
Right now I don't know how to do
that but we might learn how to
do it if if necessary
we need just a mechanism that's
going to work for people that
they have easy access to it and
so it it might involve us
learning a new skill with if we
need to look this system
currently doesn't work probably
don't need it but I just want to
make sure that
And everything set up to do it
one last comment though you said
you would call role on boats
that's good I'm glad we're doing
that but there may be times I
know there's a rule out there
that we're supposed to have a
picture on.
Prove that we're here on the
other hand once in a while I
granddaughter is doing virtual
school I'm working from home my
band with it's terrible so I
turned my video also I can hear
you and I am probably here but
make sure that I get you know
don't don't count me out so what
I'm saying so let you know once.
Thank you senator and and
specially if you're running an
iPad or a something along side
to do the text.
Thank you senator and I did have
on here that in general we need
to have our cameras on and so if
you could send me a text or
Marianna text that says I'm on I
just got it off because the band
with problems so that we we
don't think that you're off to
the bathroom mirror out of the
the room of the building or
something of that sort we can
manage it.
Thank you that's all have.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman this is a
dress to mark hello
and I heard the Senator Brandt
say have the
another monitor next to a and
that and and that that would
have the bill and so forth
basically if you could get my
email and send me information on
how I can get you to figure out
how to have both my computer
going face to face and have the
bills on the monitor at the same
time.
I know it's doable I just can't
remember how to do it was a long
time certainly I can help walk
you through it I'm sure Marian
I'll send you my private
information just so we don't
have to have all the information
on this but passed specifically
but now I.
No worries.
Okay but we can definitely get
together and work on that
absolutely okay that would be
very helpful and Mr chair if you
mentioned about sending you and
merry and sending you it tax
could you send us that
information as well of the the
phone number whatever it is you
have next year during these
meetings.
Senator absolutely
will we'll get that out to
everyone in text maybe that we
used to always pass notes back
and forth and I think texting
each other may be the the new no
passing of that that we do well
we're live on committee meetings
the only thing I worry about is
if we've got lots of other
people that are suddenly blowing
up our phones for something of
that sort but it hasn't happened
yet so no it's not let's not
jinx it at this point right and
and Mr chair as we were reminded
the other day probably as soon
as the meeting is over eliminate
those tax.
Yes.
I don't see any thank you
Senator Hickey anything else no
thank you Mr.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands up if there's anybody
who's trying to get on the other
hand up that has any questions
or comments.
Representative just a couple of
short things as senator Neville
indicated is legislators as
members of this committee you're
expected to have your picture on
showing that you are in the
committee again in less as
senator Neville indicated you
got brand with problems in which
case make sure that either I
know or mark hello or merry and
so that we know that that's why
you're your picture is not one
of my friends were doing the
meeting is we will have the bill
number will be up on.
The box where Martellus current
picture is so that everyone will
know which bill we are on it is
also my intention between age
bill to essentially announce the
next bill with the next couple
of bills that are coming in
amounts which ones we have just
finished and ask for didn't pan
out so that if somebody is
coming on that they try to get
an update where we are on the
agenda and what's happening on
the agenda particularly if we
have to bounce around the agenda
based on other legislators and
when they're available as
they're trying to get on and off
of our committee to president
Bill so it's my intention to try
to.
Keep everybody informed where we
are and will break in between
bills as we're getting ready for
the next one that that going we
already talked about raising
your hand at the general course
of events if you feel you need
to break in I understand how
that works and we'll manage that
as best we're able to if it
becomes too much of a problem
well we got some other system of
first you making a motion or
something of that nature I don't
foresee it being a problem but
your please you agree to our to
the body and if it's appropriate
to do so otherwise raise your
hand will finance through that
process merry and indicated that
we will do roll call votes are
all grown and whether that's on
an amendment whether that's on
the bill
anything that we have to have a
formal record of those will be
roll call votes as she goes
through impose the role
this quickly and use your cell
indicate your your vote yeah or
nay and then New Jersey self
again mark hello baby actually a
new the new would doing that
automatically or make sure that
it's in the right position
program through
the last one and most people are
very good but just a bit people
try to remember not to get into
a one and one back and forth
with the president or
without going through the chair
most times it is not a problem
but part of what keeps things
focused on the bill and not on
people and personalities is
always going through the chair
so the appropriate is Mr chair
Senator Hickey and continue on
or Mr chair Senator Brandt you
know the answer to your question
is it feels cumbersome in so
it's necessary and then it makes
it much much smoother and so if
we just get in that practice and
have it similarly if we were in
a life meeting I think will work
the the vast most friends I will
invest I need.
To be I will try to help myself
muted as well and I am in my
office with the door closed and
always required so there should
be a lot of background noise on
the my my my are just as I need
to to run the meeting and the
chair.
The final thing that I have is
we have a critically could
committee the people on it are
top notch high quality care
deeply about kids this committee
has a reputation for getting
along in getting the business
done I look forward to that
continuing I need your input as
we're doing this virtual if it's
not working for you in a
particular way and you've got an
idea for how to make things
better please share those ideas
we want this to be smoother than
do the good work of the state of
New Mexico and in this committee
for the children of New Mexico
so please share your ideas for
how we can make things better or
if there's something that just
isn't working how we can fix
that so that it does work I
think that's everybody's goal I
will trying to medicate with you
on a regular basis.
Things are please communicate
back with me and with that is
there anyone else has any
questions comments very and any
other things we need to cover.
Good.
Mark tell anything that you see
as our zoom Meister as far as
helping make things go smoother
or that you've noticed rural
just this meeting where we can
help and make sure that your job
easier.
I'm I would just really insist
on the use of the hand raising
you know like Merion said three
of us are gonna be watching that
Q. so I'll ask you to on mute
just so we don't have a lot of
people talking over each other
and it gets really chaotic and I
don't want anyone to feel like
they're not giving that
opportunity to speak I I really
would want that to happen also
do I guess let your expert
witnesses no about the weight
room that way if they show up to
the zoom room and they're not
immediately and with everybody
they don't leave and then we're
wondering what happened to them
those would probably be the only
thing so just let people know
that the waiting room you might
be lower on the list you might
be waiting there for a long time
please don't leave okay to you
eventually.
Thank you anything from other
committee members.
If not I would we need the most
to do a motion to adjourn a
motion to adjourn.
We motion to adjourn we just
kind of the meeting member done.
Thank you all for participating
and I think this meeting is
going very smoothly for the
first meeting I look forward to
serving with everyone on the
agenda for Wednesday's meeting
will be out later this afternoon
we're gonna jump right into a
bunch of the bills that have
been referred to the committee
already for Senator pope I'm not
gonna have any of my bills on
Wednesday because you're going
to act as the chair when I'm
presenting and I'll give you a a
day of trying to watching what
the process is before I throw
you in jail to running the
meeting is I'm presenting bills
so go out certainly several of
senator storage bills that are
we have many on the thank you
there are a couple of others of
committee members if committee
members did you got deals that
you want to make sure get hurt
on a particular date or yeah
that you have a rush for
whatever reason if I can
accommodate you know I will try
to do so so please let me know
with that thank you everybody I
appreciate the the committee I
get to be the chair of the
wonderful people I get to serve
