We just go through the motions
to.
You want me to introduce the
bill and then right, so let me
tell you this story.
About 3 years ago.
Um, Sherry came to me and and we
talked about online universities
at NMSU.
Uh, I took a risk and we put
10.5 million into the budget for
her to to start the online
university in Nimes.
Um, that in turn.
generated 10.5 million in the
first year.
Uh, the university had some
overhead costs and had to spread
those throughout. Otherwise, the
online system would have made a
profit the very first year, the
number of students that we
gained the first year was in
the.
Uh, 2000 students came online
for the first time, uh, the
university then proceeded the
next year to ask for additional
revenue of 177 million 1.5
million and now it's fully
sustainable on its own.
The story of my journey is
really, I always tell the story
about my kids.
My kids were going to the dual
credit charter school.
They had an option. They were at
UN in.
So you name school in Galup.
He had to take a psych class
online.
And so UNM came to him and said,
you know, the, the site class is
$18,800
in our charter school, in our
charter school, the school
district pays for the dual
credit system.
And so he had a choice of $1800.
They told him he had to come on
campus because he wasn't a UNM
student yet and had to do new
student orientation. He had uh
UNMID UNM email. I had been at
UNM Gallup for for over 3 years
and he starts shopping and he
starts looking.
Uh, and he looks to the, to the
west.
And you had the exact same class
that was transferable at $700
and
I'll let you guess where he
graduated from when he was all
wrapped up with school.
Northern Arizona University.
He went to Emma for a year after
went to could have got another
degree there he didn't, but
that's his choice and, and so
every student since COVID has
now changed the way that they're
going to learn.
Currently right now about 50/50
do online, 50/50 in the
classroom, uh, some of them,
there's some students at Western
that I've heard of that are just
completely online even though
they're on campus, they want
that relationship and that
sport.
And so as we move forward into
this new learning direction, uh,
New Mexico has not followed
suit.
We hire outside companies to
come in and run our online
systems. Uh, they take about 45%
of the profits right off the
top.
They control the whole online
system and so
That's kind of where we're at.
We can build this in New Mexico
and and build a program. It was.
There was a lot of conversation
with presidents. How do we build
this one system so every
university controls their own,
every university has their own
students in every university
gets their own money back.
The only reason we set the
operation in Sherry will give
you her background.
in my shoes because she has the
experience to set this up
statewide.
But as we head down this
journey.
And then it'll take Highlands or
any university. They could give
45% of their profits to an
outside company.
Or they could keep it for
themselves.
And so with that I'll introduce
Sherry and you want to touch
base and then we'll get into
that.
The substitute And Senator, do
you want to move the, we wanna
move the substitute that will
and,
and then it becomes mostly it
looks like just an appropriation
bill and so we can get you out
of here pretty quick then, I
think.
Um
Someone like to make that.
And, uh, Mr. Chair, I move a do
not pass on Senate Bill 492 and
the due pass for discussion
purposes Senate Education
Committee sub for Senate Bill
492.231.
331.2.
Right.
Thank you. So,
Yeah
And, and briefly because you
know we've got lots of other
things on the agenda and stuff,
but
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, members of
the committee, essentially what
we're looking to do is to work
with the 7 university presidents
and collaboration to be able to
build a hub that will benefit
all of New Mexico, so that as we
are building and growing or
rising together, um, and unless
you could have easily just came
into this and said we will take
the market share and move this
forward, um, but that is not in
the best interest of our state,
so really focusing on working
with in collaboration focusing
on uh and working with the.
uh,
university presidents, uh, and
then building this, creating
metrics for this to create a
self-sustaining, uh, hub for our
state.
Uh, the, the last thing that um
I do wanna mention is uh to what
Senator Munoz said is as far as
my background, I did help build
uh southern New Hampshire
University, specifically the
business programs, so I also
know what some of those mega
universities are looking at as
they come into our state,
because New Mexico is a a a
state where almost every single
mega university is trying to get
their students, um, I did it, I
know how the formula works, so
you not only have
No, you have Maryland Global,
you have a number of other ones,
um, especially ASU that are
trying to um take our students
from our state. Thank you.
Um
I think we go out to the
audience now, those in support,
and just show hands and in
opposition.
Some of the ones supporters like
to come up, you have up to 2
minutes.
Mark, go ahead.
The committee Mark Sedro with
the New Mexico Council of
University Press. I stand and
support we stand in support of
this substitute the 7
presidents, the 7 universities
have been working together since
December. We discussed this,
bringing folks within the
institutions together to decide
how we're going to, um, how we
may work with this preparation
you to be able to put the
established in New Mexico online
hub, work with the individual
institutions, help support what
they're doing currently with
online, for example, Eastern
Mexico University a lot with
online.
Then house not using an external
OPM.
in New Mexico, all a little bit
different when it comes to
highlands and western and so on.
I'll be working specifically
with these individual
institutions and collaboration
as a group of presidents coming
together, working with Doctor
Coleman, help move this forward
to help us. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, Mark.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I'm Mike Foley with
the University of New Mexico.
I'd like to thank the sponsor
for working with our leaders,
we're working with our
association, and for all the
reasons stated UNM supports
this. Thank you.
Chairman and members of the
committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for Mexico
Highlands University on behalf
of President Neil Wolf, we are
excited to participate in this
program and we fully.
Thank you, and we have one
online, Amy trailer.
Hi, I wanted to uh support this
bill, um as someone who works in
public schools in dual credit.
This will make a fantastic
opportunity for our K-12
students across the state to be
able to access um courses taught
from anywhere in New Mexico,
which is a wonderful boon for
both the universities and for
our students. Thank you for this
bill.
Thank you. Again, is there
anyone in opposition?
Anyone, no one online in
opposition to questions from the
committee.
The pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Senator.
For bringing this just, just a
quick question on this online
hub. Are we, are we talking
about developing like a
blackboard or canvas just of our
own or just?
You could kind of help me with.
And what
Mr. Chair, um, uh, it, no, it's
a, every institution, they're
academic components will remain
within their universities, that
is, is critical, um, for the
faculty pieces for the
accreditation piece for NC Sara
that allows us to do online, so
essentially what we would be
doing is helping there's
different services that would be
offered, but it will be
dependent upon what the needs of
the universities are not every
institutional need the exact
same thing, so for instance,
Northern.
Northern may need a whole suite
of of support, so for instance,
they may need someone to be able
to uh do marketing, they need
someone to be able to help with
persistence and retention. Those
are all different uh texts, but
there's also staffing that comes
with that, that the hub would
support as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Other questions, send
a result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator Munoz.
Uh, I know that this.
Committee substitute is diff a
lot different than your original
bill.
But is this still going to be a
recurring expense?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, once we
stand up the university, it'll
be a 3-year recurring expense to
stand it up.
Um, just like I said in the
beginning, you know, in the
first year of intimate shoe,
they made 10.5 million on the 3
on the.
3000 students.
But there is operational costs,
so we're going to stand this up
across the board. Northern is a
small school that needs a lot of
help.
And, and so they may need a
little more time, but if they
gain students in the capacity we
think they're going to gain,
that they'll be profitable by
year 3 and may not need state
support.
Thank you for that response, Mr.
Chairman, and I am seeing the
main difference between.
Your committee substitute in the
original bill.
go back and double check this,
OK? If you, if you go back to
the bill, you're just gonna
confuse yourself. We've done
this modeling before, uh, with
MSU and, and so the substitute
is a direct appropriation to in
a global, which will operate it
or set it up for the entire
state.
Uh, if you go keep going back,
you're gonna, you're gonna get
really confused between the
buildings.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, my question
was going to be until you made
your last remark all the shells
have been taken out and I'm glad
to see that.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Minos
um.
There was one question I had in
here about how you're.
Committee substitute will
affect.
Or was it uh
Just one moment.
OK.
In regard to Mr. Chairman and
Senator Munnoz San Juan College
in Central New Mexico Community
College in Santa Fe Community
College. It seems like they
might have.
San Juan is stating that they do
not need a third party program
management provider.
And then Central New Mexico is
saying they have a robust
framework.
So I'm kind of concerned why,
why are they stating that not
what, not necessarily wanting to
be a part of imme she was
wanting to do well, it's not an
inim issue, it's a statewide
program, Mr. Chair and Senator,
so community colleges are on
their own mission. They're more
local, more people coming to the
campus, a welding training basic
classes getting your associates
and moving forward.
Well, they're those students
will be eligible to take these
online classes. That is not the
goal of the mission of the
community college. It's not to
create online systems in a
community college because they
want those kids in the classroom
in the building and getting that
experience, um, they're
eligible like kids in dual
credit went to community
college.
I will tell you one thing that's
the most scary factor to me in,
and why this is happening.
ASU between Thanksgiving and
Christmas holiday came into.
to gallop.
And went to schools, private
Christian schools, public
schools, and sign students up
for ASU online high school.
And now they're going to begin
to start taking those high
school students away from us.
They guaranteed you.
Uh, acceptance into ASU.
As long as you grade met your
grades and ASU online system.
And so when you start to see
that in the system on a border
town. ASU is one of the largest.
Universities that has this, they
are in a massive growth and so
if we do not start to invest and
start changing the online
system. We don't really have an
online system in Mexico and
Mission Global.
We're, we're gonna lose, we're
gonna lose high school students,
we're gonna start losing that.
And Mr. Chairman Senatormenos, I
totally agree with you on that.
Uh, on the
If IR
Under some of the
Impacts that it's gonna have to
stay.
This is coming out of the Grow
program fund, is that correct?
Mr. Chair and center that will
be correct.
And can you tell me how much
money is in that grow program
right now.
Uh, currently I believe there's
about 500 million set aside and
grow right now that.
hasn't been appropriated that's
uh gonna be appropriated in
in-house bill too.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and Senator
Munoz.
In light of the volatility of
the oil and gas production in
our state and everything that's
fixing to happen to it, I'm
afraid.
Uh, this program that y'all are
requesting right now for the 3
years.
I, is it going to be safe with
money out of the growth fund?
Is it um Mr. Chenson safe or
saved.
Safe.
See, yes.
I mean, we're gonna, we're going
to set aside 3 years' worth of
appropriation, which we're doing
everything and grow and say, OK,
here's 3 years, here's the
stability, and here's the time
that we think you're gonna need
to set it up.
Mr. Chairman'sentinos, I agree
with what you're saying as far
as the online students are, that
is a big concern right now, and
I do.
Like that the money is going to
be available through the growth
fund, Mr. Chairman, thank you
very much, Senator Munoz, thank
you.
Thank you. Other comments?
Yeah, just a, a comment or two
is I appreciate the, the
Substitute bill I had concerns
prior to that, um, and concerns
as to whether this was either a
grab by New Mexico State to
bring in all the online stuff or
was other universities taking
from what New Mexico State had
set up.
Had a great conversation with uh
the executive director of Cup
this morning that this really is
cooperation among all of the
universities to make this work
and so very much in support of
it. And so thank you for that
work and, and making the, just
the funding so that we can get
this moving. Thank you, Senator
Pope, Mr. Chair, I move, uh, do
pass on Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 492.
We have a motion seconded by
Senator Ramos, if you'll call
the roll, please.
Center boom
Cinderel
Sinder Figueroa, yes, sender
Hickey.
Yes
Novainer Thornton.
Yes.
Yes.
Thornton
Senator Pope. Yes.
tender soul. Yes. OK. So you
have a new pass senator. Thank
you. I, I just wanted to clarify
one thing so people will know
too. So if Highlands, which
focuses on social work, right?
That will be their tranche and
bucket. So if you want to take
an online course, you're gonna
get pushed in that direction,
right? It's not going to be in a
you will take everything that
everybody else has. If there's a
specificity in in the university
that they want to keep
entrenched, they're gonna keep
that.
We're not saying that we're just
gonna water down everything, let
those focused.
Degrees be at those universities
and we're going to push you to
that university, so.
Just want to say that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, next up, Senator Campos, and
you've got 3 of them, you can
decide which order you would
like to do those in, please,
sir. Just let us know.
That
But I hear we're gonna start
with Senate Bill 494.
Which is the rural school
defibrillator training.
of the Senate Education
Committee. Yes, you're correct,
if we could, we'd like to start
with Senate Bill 494.
Uh, and, uh, in essence, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Senate Bill 494, the
rural school defibrillator
training.
Uh, act with appropriate 150,000
from the government and
opportunity program funder, if
you will, the growth fund to the
public education department for
the purpose of contracting with
the national organization that
produces guidelines, uh, if you
will, for everything to deal
with uh resuscitation cardiac
care and also to provide, if you
will, the units, uh, within
schools and just very quickly
and then I'm going to defer to
uh my expert with me. He'll
identify himself and make a
brief statement. In essence.
What we're looking at is to go
ahead and set up pilot programs.
Specific as an example to uh
rural and frontier New Mexico,
I'm gonna use an example in the
Springer area if something was
to happen at the uh school there
in the community. It takes about
45 minutes to an hour for an EMT
or an ambulance to get there.
And the whole point with all
this is to fully equip, if you
will, if this is to work, the
training, and if you will, the
equipment so that if anything
does happen whenever there is
going to be, uh, any type of uh
uh situation that.
occurs where uh a defibrillator
would be needed, it would be
trained and Mr. Chair, members
of the Senate Education
Committee, again deferred to my
expert. He'll identify himself
and make a brief statement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes,
sir, please.
Um
Miss Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Mahesh
Sita of the American Heart
Association, so this is part of
a broader.
plans to train, you know, school
officials in cardiac emergency
response plan that involves, you
know, training in CPR AEDs and,
you know, every minute that's
not rendered CPR to a victim of
cardiac arrest you.
The chances of survival goes
down by 10%. So we, we believe
this is, this is good,
especially in rural areas where
the response, EMS response times
are.
longer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee and then
just in closing, I would like to
indicate for many years I've
been asking that you've had
defibrillators here in the uh in
the Capitol and uh we're not at
that level yet, but uh these
definitely do save lives. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee were
available for questions.
Thank you, out to the audience,
just a quick show of hands and
support.
In opposition
One supporter opposition, so
questions from the committee.
There's a chair. I move a do
pass on.
Senator, you have a question?
Yes, ma'am, please go ahead, Mr.
Chairman, thank you very much,
Senator Campos, I understand the
importance of this bill right
here.
How is this?
still going
How do you intend to get out to
the rural school areas to do
the.
And, and could I ask you to move
if your microphone will move
closer. I'm having a hard time
hearing you guys. They're
stationary. OK,
never mind stationary, so it's
difficult, but we'll move
forward as best we can. Thank
you.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I think,
uh, you know, the there are
established guidelines, uh,
evidence-based guidelines that
we will be working with school
districts and you know and
establishing, you know, cardiac
emergency response plans, and
part of that would be training
them in CPR.
How to use AEDs.
you know, basic, uh, you know,
uh, skills.
Before EMS arrives.
OK, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Compos and Mr. I don't know if
I'm pronouncing your name right,
my my.
My, OK.
Oh, whenever you say you'll be
going.
To the schools to do the
training, will it start at the
superintendent's office with the
principals from the various
schools there or will you go to
each individual school in our
more rural areas and I'm.
Assuming those rural areas.
Are not those that are included
in.
Albuquerque Public Schools Las
Cruces public schools and
probably Santa Fe school, so
that leaves a big area of our
state is this money that you're
going to have appropriated if
this bill passes.
Will that be enough to get this
covered to save a life.
I mean, this, you're asking for
150,000.
And it's gonna go to the PED for
expenditure.
Contract with the national
organization.
So my concern is, is that going
to be enough for this important
step on saving.
And sufficiently.
chair, Senator is out, I think,
uh, initially we're looking at
high schools.
And, you know, we have about.
Excluding, you know.
Albuquerque and some of the
bigger.
Cities
Maybe
Less than 100.
high schools.
And you know, a basic AED cost
about 1200 to 1500.
the, the
No.
operations in this bill should
cover.
You know, training and EEDs.
And, and, and in terms to answer
your question, like, you know
this this.
You know, the schools have the
flexibility to decide.
You know, who will be part of
the cardiac emergency response
plan.
can incorporate into their
existing medical plan or school
safety plan.
And it could be anyone from a
security guard, a coach.
And a school nurse.
Um, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Compos and your expert witness
there.
I see that this money is going
to be coming out of the growth
fund and you just heard probably
while you were waiting here.
That, uh
Senator
Munoz is also asking for now I
can't remember where I wrote
down the number at, but his
money is going to be coming out
of the growth fund too.
Is this going to be, let me look
here, it's going to be a
recurring, I'm seeing on the FIR
it's going to be a recurring.
Can you
make sure that this how how many
years do you anticipate this
going on?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senatori, uh,
it's gonna be a, a 3 year. It'll
be the growth fund and 150,000
is to use this more as a pilot
program. We know that it'll take
quite a bit more in terms of the
resources needed, but as an
example, uh, possibly Floyd
Vaughan, uh, Anton Chico, uh,
Maxwell, some of these small
school districts where they
don't have a direct access or
quick access, if you will, to
the uh EMT services.
For the quick response time then
within the school districts uh
then the defibrillator and the
training that would occur would
be that that community is able
to go ahead and respond in case
someone does have, if you will,
a uh pulmonary episode. Thank
you very much and uh uh Mr.
Chair, uh, Senator Rizel.
Mr. Chairman, I do feel like
this is a very important
training that does need to
happen to help save lives in
our.
More rural areas than you're
exactly right, uh, I have a
school in my district that it
is.
Augustine.
It is 90 some odd miles away
from the closest hospital.
So I understand the importance
of it. My concern is I want to
make sure that that money in the
growth fund.
Mr.
Chair, uh,
Senator, uh, it, it would at
least at this point as we deal
with it, there's 500 million
that is uh uh gonna be available
for different uh programs, and
this is part of the resource
that we would be using, uh, in
the way we have it set up, it
would be for uh for a 3-year
period.
Again, I want to, Mr. Chair,
just very quickly, Senator Riel,
we know that we're having the
discussion in terms of the
changes at the national level.
And then, of course, how those
possibly could affect us here at
the state level, so we're going
to be studying that uh during
the interim as well. Thank you
very much, man, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Iso.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Compos,
thank you very much for your
responses. That's all I yield.
Thank you and um just something
that you had indicated on uh
line 19 of the bill, it says the
expenditure is only for 2026. It
does not show it for being over
3 years. So, so again, uh, Mr.
Chair, as we deal with it with
the growth fund as this works as
a pilot program, the intent is,
and if you take a look at uh
some of the FIR information. Uh,
it would be uh recurring. So
that would go ahead and assist,
if you will, over a 3-year
period. But again, I
understand that it's not stated
that way in the bill, but again
with the growth fund as we deal
with it, that seems to be, if
you will, the mechanism that
we're using over a period of 1
to 3 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, Senator Figueroa, Mr. Chair,
that was going to be my comment
that we make an amendment to say
expenditure in fiscal years 2026
through 2028 to make sure you
have those 3 years.
To expend it.
If the sponsor doesn't think
it's necessary, but I think we
could amend it here for you, Mr.
Chair, Senator Figueroa, it's a
great amendment, uh, again,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
for the, for the catch and
Senator Figueroa, uh, it'd be
the will of the committee that
would be something that we'd
entertain as a friendly
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, and I guess I would ask, do
we need to then triple the
amount.
Is this the amount needed for
one year, and if we're doing it
over 3 years, it would need to
be tripled. They're getting more
complicated than you, I would, I
would leave that to the sponsor
to decide if that's what he
wants to ask for. I, I can make
the amendment.
For the language change on 9919
and line 24.
Um
But I would ask the sponsor, do
you want to triple the amount.
Mr. Chair, Senator Fierra, I
truly appreciate.
It it seems like as we deal with
all these things that
People that we deal with just
they they keep.
Coming up with more and more
resources to help with their
needs. I really appreciate that,
Mr. Chair, Senator Figueroa, I
consider both of them to be a
friendly amendment. Senator.
OK, Mr. Chair, then the
amendment will be online 16.
Strike $150,000.
And change it to 4050.
100 $0.
Change the uh numerical in
parentheses.
$450,000.
Then line 19.
the word year uh change it to
years.
And it insert through 2028.
After 2026.
And then in line 24, strike
2026.
And insert in lieu thereof, 202.
do you have that down right?
Mitty, are you, everybody follow
track that OK?
OK.
And then Mr. Chair, I have one
question actually about the bill
which it says PD will contract
with a national organization
that publishes official
guidelines, let's get the
amendment passed first.
Very good. Is there a second on
the amendment?
Seconded by Senator Ramos, is
there any opposition to the
amendment, seeing no opposition,
now we are amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, my, my question is, is do we
know what national organization
this is already or is this an
RFP process, are there multiple
national organizations that
publish official guidelines or
is this an appropriation for a
specific organization.
Uh
My sister, uh, Senator Figora, I
think uh.
From AHA we, we don't do dormant
contracts we provide.
Guidance
And, and these are all.
Uh, established by American
Heart Association, American
College of Cardiology.
And other medical societies that
have come up with the with the
guidelines. So these guidelines
are.
You know, open source, they're
available.
Uh, we can also provide training
free of.
Uh
Charge
And, you know, 80s in terms of.
Buying them, I mean, they, they
could be bought through.
State purchasing or through.
Mhm.
Or a
And Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Figueroa, if I may go through
the PED, there would be a proper
procurement process, so there is
not one specific company in mind
in terms of uh what this would
directly affect at this point.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
And I see the PED people nodding
their heads.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, that was
my last question.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
senator, just
One quick question I guess for
clarification, um.
I
It's 450,000. I'm appreciate the
amendment because I thought this
was not enough money for what
you're trying to do, but I want
to make sure I understand, is,
are these automated external
defibrillators, they required in
schools right now.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Thornton, I mean, right.
Today, no.
But
We, we have a legislation.
Working in the house that
requires all high schools in
year one.
And here too, like all other
schools.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair, so
Right now they're not in school.
So with the training that you're
providing, are you gonna be also
be providing these AEDs as part
of the training, and are you
going to be leading those with
the schools that part of the
cost of this?
Uh
Mr. Chairman, Senator Thornton,
yes.
OK. So, and you had mentioned
earlier if I heard you
correctly, that, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, that I had
And it was gonna be about $1200
to $1500 per device. Is that, is
that what's, I hear you
correctly, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thornton, I mean, that's the
basic one, and they last
anywhere from
5 to 8 years.
And, and
All you have to do is like
maintenance, change the pads,
change the batteries, and they
cost about
$100 a year.
For the change for the change.
So again, I'm just doing the
math here if if we're looking at
150K at about, let's just say
1500 per we're looking at about
100 schools a year.
And so, uh, and rural schools,
so I'm assuming we're talking
about, so.
I thought we'd probably need
more than just 100 schools to
hit all of New Mexico. So that,
that was the concern and and I'm
glad uh Senator Figueroa added
the additional.
Years and budget to the bill so
that we could uh
cover more schools, but thank
you for the clarification. That
was all I had. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Mr. Cherry move we do pass on
Senate Bill 494 amended.
Of a motion for due pass is
there a second.
by Senator Thornton, if you'll
call the roll, please.
Sender boom.
Cinderel
Cinder Figueroa
Yes, sender Hickey.
Senra Nova Center Ramos, Senator
Thornton.
Yes. Senator Pope. Yes, Cinder
souls. Yes, you have a due pass.
if we could go now to Senate
Bill 493.
That would be the next one.
center, please go ahead, uh.
K A N W radio station. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Education Committee.
Uh, so in essence, in terms of
um
Senate Bill 493, uh it
appropriates 500,000.
In a recurring expense to the
grow uh program fund and uh with
that what I'm gonna do is I have
an expert with me. I'm going to
go and ask him to identify
himself and explain exactly what
the resources would be used for.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the Senate Education
Committee.
Yes, if you would please, is
mostly a straight up
appropriation, but yes, sir.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Michael Brasher.
I'm the general manager of KANW
in Albuquerque and the request
is for funding to create uh uh
our partnership with the
Mountain West News Bureau. The
news bureau was formed because
stations in the middle portion
of the United States received
very little.
Actual news coverage because
some of them are smaller
stations, uh, coverage of
important news events that were
going on.
And so they've formed a group of
stations in this mountain west
network and uh.
They're sharing information in
the region and also sharing
information with National Public
Radio as well.
And in New Mexico, we would have
a reporters reporting for the
more rural, more isolated.
Areas that currently don't have
any reporters covering news, and
of course they would cover news
in the major urban areas they
would cover the state of New
Mexico.
And as such we would become one
of the stations in this region
reporting from New Mexico for
this mountain news bureau.
Or distribution with other
stations in the region and
distributions.
Or uh
The National Public Radio if
they choose, chose to.
Running one of the news stories,
so the uh request is for uh
funding for acquisition of some
equipment and to to make the.
Reporter available to serve the
area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
Senate Education Committee were
available for questions.
Thank you. First out the
audience, those in support.
You were in opposition.
No one in support or opposition
online. Questions from the
committee.
The result
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, Senator Campos, I have
a question. Why didn't this go
through your capital outlay
request. Mr. Chair, uh, senator
is he.
In terms of the capital of a
request, uh, that'll be coming
up with the next bill.
And the reason for this one not
going through that because this
is going to go ahead and be for
Personnel in order to go ahead
and offer, if you will, uh.
The development of uh the
stories that.
are affecting rural and frontier
New Mexico.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Riel.
Thank you, Senator Campos and
Mr. Chairman, Senator Compos, I
am reading here on the analysis.
That KANW is owned and operated
by the Albuquerque Public
Schools. Is that correct? That
is correct. It's owned and
operated by the Board of
Education.
And so Mr. Chairman and Senator
and expert witness, why isn't
the school paying for that if
they owned that.
Yeah
Um, Mr. Chairman, and Senator,
thank you for the question. The,
this, this is going to be an
extra expense for the radio
station that that we and we
don't frankly have the money. We
received some funding from the
corporation for Public
Broadcasting, but most of the
money for the operation of the
station and to provide this
service, we have to raise our
ourselves.
And so to become a member of
this news organization and and
active constructive participant
in that news organization. We
need to come up with the money
to.
To a higher reporters and and.
And uh
Provide content for the, for the
news network and and so that's
the.
And by the way, it does have an
informational component and it
does have an educational
component, so I understand the
question, but um.
This goes a little bit beyond
what what we've been able to
provide in the past and the fact
that we have to do the
fundraising ourselves.
This goes a little bit beyond
what we would be able to to
raise.
Chairman and.
Senator.
Compass and your expert witness,
I, I'm seeing what y'all do
under here under significant
issues on the FIR.
And
You're talking about the NPR
which.
EMU
In Proteus, Desro broadcast
through the NPR.
But you also have on here
British Broadcasting
Corporation.
Classical music for Sunday
through KANW.
Uh, economics radio.
Livewire Marketplace Mor
reports.
Um
Report from Santa Fe has all
sorts of different things on
here, the New York Times, The
Daily.
So if you're having to hire
additional person ill.
How has it been operating in the
past if you did not have this
funding that you're asking for.
The station acquires the
programming that you've
mentioned these uh programs come
from National Public Radio and
the other major public radio
networks.
And we do that in a what is
called a community service
grant, which comes from the
corporation for Public
Broadcasting, and that's how
we've been able to acquire uh
those some of those programs.
Mostly on our main channel, we
operate 2 stations actually.
Uh, one is a sub carrier of our
main channel, uh.
A lot of what we do is New
Mexico.
Um,
Hispanic music.
So these programs are paid for.
In large part by a federal grant
from the corporation for public.
Broadcasting.
But Mr. Chairman, I guess my, my
question still remains though,
Senator Compos.
Basically what it breaks down to
is your you want money
appropriated.
For KAE and W to purchase
equipment and to add resources.
I, I'm kind of curious with
everything that I'm reading
right through here.
And everything that you do right
now and then you're saying it,
it's the Hispanic music as well
or or um.
Reports, I suppose.
How much more are you going to
be adding on to that and why are
you not getting help for this?
The radio station, uh, please
make sure and come through the
chair each time.
Thank you, so I'm I'm very
sorry, Mr. Chairman.
I, I know better.
I, or I should, um.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, the,
uh,
Um
Hunting for for KANW, um.
is in terms of providing a
facility, they do not provide
direct operational support for
the radio station.
And so we raise, we raise the
funds.
Uh, for most of, uh, of the
programming and
And do receive uh community
service grants that grant from
the corporation for public
broadcasting and
In
Many of the radio stations
around the country. This is how
the public radio stations are
funded. OK, and
Mr. Chairman, I am looking at
what I just.
Is able to pull up and
Who you do receive broadcasts
from and.
Oh, I also see one that Mountain
West News Bureau is a
collaboration between Boise
State, uh, Colorado.
KUNM in New Mexico, are you not
utilizing that?
and we would be a part, a full
partner with the mountain
state's news network.
So we, we would actually be a
full partner. We do receive a
very, very small grant from the
uh National Public Radio, Mr.
Chairman, in, in the uh
In the amount of uh $15,000.
Which would not come close to
covering the expenses.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess that
my concern here with KANW
versus.
The one that's
Located in talus.
the funding for the one in comes
through gifts and donations and
that type of stuff in here we're
asking for.
big amount of money.
$500,000 to be exact.
Uh, to update it with through
equipment and it is owned by the
Albuquerque Public, the largest.
School system in our state.
And, but you do offer a 4 week
self-paced online introductive
course on radio broadcasting.
Can you tell me what the
attendance of that
Senator, thank you for the
question. The station offers a a
radio course in in.
Introduction to radio
broadcasting.
The students
come to the station. They
trained at the station and
eventually serve as the
volunteer staff. The radio
station has a staff of uh of 3
people at this point.
Tempting to hire a 4th person,
so we have a very small staff.
But we were the
The students in this uh.
Introductory class eventually
stay on and serve as volunteers
and as a result of that, many of
them.
wind up working at
Many of the stations around the
state of New Mexico.
OK.
And I see that it would Mr.
Chairman, I see that it would be
a benefit to the students that
do want to get into
broadcasting. I do understand
that.
But I don't
Uh, you have not satisfied my
question over to.
Mr. Chairman, if
Uh, senator, if you're.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
thank you very much.
Our hope is that we would be
able to
For instance, uh, Senator Pope
when we broadcast to Martin
Luther King thing to get that on
the air was just an incredible
project. Our hope is that we can
acquire equipment that would
Make it possible for us to
broadcast from remote, very
isolated locations around the
state of New Mexico. And so
that's some of the equipment
that we would be buying.
To, to make those
interconnections plus the
interconnection would be that we
would make the programming
available to eastern New
Mexico's Portales radio station
KKENW and it would be available
to
The New Mexico State radio
station KRWG if they chose to
use some of the news stories
that were were originated.
From this network
OK, I guess that's kind of
confusing me, Mr. Chairman and
it seems to me like you are
already KENW is.
Um
I'm seeing that you're only uh
is is this just a one time
appropriation.
The network
Mm
The network is just getting
started at this at this point.
There would be some.
Ongoing expenses.
In years to come.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, Senator
Campos, I'm reading on the FIR
that this is a recurring
expense.
So that brings to mind.
Why are the other NPR's
throughout our state that might
be in affiliation with other
universities, why aren't they up
here asking for money too, so
that does give me concern.
So Mr. Chairman, with that, I
will end my questions. Thank you
very much for your responses.
Thank you, Senator Ramos.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thanks for
bringing this bill in front of
us today.
I, I guess my big question is,
since these are public funds,
How do you manage?
The messages coming out of
A public funded radio when it
comes to.
Progressive, conservative radio.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Ramos, a
very good question.
We have a genuine commitment.
balance and fairness in what we
do on the air.
And that's, and that's what we
go by.
And we have reporters who
actually do fact-based
reporting.
So we don't have a particular.
We don't have a particular.
Ideology we
We, uh
Just do our part, do our very
best to be very balanced and
very fairer in what we do on the
air.
Mr. Chair and the senator, so
what kind of management tool do
you have to make sure that
there's an equal representation
on
The different values.
Mr.
We
Winter
and uh
and Senator Ramos, we uh.
Use the balanced balance tool
that that uh many news networks
use of.
Reviewing and having editors
review stories before they hit
the air. The stories that.
That are produced for the
mountain network, go to an
editor who would be reviewing
all the stories before they're
presented on the air.
So, Mr. Chair and uh senator,
so.
How is there any kind of a
report that you put out on
The balance at this time, Mr.
Chan?
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Ramos, there
isn't a report that we put out,
but our biggest report is from
our listeners and the general
public.
And comments that we received
from the general public.
On
They're their concerns and.
And their interest, frankly.
Yeah, are we addressing the
problems, the needs and concerns
of all people, not not just a
particular segment of of the
listening audience and Mr.
Chair, Senator, I, I think
that's very important.
Because we're gonna be utilizing
public funds.
There should be an equal
balance.
In on this radio station.
And of course, that's, that's
uh.
Uh, I, I, that's the way I feel
because when we use public funds
when, for instance, when we pay
our our people here that are our
assistants, they've got to
remain neutral and, and not use
politics and during during the
working area, what have you.
So, whenever we're utilizing
public funds, I really feel that
we need to make sure that that
balance is there, especially on
a radio station like this. Thank
you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Other questions?
have
One question, it says um.
The money is to be used for.
Equipment
And other resources. What
percentage for equipment, how
much is for equipment, how much
is for other.
Miss Chairman, um.
I would say probably about 60 or
70% is for equipment.
Because the interconnection
equipment is.
is pretty expensive and the
origination equipment and the
recording equipment and the
editing facilities are pretty
expensive.
Thank you and the reason I ask
is I know my public radio
station down in Las Cruces, KRWG
regularly asks for capital money
or equipment upgrades and and
uses. Why is this not going
through the capital process or
the equipment portion. I
understand the operational, you
can't use capital money for
that, but why was there not a a
capital request of the sponsor
or others.
Miss Chairman,
And
Part of that comes in the next
item.
Where we
Where we talk about uh.
Uh, KRWG uh radio and television
and.
And
And
One of the problems was that.
Through the federal government,
we used to have what was called
an equipment replacement fund,
it was from the Department of
Commerce, their public
telecommunications facilities
program.
And that program went away,
maybe it's sunset and I'm not
sure why it went away, but care
WG in particular.
A lot of very expensive
transmitter and they bought some
new digital equipment for
digital broadcasting, and they
use some of the funds for that.
And of course, that money went
away, it's no longer available.
I understand that was the
federal money, but we have state
capital money that they
regularly, I don't think it was
on my list this time, but I know
many other times the capital
money we get as legislators,
they had asked for and I had
supported, why was this not
asked for through the New Mexico
capital outlay process, and that
may be more for senator.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee in terms of
that, uh, yes, we have a
requested, if you will, and
these are taxpayer dollars and
so that's the way I treat them
as we deal with it, uh, and in
years past as an example with uh
uh KENW with uh uh OK, NW with
KNME. I've I've always supported
public radio, public television,
and so within that oftentimes
when we deal specifically with
non-recurring.
capital needs, uh, that comes in
that form with this specific
piece, uh, this is taking, if
you will, uh, capital resources
and I know the question, but I'm
gonna just kind of move in real
quick. So in terms of that, we
have the capital needs in order
to go ahead and ensure that
If uh staff is hired or uh
reporters are utilized that they
do have the equipment to go out
into the field and so within
that, this is part of that, but
uh in terms of the capital
piece, it has been requested in
the form of two of these bills
or legislation and the second
piece is that uh with capital
resources that thanks to the
taxpayers that I have, uh,
access to, um, we are looking to
go ahead and fund the capital
needs.
Here and also in in the
forthcoming bill if these bills
are to pass. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, and I
understand, but when it's funded
this way out of general fund
money instead of out of capital
money that reduces the general
fund money for other kinds of
programs when it seems like
clearly some of this is more
capital money that should have
been funded through that
mechanism. That was why my
question is to what percent that
sounds like about 300,000 should
have been funded out of capital
through, and if this is in
Albuquerque through various
legislators, they're putting
some money in.
And that this request should
have been closer to 200,000 for
the operational money. Um, am I
misunderstanding, you're not
misunderstanding as we deal with
it and those that know me, I
look for resources everywhere
and anywhere in order to go
ahead and uh support and to help
people. So within that, if as an
example of this was not to go
through. We would continue to go
ahead and look for resources
through the non-recurring
capital dollars that could be
available, not to say that they
were going to be specific.
amounts again we're still
searching for the resources and
now in the final weeks, this is
uh what, what we're doing
through this process. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair.
OK, thank you. Other questions?
A lot of motion, Senator.
with
We have a motion for a do not
pass, um, wanna make sure people
understand if that motion were
to go through, then this bill
would die in here in committee
and not be able to be
resurrected, where a tabling
motion would be able to be
resurrected, and I believe I
explained that properly. We have
a motion for a do not pass. Is
there a second?
Seconded by Senator Thornton.
You'll call the roll please, on
a do not pass motion.
In boom
And.
No.
Center Hickey. Cinnava no.
Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton
Yes.
Pope. No. Cinder souls. No.
So the do not pass motion does
does not pass this gets really
complicated trying to explain,
as there are separate modes,
different modeen Hickey.
Motion for a
due passed by Senator Pope, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Senator, Senator Boone.
Yes
cell
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes. Sider Hickey. Ciner Nova.
Yes. Center Ramos.
No.
Sir Thornton.
Sinder Pope, yes.
And back to Cinder Boone.
Center soul. Yes.
So you have, you have a do pass
motion on a 54, uh, my only
comment is, you know.
Lots of when we have.
capital type things really ought
to be funding it through
capital, but I'm wanna make sure
we have strong support for our
public radio and, uh,
particularly things working
where we're training kids so
thank you thank you Mr. Chair
and members of the Senate
Education Committee.
OK, so Senator Camo's compos on
the higher education ratio.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair.
Thank you, members of the Senate
Education Committee going back
to uh Senate Bill 495 at a mens
the educational television
equipment replacement fund to
include expenditure at public
schools ads radio equipment, uh,
as an eligible use and makes a
technical change to clarify the
fund is non-reverting. This bill
does not contain an effective
date and as a result, would go
into effect 90 days after the
legislature adjourns if enacted.
Or June 20th, 2025, and Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Education Committee. If I can,
uh, again defer to an expert
witness, you'll identify
himself, make a statement, and
then we're available for
questions.
Miss Chairman, Michael Brasher,
K A N W in Albuquerque.
Mr. Chairman, uh, this bill is a
bill which would benefit public
radio and public television.
In the entire state of New
Mexico.
I mentioned earlier that the
government for their part.
Recognize the importance of
providing a service that
informs, educates and and
entertains and.
Decided that they would have a
fund for equipment replacement.
And the life of broadcast
equipment isn't as long as it
used to be because of the new
technology and how digital
technology is changing rapidly.
That equipment replacement fund
from the Department of Commerce
went away.
And now there's a need to find.
Uh, funding from local sources
from non-federal.
Uh, sources and so uh.
We use fundraising from.
Uh, individuals.
Uh, to help, uh.
Uh
purchase equipment when it wears
out and we use fundraising from
uh.
The state when when we're able
to get it to uh.
Replace radio and television
equipment and the
interconnection equipment for
television.
I'm a board member for KNME,
which is owned by the University
of New Mexico and yesterday they
had a presentation of some
really innovative, important
things they're doing, and
they're doing it in the same way
that radio is doing it.
They're providing programming
for rural.
Unserved or underserved areas.
There are some areas where there
are still black mark black spots
in the state of New Mexico where
television isn't available or
the quality is is not watchable.
And so you have to if you're if
you have a satellite, you can
probably pick up satellite
television, although due to the
terrain shielding, we're in a
mountainous area. Sometimes
that's not possible, and so, uh.
The hope here is that we will be
able to replace some of that
really expensive but important.
Television equipment.
And so that's the hope here, and
it will also help with the
interconnection between the
television stations, their TV
translators that serve the rural
area and the radio stations and
their translators as well, Mr.
Chairman, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Education Committee.
Thank you. I to the audience,
those in support of Senate Bill
495.
Yeah we have one sport anyone in
opposition.
Would you like to come up and
speak?
He's come up
Online?
And now
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee, Linnea Montoya
from the UNM, uh, just wanting
to stand in support of this bill
today on behalf of KUNM at UNM
that we are going to be added
into this law, so we are very
excited and very thankful to the
sponsor and all the wonderful
people who worked on this bill
to include us and other public
radio stations across the state
that are at higher education ins
institutions, so thank you so
much.
Thank you. There was no one in
opposition or online, so
questions from the committee.
Mr. Chair Ramos, Senator Ramos,
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, how many
public schools are anticipated
to request funds or participate
in this.
Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, Senator
Ramos, I didn't quite hear. How
many public schools are
anticipated to request funds or.
Uh, public schools, I'm not sure
we do. I do know that that uh.
I can speak for my station and
areas that we serve, um.
We serve uh
communities like Santa Rosa and
Grantz and Espanola and gallop
and uh.
And as far south we go to.
The Socorro, so school system,
schools in those in those areas
are able to use it, they don't
have radio stations, but.
But
We provide
A lot of really important
information, for instance, when,
when you have inclement weather.
And they need to get the message
out of that type of.
Uh
Um, information. In addition, KA
Um, information. In addition,
KAW is
There are 2 emergency alert
stations now in the state of New
Mexico. One is KOB.
And KKOB or whatever they are
KKOB and and the other is KANW,
so we provide.
Some emergency alert information
for um.
Some of those schools in a very
large service area.
of
And Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
guess what I should have been
asking how many higher
education.
Uh
How many schools are actually
asking through higher education
for some of these funds and
participating in your program.
Do they actually come to you and
and have you come participate
within. How does that work?
I'm completely ignorant to the
way this works, Mr. Chairman,
uh.
Senator Ramos, thank you for the
question. Is it the radio
stations work together very
well, and they communicate with
one another, so from radio
station to radio station.
A radio station to television
station, for instance, our
relationship with KUNM is very
good.
And with KENW and KRWG, we work
together, uh, when important
things happen when they need
information in the community.
Of you get an emergency
communication out.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
how
I mean, currently there's a
television equipment replacement
fund throughout the state.
There
Chairman, uh.
Cause if IR states uh Senate
Bill 495 amends the education
television equipment.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, I'm not, not.
Chairman and Senator Ramos, I'm
not aware that there is a
there's a direct line item
appropriation for operations and
maybe, maybe it's maybe it's not
categorical maybe it it.
It
Can be used for my understanding
is that there is not a direct
line item appropriation for
equipment replacement for any of
the TV stations or radio
stations.
That's all they've got Mr.
Thank you, and, and I think what
he's referring to, it's already
in language that there is an
educational television equipment
replacement fund.
This
Modifies it to being a reverting
fund and then for the most part
it looks like your dad's radio
stations.
State institutions, public
schools, it, it expands the
mission for all of that. This
isn't actually putting money in
there. This is expanding what
those replacement monies can be
used for that Mr. Chairman,
you're correct. That's the
purpose. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee, Senator Figueroa.
Mr. Cham wondering how much
money is currently in the fund
right now, and why
It's changing to non.
And
Uh, so we
Why could you explain that?
I'm due to
so I apologize.
Educational television equipment
replacement fund already exists.
And the bill doesn't change
that.
But it expands the scope.
Of who can apply for those
funds, so I'm wondering how much
money is in that fund right now.
And why this bill changes it to
a non-reverting fund.
And if it
Mr. Chairman, if it's for, it's.
It for equipment.
Uh, purchases maybe uh.
Uh
If we buy, for instance, we, we
filed an application with the
Federal Communications
Commission for a transmitter.
And
We didn't want the money to
revert because it took a long
time to go through the full
federal process to get.
You get the
Authorization to even.
A choir and operate the
equipment.
Mr. Chair and Senator Fiora, if
I may 1st of all, I'm not aware
of what amount is in the fund
right now, but with higher
education, uh, it's already uh
in in statute with uh
non-reverting and so that's the
purpose of it and that's, that's
the indication in terms of what
the FIR and and the bill also
would uh would indicate. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would.
Really like to know.
Is there anybody here from HED
who could tell us how much is
sitting in the fund?
whether
They're supportive of expanding
this mission.
you
Public schools K-12.
Secretary, you're right on cue.
And, and while you're up there,
I might add, you know, and it
says, or public schools, HED and
public schools don't normally
commingle. Are you all able to
manage what this bill's asking?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
thank you for letting me come
up. Um, and then Senator
Figueroa. So I'm actually
texting my team as we speak to
get that number. I will text it
to you as soon as possible, and
you, Mr. Chair. But as far as
non-reverting, that's typically,
uh, what we do in higher
education. The funds that go to
higher education institutions
are non-reverting funds. That's
a typical practice. This is
anything out of the blue, as far
as administration of any fund,
it's something that we do day in
and day out, we wouldn't have, I
mean,
People always tell you FTE
administrative burden, but we
have so many funds, we know how
to do it the right way. We
wouldn't have a problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. Those were my only
questions.
Um, knowing that the department
is gonna have to.
Promulgate the rules and make
choices when people apply for
funds is the public school get
it, does the higher education
institution get it, but they're
gonna have rules and criteria
for doing that. I don't envy
them the decision. Thank you,
Mr.
Senator is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Senator Campos, in this
particular bill, there's no
appropriation in the bill
itself, is that correct?
I've read it twice and I don't
see one.
So, so, Mr. Chair, uh, senator
is, it's not the appropriation,
it's adding the radio, if you
will, to public television to
include the radio and we've been
trying to go ahead and do this
for
For several years, and the
reason for it because as we deal
with the public uh message, uh,
this is the way to go ahead and
get it out effectively, so
you're correct. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Excuse me,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Azel.
Mr. Chairman, for what I'm
seeing is you are adding the
radio in there after every time
it says television.
And it goes into the
non-reverting fund in the state
treasury.
But then it said dispersements
shall be made to the institution
by one of the Department of
Finance Administration upon
voucher signed by the Secretary
of Higher Education.
Even though there is no
appropriation in your bill under
fiscal implications in the
analysis from the university in
New Mexico.
You and him
It is saying cost to replace
KUNM's 28 year old transmitter
at Sandiaris is $150,000 and
that's due to be replaced in FY
26 and then to replace the other
7 rural transmitters.
It is $250,000 that will be
expected in 2027. Is that
information correct, Mr.
Chairman and Senator.
Mr. Chairman.
And Senator, um, the
Yeah
Addition of of the the
radio equipment would be a a
very small portion of
of
What is needed for for
television and there would be
adequate funding for that, I
believe. I'm I'm sorry, I
couldn't hear you. Thank you.
The
Thank you, Senator, um.
Yeah, could you, I'm sorry,
Senator, I apologize. Could you
please repeat that? By the way,
I don't have my hearing aids on.
That's fine. That's fine.
Compos.
Even though you're not asking
for any money in this particular
bill, the UNM uh.
Analysis did give the report
that.
The cost to replace the 20 year
old transmitter at Santiacrist
is $150,000 and then the cost to
replace KUNM's networks of seven
rural transmitters is $250,000
and that's to be expected in
2027.
My concern here is.
Going back to the prior bill
that we just heard.
Um
I guess where we gonna see this
money coming from?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator is he in
terms of that as already
indicated, uh.
It's gonna be capital outlay and
it'll be resources coming uh
from some of our non-recurring
resources that we do have
available.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator.
Compass
I'm also reading under that uh
analysis from you and them.
KUNM radio is a self-supporting
department of UNM.
And that there is no line item
funding from UNM or the state of
New Mexico.
And that appropriations if there
are any, will be overseen and
managed through the appropriate
UNM business channels.
So,
It is licensed to the regents of
the University of New Mexico,
which I found kind of.
OK.
But uh
And it's also stating that
Nielsen.
Uh
Who does a pretty good job on
what they're.
Aspect of reaching out to
listeners or viewers might be
states that they're between,
there are 77,300 people that
listen to KUNM in any given
week.
So
I, I'm just really concerned
about.
With his old as these
transmitters are now. I'm, I'm
not too sure if I'm not going to
see you next year, Miss Senator
Campos coming back to ask for
more money for these
transmitters.
Mr. Chairman, that's all I have.
Thank you very much for your
responses. Thank you. Other
questions?
A lot of motion, please.
Overdue pass.
you'll call the roll, please.
Sender boom.
And
Yes.
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes, Sier Hickey.
Yes
Nova, yes.
Ramos.
Yes.
Senator Thornton.
Yes.
That
Excuse me, Cinder Pope. Yes.
Back to Cinder Boone? Yes.
in el
Yes
Souls. Yes.
You have a do pass. Thank you
very much Mr. Chairman Senate
Education Committee.
Mr. Chairman, my apologies.
Never mind, I missed us, never
mind.
For those in the room and those
online we're now moving on to
Senate Joint Resolution 15.
Appointed state board of
Education constitutional
amendment.
Senator Souls, you have the
floor.
Thank you. Um
We've heard lots of this before.
Uh, there have been discussions
for several years about moving
back to a state board of
education, uh, I carried an
earlier bill. It's currently
sits on the floor of the Senate
that was modified in this
committee to have both a state
board and a state public
education commission, both
elected with 10 members elected,
the state board would have one
from the governor, um, and I was
quoted in the paper as saying
something to the effect. I'm not
sure I can support my own.
Bill at this point of having two
separate ones, uh, certainly
they do the other one there were
concerns of the charter schools
and others.
This particular one comes as a
different way of looking what a
state board of education could
look like. Um, the state Board
of Education would hire a state
superintendent of schools as
their primary mission, um, and
might point out that unlike
local school boards that meet 34
or more times per month, the
state board in the past when it
met, it met typically on the
order of 4 times a year.
Their main mission is to oversee
the state superintendent of
schools and uh hired the state
superintendent of schools and
very broad statewide policy.
This particular one would be a
very different way of doing a
state board of education instead
of having board members elected
from around the state, it would
have a board of appointed
stakeholders, um.
All of that cannot be put into a
constitutional amendment that
would all be done with enabling
language if this were to pass
and go to the voters and pass
the voters, then it would be
back up to the legislature to
put in the details and the
specificity of what those board
members and who would be the
stakeholders who would each make
appointments.
To us the state Board of
Education. Um, I could talk
about what I envisioned those
being, but those cannot be
particularly in here. When the
bill was going through the rules
committee, a number of the
people who were in opposition,
wanted to know exactly what
these were.
You can't put that into it, and
so I can tell you what I
envision if it were to pass the
voters, I would imagine also
that the LESC would have some
deep conversations about what
those members should be. This
envisions a nine-member board.
You want to have an odd number
so in case there are ties, the
tie is broken. uh, and the
members as I envisioned it would
be such as the Senate would
have.
would
Put in a member. The House would
put in a member. The
Let's see, the charter schools
would have a member. The tribes
and nations would have a member.
The
Any union would have a member of
the school board association
might have a member the
Uh, let's see, the
superintendents association
might have a member.
The idea behind this is people
that have a real interest in the
education of children would be
in charge of education in the
state of New Mexico. Uh, this is
not a poke at the current
administration. We've tried
having a state.
or a state secretary of
Education for many years.
There have been good times,
there have been bad times.
The problem that most educators
see with the current system is
the whiplash that's caused when
there could be major
philosophical changes in
The secretary of education. This
in the past has provided
stability under other
mechanisms, other times when it
was there and the idea is again
to provide the stability for
education so we can move
forward. Um, some of the
comments in the past have been
things like, well, you know,
this won't guarantee that we're
gonna move up out of the bottom.
I would never make a guarantee
like that. The idea is this
provides stability so that the
education changes that we're
making have
opportunity to move through and
to mature without a new
administration that might come
in and totally change with a
different direction, um, and
we've seen that over the last
little bit. And so, uh, with
that, I have stand rounds with
me. He is, uh, you know,
represents the superintendents
association, but I've had
extensive conversations with
superintendents around the state
of New Mexico with school boards
around the state of New Mexico
who all seem to think that this
might be a very
effective way of making sure
that
Education in New Mexico and the
leadership of education stays
focused on the student rather
than on political ideologies
that get lost in the the.
Politics of education. And so
with that, I'd be open for
comments and questions.
Thank you, Senator. So now we're
gonna move on to public comment.
Uh, for those that are in the
committee room and so are we
have anyone in support of Senate
joint resolution 15. If you
could raise your hand.
OK, if you could start lining up
for public comment, you'll have
2 minutes. Do we have any in
opposition in the room.
Right? We'll go to you next.
Do we have any support online?
Any opposition?
So we'll start with the support
first.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Lily May
Ortiz, legislative liaison for
the New Mexico School Board
Association and Mr. Chairman, I
stand in support of this
legislation on behalf of our
membership. Our membership has
numerous, as you know, positions
for legislation. This is part of
our top 10 priority this uh
different state government
system and NMSBA membership from
across the state at our annual
conference in December, voted to
pass a resolution.
Asking the voters to approve a
constitutional amendment to
re-establish a state board of
education as an independent body
and with the authority to
appoint a state superintendent
of education with the funding
and oversight for a robust and
accountable education system for
our students, our educators, and
our communities. Our membership,
uh, Mr. Chairman did not outline
details, nor the configuration
of the makeup for the board.
They just moved to, to support
this type of governance.
New Mexico School Board
Association wholeheartedly
supports this legislation and
asks you, um, members to please
pass it forward. Thank you.
Thank you.
Now we'll go to opposition.
Could you raise your hands if
you were in opposition.
Like if I could have uh 5 people
and you'll have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Uh, my name is
Gregory Frostadt. I'm assistant
secretary of Education for the
Public Education department and
uh we have some concerns about
SGR 15 that I'd like to express
to you today. Uh, the first is
that there is no body of
research to support that, the
effort to put into making
another change to state
governance would benefit student
outcomes. Uh, we, we definitely
try to put all of our time and
energy in and
resources into initiatives that
we feel like will support
student outcomes, and this does
not have the, the research base
to support that.
In 2003 is when we made the
change to the current system
that we have now away from a
state board that that was not
working in the past. In 2005, we
got the HED and later came the
ECECD. Now we work very closely
together, those three agencies,
all of us reporting to the
governor and um we work on
initiatives such as the Office
of Special Education
Longitudinal Data System and
MRI, rise NM those are.
Those are initiatives that we
can work on together because we
all have, we're all moving in
the same direction and reporting
to the same boss. And if we did
not have, uh, if K-12 public
education was pulled out of that
mix. It's unclear whether or not
we'd be able to work as closely
as we do on the number of
initiatives that we have.
have
It's also been, um, one of the
reasons that this
That the joint resolutions and
Senate Joint Resolution 15 have
been proposed is because there
have been turnover at the public
education department at our
secretary level. Um, however, 15
seconds. Thank you. um.
This is a nationwide trend. It
is not just a statewide trend,
and we don't have the same
education system now that we had
in 2003, and it's unclear that
um we would gain stability from
making this change. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning. I'm
Terry Cole, president and CEO
for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce.
I am standing today in
opposition to SJR 15.
It is problematic that this
legislation gives no indication
of who the board members would
or could be or the mechanism by
which they'd be appointed. This
is not a minor item to simply be
dealt with later. It's a heart
of the matter issue. It's true
that great detail cannot be
placed in the Constitution.
Senator Michael Padilla solved
that problem by bringing both a
constitutional amendment and
enabling legislation at the same
time regarding the ECE.
Trust Fund.
So far this session, we've heard
proposals for a 15 member
partially elected board, a 11
member board, a fully elected 10
member board and now this 9
people appointed in an
undetermined way. Some would
keep the PEC, some would scrap
it. These proposals are all over
the map, challenging the
governance and changing it of
public education is too
important an issue to be handled
in this way.
We must take the time to get it
right. The LESC should compare
and contrast different modes of
governance and come back with a
proposed constitutional
amendment and enabling
legislation if after careful
consideration, the LESC really
thinks a change in governance is
necessary. This measure won't be
on the ballot until 2026, so we
have time to get it right. We
urge you to vote no on SJR 15.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Amanda Aragon, executive
director of New Mexico Kids can,
and we oppose SJR 15. Well, we
appreciate that this addresses a
lot of the concerns that we had
with SJR3 and some of the other
proposals we've heard this
session.
It still leaves too many
unanswered questions. This is
simply too big of a decision to
rush. We're talking about the
governance of a $5 billion
system.
One that directly impacts
300,000 students and their
families.
Any change to the oversight of
our public education system must
be given serious, deliberate
consideration.
And even more concerning is who
will be represented and who
won't. New Mexico's education
system has underserved students,
families, and communities for
decades.
We cannot afford to replicate a
governance structure that
protects the status quo, rather
than bringing in new voices and
real accountability.
If we move forward before
ensuring that all communities
have a meaningful seat at the
table. We risk rearranging power
rather than transforming
outcomes.
Furthermore, we are on the cusp
of a gubernatorial election.
One in which we hope education
plays a vital role, but this
proposal in its timeline created
dangerous leadership vacuum.
Like in mayoral elections when
we don't hear candidates talking
about education, because they
wouldn't have jurisdiction.
If we pass SJR 15, we risk
creating that same void at the
state level. New Mexicans will
head to the polls.
Without a clear understanding of
who will be accountable for
education, and candidates will
be forced to campaign for
governor without knowing what
their role in education policy
would even be.
This is a big decision, and it
deserves a lot more
consideration. We urge you to
vote now.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Matt Paul
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. I need to start my
comments with some thank yous.
Um, first, thank you to this
committee for making the
adjustment to SJR3 and
preserving the independence of
our authorizers. That was deeply
important to our membership. I
also want to thank the sponsor,
his expert witness, and others
who are working on the bill for
going back to the drawing board
and figuring out a way to
accomplish their objective while
preserving that independence. So
I want to be clear.
The issues we brought up during
SJR 3 are not present in this
bill. Um, we just feel like this
is a new proposal. Our
membership split on whether they
want a board or whether they
want to maintain a secretary.
Um, I think a number of the
issues that are presented today
and that the um lack of clarity
on what we think is going to
happen, could be resolved with
some real good interim work with
the LESC on this. A number of
you are
uh this year and you'll have the
opportunity to serve on the LESC
and I think some deliberation on
a big decision that will be in
place long after we're out of
our chairs, uh, respectively,
um, is, is worth an extra year
of deliberation. So we ask that
we consider this further
together with the sponsor, with
the expert witness and others
that are involved in this bill,
um, and respectfully oppose the
bill for now. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. I'm Mandy
Torres, Education reform
Director for I think New Mexico
and a former elementary teacher.
The New Mexico stands in
opposition to this resolution
for a simple reason,
complicating the education
system with more bureaucracy and
more divisive perspectives and
practices is simply not what our
students need. While we have
shared on the frustration of PED
leadership turnover, this bill
has not received adequate study
and consideration for such a
large move, and it also raises a
few key questions. For example,
the bill states that a board
will be able to determine
public.
policy despite not being elected
officials. This would seem to
undermine the efforts of our
elected officials who carefully
consider reform efforts through
research, collaboration, and
with public insight. How would
an appointed board be held
accountable for ensuring that
they represent what New Mexico
parents actually want for their
children, rather than their own
personal interest in the system.
I didn't hear parents or
community leaders listed in the
vision of who would be
appointed. The bill also gives
the board control over financial
direction. We wonder how this
will further complicate our
system.
where 3 budgets are already put
forth every year. Plenty of
disagreement already exists in
adding another 9 individual
perspectives which seemed to
slow processes and progresses
and progress even further.
Again, not what our students
need. Our focus should be
closest to students. We, we
should ensure that LEAs have
adequate funding to be able to
engage students and meet their
mental health and academic
needs. We should focus on
stability at the district level
because that is what most
affects our students. When you
look at a district like Rio
Rancho, which has had quite a
long run with their
superintendent.
They have continued to perform
even amid the turnover at the
state level. When you have that
kind of stability and long term
vision, you can weather a storm
of turnover at the state level.
We should focus on getting that
kind of stability in all of our
districts. New Mexico moved away
from a state board because it
added another layer of red tape
and was inefficient, stifling
innovation and progress for our
students, and we are still
trying to catch up as a result.
The New Mexico asks that you
vote no on this resolution.
Thank you.
Thank you, and we have one
person online, Hope Morales.
Good morning, Mr. Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Hope Morales and I'm executive
director for Teach Plus New
Mexico. We work with hundreds of
teachers across the state,
including some of our state's
best teachers, and there is
concern among some educators
related to a state board of
education. I really appreciate
Senator Souls for being
open-minded and considering some
of the concerns about SJR3.
However, I still have some
concerns and questions about
this proposal. While an
appointed state board might take
out some of the politics from an
elected state board, there was
still concern.
around the quality and equity of
voices on the board, as well as
the overall effectiveness of a
state board of student outcomes.
Unfortunately, we see far too
often adults that engage with
educational systems for the
benefit of adults and not the
outcomes we want for students.
In order to have an effective
board, there needs to be more
time and collaboration given to
the potential system before we
move SJR 15 forward.
We must ensure that the
challenges that we have helped
highlight are part of meaningful
discussion to help ensure that
we're not created more issues
that could negatively impact
students while trying to address
a concern related to governance.
Here are a few concerns. Our
teachers have been advocating
for improved data systems that
are accurate, timely, and
measure the outcomes we want to
achieve. We believe we're
finally starting to make
progress and worry that the
strategic collaboration and
longitudinal data sharing
between NMPED, ECECD, and HE.
may be interrupted. With the
nine-member board, how would we
ensure there is diversity and
quality representation among
members and not a system that is
limited by a status quo
leadership.
Looking at district level data
in 2024, just under 2/3 of
superintendents in New Mexico
have been on the job for 4 years
or less, or were on an interim
basis. Perhaps more attention
and support.
I needed for district level
governance.
I didn't want to share my
deepest respect and admiration
for Senator Souls and ask that
this be discussed further to
help ensure we're considering
the various unintended
consequences and have the best
system possible. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. And that's the end of
public comment, uh, Senator
Souls, I'll give you the floor,
uh, for any responses if you
like.
Thank you. I, I would like to
clarify a couple of things. When
we moved away from a state
superintendent of schools, uh,
there was a comment made that it
was a failing system. It wasn't,
uh, New Mexico was actually
ranked higher on the state
rankings at that time. That's
not because we had a state
superintendent and we didn't go
down because we didn't have a
state superintendent, uh, but
one of the main reasons it was
under Governor Richardson, it
just narrowly passed. I was a
principal at the time, and I
warned people.
Don't do this. Um, it will cause
more whiplash when policies
change with the political whims
rather than the stability that
we had had with
State superintendent of schools.
Um, I've been in support of
moving back to a state
superintendent since I've been
in the legislature, um, and then
part of several issues trying to
do it. So this isn't something
that we have not talked about in
the past. Um, also want to point
out there were some comments
about another level of
governance. The governments of
the public education department,
most of the people are still
going to be there. It's just the
political appointee that will.
not the people that are doing
the day to day work of it. Um,
and in the past, most of the
board members who are ran for
both the current PEC and in the
past for the.
The State Board of Education,
many of those races were
uncontested, and the concerns in
the past were people who came in
with political agendas that were
not focused on children. By
having an appointed board, it
allows the various groups that I
envisioned would be making the
appointments through the
enabling language to focus on
appointing people who are
educators interested in the
education of children, not in
the politics around education.
And if my expert can make a
couple of short comments, Mr.
Chair, I'll keep it short, and I
apologize for sliding in late. I
haven't figured out to be
triplets around this building,
yeah, uh, Mr. Chairman, I want
to just say 3 things. One,
Current structure of the public
education department.
Might be renamed what it used to
be State Department of
Education.
That doesn't change. The
majority of your statutes.
are organized to direct what
happens under that structure.
The only issue is.
The number one position there,
how's that determined?
Right now it's supported by a
governor. In the past, it was
appointed by an elected body and
5 appointed individuals at the
end of that with a 15 member
board.
This proposition suggests that
that position would be appointed
and would be a constitutional
position which it is not right
now.
Would be appointed by this
appointed body.
So there's lots of ways to get
to that home base. The real
issue is, do you want a
constitutional office.
Third point, Mr. Chairman.
I do we continue to work on
school calendar issues.
In that process we were required
to go to the courthouse.
Uh, and, and, and in a lawsuit
to clarify what you as a body
had indicated in statute.
was how calendars were were
developed.
Within that process, one of the
things that became strikingly
aware to me.
Was once the decision is made
under the current structure,
there is no appeal outside of
the courts.
A body like this appointed body
would be the point of appeal
when a rule comes out.
And uh needs to be appealed. It
would go to that body and, and
get away from the courthouse
issues that we were required to
go through Smith chairman, just
want to give some history to
that. Thank you.
Thank you. And with that we'll
go to the committee.
Questions or comments in
committee. First up, Senator
Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I guess, I guess I just want to
remind everybody why, why this
is even being discussed. Um.
I always go back to the
statistics.
And we know
That our students proficiency in
reading, it's 39%.
That means 61%.
Or not.
Our proficiency in math.
It's 23%.
That means 79%.
cannot even do math.
And our science proficiency in
this state is 38%.
What does that mean?
62% of the people.
Don't understand science.
This wouldn't even be a
discussion if we were.
If all those numbers had been
reversed.
Right now, where we stand is, is
not where we want to be. I think
we all understand that.
The questions I have for uh
Senator souls, I guess the first
question I have is, there was an
issue brought up that there is
no research to support the, the
idea that changing this would
make a difference.
Do you yourself, sir, have any
evidence that suggests that if
we go back to
This new structure, as you are
indicating by this
constitutional amendment.
would make a difference.
Mr. Chair and and Senator, I am
not aware of any specific
research that indicates that one
governance system or state level
education is better than others,
uh, various states have
different ones. Some are totally
appointed by governors, some are
elected. There's a wide range of
these. I'm not aware of any that
have what is proposed here,
which would be a board of
stakeholders. If you appointed
by stakeholders.
Not of stakeholders, but
appointed by stakeholders. Um,
it's a bit of a novel mechanism
and some of the education
leaders within the state
kind of perked and said, well,
that's interesting because that
would have people on the board
who understand education,
education data and research and
be more focused on.
On what might make real
differences rather than worrying
about the politics around
education, which is some of what
we've seen or the time at least
that I've been in the
legislature under governors from
both parties, there's an awful
lot of politics around the
education instead of focus on
the students.
Thank you for that.
Um
There was also mentioned, Mr.
Chair, with regards to the fact
that this particular uh
resolution.
does not have enabling.
Legislation in it, and, and
maybe that's not the appropriate
place, but could you respond to
that?
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
constitutional amendments cannot
have enabling language. We don't
want a, the constitution to look
like our law books. And so they
tend to be much more general as
to what goes in front of the
people. Uh, once that passes,
then the legislature comes back
and fills in the details around
how that would work. Uh,
certainly my commitment would be
if this were to pass to be
moving towards
what I envision that enabling
language would be as to how who
those nine members might be
certainly open to, well, what
about this group or what about
that group, um, I would very
much resist moving back up to a
15 member board. Some of the
criticisms of the past was that
board was too large. Uh, you get
too many people who all want to
talk and not much ever gets
covered or done, and I think a
9-member board is more about
the, the right level for
that. But those discussions
would then happen were this to
pass, um, as well as uh the
LESC, I think would be very
involved in having a hearings
and and such, looking at.
To those members might be
appointed by.
Thank you for that, Senator.
Um
So Mr. Chair, I see that you,
you kept the um
PEC in place. It's with their
function still remain completely
the same as it stands today.
Mr. Chair and and Senator,
within this legislation, the PEC
would not be touched. They would
still have their 10 members
elected from the various um
areas around the state of New
Mexico, their functions would
remain the same. They would be
answering to a state
superintendent instead of a
state secretary of education,
but I envision it as very
similar to what the situation
now, it's just the leaders going
to have a different title and
would be answering to a board
instead of the governor.
Thank you, Senator.
One last question, have you
thought about
And maybe this is the, this is
probably the toughest. If we
were to go to something like
this.
What could be the unintended
consequences of of doing.
Mr. Chair and senator, um,
Some of the things that
certainly will be challenges is,
you know, we've spent.
12 years and every time we go
into the books, we find another
place where the language in the
law is still under the old
system and we've been trying to
change it into the new system
that will continue as we try and
unwind and move back the other
direction. And so there'll be a
number of places through the
next several years where, as
we're doing legislation, we're
gonna have to fix the language
as we've done with the PRC now.
Uh, we continue to find parts of
the law where, oh, there's
another place where it refers.
To the old PRC mechanism.
I think that's one of the main
pieces where they'll they'll be
difficulties. Uh, one of the
other people indicated a concern
that
Which groups might get left out
and when there's not an election
doing this, though most of the
Ones that I envisioned being the
stakeholders, many of them are
already in elected positions.
That would be making the
appointments. And so there's
lots of opportunity to influence
those groups when an appointment
comes up.
Mr. Chairman, a positive
unintended consequence.
would likely be that there would
be another voice recommending
the funding levels.
To meet the programmatic needs
of
The schools
Mr. Chairman, I operated under
the prior system.
And there was a 4th.
Um, recommendation.
You had executive, you had LESC.
You had LFC and you had the uh.
The Secretary of, I'm sorry, was
the superintendent of public
instruction recommendation. I
see.
Thank you for that.
And, and Mr. Chair and senator,
if I might, uh, one of the
concerns people had was whether
this person would not be able to
work as well with early
childhood and with higher
education. And I think we can
look back into the past and see
that that was not a problem. We
didn't have a higher ed
department, but we had a
commission on higher education.
And there was very good
collaboration then. We did not
have an early childhood, but
certainly this person would be
working closely with a cabinet
secretary on early childhood
issues as they affect public
schools. Some of early childhood
is completely outside of the
schools. I mean, uh, childcare
reimbursement rates and things
of that sort, but
Having this person does not mean
that there would be silos and
they shall never talk to each
other.
Uh, the state superintendent of
schools would be talking with
stakeholders all around the
state, whether it's chambers of
commerce, whether it's um
industry people, all of those
affect education and would be
very much a voice for teachers
and educators, which would
include working with other
cabinet level people.
Thank you for that. Um, that's
really all I have. I, I, I'm
concerned, um, I'm not sure this
is gonna work or not. I really
can't, I don't have a sense one
way or the other. I'd like to
hear rests from the rest of the
members of the committee here.
I, I'm struggling with whether
or not it'll make a difference,
but I also know that what's
currently going hasn't worked,
and so that's, that's where we
are.
Thank you for your responses.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
from the committee? Any
questions Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, sponsor. I want to start
with, I appreciate the
improvements in this version
over the other one, in
particular, Mister Chair, the
protection of the public
education commission as it
stands in their job of
authorizing and supervising our
charter schools.
I also think 9 Mr. Tays much
more to do management. missions
or committees that get larger
than that are not usually
efficient.
Um, and I will say I found Mr.
Browns.
Um, comment about a place to
appeal decisions.
When there's a difference of
opinion with what happens in
rule from the executive side in
the legislative side, a
different body to appeal.
Is a little bit compelling. So,
so you got me on that one, Mr.
Rounds.
Um, but
Mr. Chair, I have
I have concerns about the idea
that this will provide stability
if the issue is we are trying to
provide stable leadership.
I'm gonna say that the prior
commission operating from the
60s to 2000.
Operated in a different era.
When the workplace was different
and people stayed in the job a
long time. That's not true
anymore.
And I think the current
instability in our
superintendents at our
districts.
speaks to that.
That 2/3 of them are new.
And that they turnover, we have
churn at that level.
It seems to indicate why would
it not be any different at the
state level, and I would ask the
sponsor to to speak to that why
would you expect a state
superintendent last longer than
our district superintendents are
lasting.
Mr. Chair and and senator, I
certainly can't predict that
they are going to last longer,
um.
This is an area where
I suspect some of our current
superintendents may aspire to
that have broad state level
ambitions about wanting to
improve education for the entire
state that
And it's unlikely this would be
a stepping stone to other
things. One of the areas we have
great turnover in the state is
they get a better offer at a
larger district.
Or they move on to other places.
There's not a whole lot of other
places that are higher than this
for them to move on to. And so
this is more likely to be the
terminal position or someone who
is a superintendent rather than
somebody who is a brand new
starting at a small district and
as soon as they get an offer to
a medium or a larger district,
and I might point out that, you
know, the gentleman next to me
started in a very tiny district
and has moved up to several
other ones in the course of his,
his tenure of the
Superintendents that we had in
the past. This was all their
terminal position. They did not
head on to other places. I think
that was probably part of the
stability that
sponsor, I would say that also
has changed. If you look at the
secretaries of education we've
had over the last few years.
Supervising the state of New
Mexico's educational system.
It is to some people a stepping
stone to larger state systems
and people move in and out and
across states, so it's not.
The terminal end point may be
that it used to be, but I wanna,
I want to ask a couple specific
questions. Those are broad
philosophical.
Issues with this change, but
looking at this particular
proposal, I'm gonna make some
suggestions for improvements if
it goes forward.
And Mr. Terrence sponsor the
sponsor and I have talked about
this on page 2, line 14. The
board shall appoint a qualified
experienced New Mexico licensed
educational administrator.
Uh, my concern is the limitation
to New Mexico.
Because we have a small number
of administrators.
Who have the capacity and the
experience with large systems.
To look at and run our state
system of education.
I think we need a broader pool
to look at.
So
That's
Concern number one, if you'd
like to respond.
Mr. Chair, and, and senator as
we had talked before and I think
you made a very good point that
making it available to
Superintendents from other
states, uh, so that we would be
able to have a national search
rather than limited just to New
Mexico, I think makes good
sense. That would be a friendly
amendment. Um, I
Not sure whether it needs to be
in there but worded that
eligible for a New Mexico.
Administrative license or
something of that sort so that
Yeah, but we have a lot of very
good reciprocal agreements with
many other states and so if they
are licensed administrator in
other states, that would be a
friendly amendment I think makes
good sense. Mr. Chairman, the
point of that statement is to
assure that they have the
qualifications that would be
required of a superintendent in
New Mexico and I think
There are some some statements
we could assist.
Um, as this moves down the line.
To
Exhibit that and what, what it
mean?
And or
Um,
be able to receive that
licensure.
Something like that, Mr.
Chairman. That's what we do in
the superintendent.
Uh, Mr. Chair and sponsor, yeah,
that's why I'm not proposing an
amendment now, just something to
consider, to get the wording
right.
Um, the other concern is
In, in your vision, once this.
Um, superintendent is appointed.
How could they be removed?
I think some
Because we're putting in the
Constitution, the board shall
appoint no one in the
Constitution is given the power
to remove and if there is
malfeasance, negligence,
financial impropriety, there
might be a criminal activity,
there might be real reasons we
need to remove someone, and I
think
Some line if few words in here,
will need to be added to
address.
That kind of an issue.
Mr. Chair and senator, and
again, very good point, uh, but
that would be in the enabling
legislation that they would be a
removed on uh
A majority vote of the state
school board.
In this term if I could add uh
center figure, Mr. Chairman, uh,
under the past practice.
The superintendents served on.
At will contract.
And that was the conventional
practice which then meant.
You were
Day to day in your process, Mr.
Chairman, it took an action of
the majority of the body to
remove that.
And Mr. Chas sponsor, I'll let
you figure it out with
judiciary. I think you do need a
little bit of constitutional
protection, um.
And I'll leave it at that.
Um
That's all, Mister Chair, I
think that's enough for today.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other questions or comments
from the committee, Senator
Rizzo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I, I do have a
question. I was reading here. I
like to read everything I can
about so and the LESC bill
analysis stated that uh.
There used to be a state
superintendent, that was
abolished in 2003, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes, I
believe that's correct under uh
Senate or uh Governor Richardson
and uh.
There were 3 state
superintendents, this is what
gets me. 3 state superintendents
over PED from 1963 to 2003.
That tells me that something
might be going right, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that
would be my opinion. I was a
school administrator in middle
school and elementary, uh,
during the end of that era and
the
At least in my opinion and the
feeling and attitude of many of
the other administrators around
the state is there was far less
politics coming out of the state
Department of Education at the
time, um, and it was more
focused on students.
And Mr. Chairman, since, uh,
Let's see.
This is amazing.
There have been 9 secretaries of
PED since 2000.
3.
And right now I think there has
been a new one appointed, is
that correct? Am I understanding
that correct, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair and Senator, we
currently have a secretary
designate, OK.
All right, um.
This is just blowing my mind.
Like I said,
I can remember.
There was a gentleman from my
particular area down there in
the southeastern corner of the
state that did serve on.
The board
I don't know how many years, but
he was always very conscientious
whenever he came home, he would
give a full report. He would go
around to the various school
districts and make a report and
therefore those local school
boards felt like.
They had some say in what took
place, what a concept.
Local control.
And Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
you know at the very start of
this committee, I said I was in
favor of more local control.
Is that going, is what this
joint resolution intending to do
is to put more local control
back where it needs to be.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
I don't know that that's
directly the intent. It's to put
more of the focus on education,
back on the students and away
from the politics.
Well, we've seen what politics
has done to it in our state. I'm
kind of tired of being at the
bottom of the totem pole year in
and year out.
Mr. Chairman, whenever I'm
hearing the figures that
senator.
Oh
Thornton has come up with. I'm
just appalled at what I'm
reading what I'm seeing here and
reading here that where our kids
are ranking.
And politics has put them in
that those categories.
And as a member of this
legislative body, I'm appalled
at what has happened.
I know that our teachers do work
long hours.
Parents, you need to get more
involved in your kid's
education.
But my concern with this is.
Let's see appointed state Board
of Education.
That's the heartburn I have with
what this joint resolution does,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
I know that if this does go
forward that you're saying yes,
you would like to expound on
that, but I want to hear it
right here.
I would like to know who is
going to make that appointment
of the state board of education
and how it is going to be
equitably split up between our
state.
Mr. Chair and senator, again, I
cannot tell you definitively
because
It's this is just my idea, and
I'm only one of many who would
be voting on and making this. So
please understand that it, it
comes from my perspective, uh,
but would be up to the
legislature to actually pass the
legislation. I envision of the
nine members, and I'll see if I
can get them right. A governor
appointee, and these would all
be staggered term types of
things. A governor appointee.
Uh, appointee by the Senate
majority by the House majority
and by the minority in the
legislature. I admit that
imagine one appointed by the
tribes nations and pueblos, uh.
And again, things like that
would roll depending, you know,
through the different years so
that everybody has that
opportunity if there was not
consensus, uh, won by the
superintendent association won
by the School Board Association,
won by the teacher unions, uh,
one by the charter schools and I
think uh gets us up to 9 if I
counted correctly.
if I could add one of the things
we've talked about.
In the enabling legislation is
also then as those appointments
are being made.
To have
An understanding of the of the
geography of New Mexico also
being.
Represented by the appointments
would be something that would
be.
Deliberated by by those making
the appointments, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chair and Senator, I
think what he means by that is
the school board appointment
would look at, oh, there's not
representation from the smaller
schools on the east side and so
they may look specifically
towards that, but it doesn't,
when I say those appointments,
it doesn't mean someone from the
legislature serving on the board
or that a tribal members on the
board, they would just be making
the appointment.
And Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Chairman, I do understand that.
But I also see with your
suggestions here that the
governor has an appointee which
would actually become Secretary
of Education.
But the other appointments would
be made by the Senate and House
majority and minority leadership
somebody from the tribe's
super the list goes on and on to
comprise those 9 members.
But the way our makeup is right
now, I can also see that the
majority of the senators and the
representatives do come from
one.
One
And I do have a problem with
that because unless there's
equal representation from
throughout the state. I will
have a problem with this bill.
Our smaller schools are the
schools that are succeeding
right now that are achieving the
goals that we expect from all of
our students and that's not the
case as it stands right now.
So whenever
I am seeing what you have
proposed here. I think that
could use a lot of work, OK, on
the makeup of it. I just beg to
differ with you there, and I, I
will not.
Whenever the governor does get
to appoint somebody.
As with some other commissions
that I have dealt with.
That is just so far over the
edge, it's not even funny.
And I know how a lot of these
appointments come to.
To bear, OK, and sometimes
they're just not.
In the best interest of
everybody concerned.
And
I will stand up and I will
defend our rural schools and I
just want equal representation.
And I see people out in the
audience that are doing this.
So thank y'all for doing that,
OK? I'll nod right back at you,
charter schools, I think that
they need to have a voice in
this too and uh.
I probably need to stop there in
essence I like what this is
doing. I'm concerned about.
of this
The board is going to be, that
is my concern right there, Mr.
Chairman. I do appreciate the
time and appreciate your answers
and Mr. chair, if I, if I might,
the governor appointee does not
become the superintendent.
I thought I.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the
current
Secretary of Education would be
the superintendent of schools
until the board is is.
Constituted and then votes on or
hires the new superintendent. So
that's just the transition that
the secretary would be the new
person until the board, and that
is not one of the appointed
positions.
OK, I'm glad you said that
because I thought I read
somewhere in one of these
analysis that that would be the
makeup of it.
And like I said, whenever we can
keep politics out of it.
Better off
Our kids will be as far as being
successful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, Senator Nava.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you, Senator
Soz, for bringing this bill
forward. I second, um.
Some comments made by Senator
Figueroa on the shift uh from
the first bill that we saw, uh,
I still have concerns, Mr.
Chairman and Senator.
Uh, I know many folks have
mentioned and brought up.
Politics in between and then
also the importance of working
with other secretaries within uh
the system itself, um.
I believe that the absence of
data is a primary concern for
me. Um,
Mr. Chairman, and I also would
like to ask how many secretaries
of education served under
Governor Richard.
Mm
As chairman of Governor Rich and
there was one.
Under you could argue under Mr.
Chairman, can I ask how many
secretaries served under
Governor Martinez.
I think there were
by the end game, I believe there
were 3, but 2 generals.
OK, and under Governor Ghan
Grisham.
Herman's
I believe it it depends on how
you count it, and I believe 6 is
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, expert, and thank you,
Senator. Um, I think those
numbers are important to me, uh,
I was not around when the other
system was in place, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, senators, and
I think it's important to note
that times have changed, and I
think that was a great point by
Senator Figueroa.
Um
I
Do you know folks move around
quickly, I know our systems move
around quickly. I know our
students are diverse. I know our
communities are as well, and I
actually share the same concern
that Senator is pointed out in
terms of
How these folks would be
appointed.
And I know that you can't
provide the exact.
Process of how this would take
place, but I can't vote on
assumptions.
Um, and to me, supporting that
is critically important, um, and
I believe that politics.
should not be in this, but they
are.
And I think it was noted, we do
have an election coming across,
I mean, you know, very closely,
and I know this will all play a
part in it, um, so I think
It's very important that we look
at the broader spectrum, Mr.
Chairman, um, and the importance
of data, and I think the LESC
report is, uh, you know, points
out the governance models
nationwide, which I think are
really important to look at, um,
and there's clearly a variety.
But I believe that we, because
we do not have that information
to support what this would do
and how it would improve the
outcome of representation, the
outcome of
How these folks would be
appointed. It just makes me very
concerned.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. I don't see
any other questions or comments
from the committee. Uh, I'll
just say, Senator, um,
I like the other one.
Um, really keeping intact,
really almost just having the
superintendent, um, but I also
do have some of the this is
better.
sake of time, I'm going to
Ask the committee, the will of
the politics are always in play
and sometimes when the cameras
are in the room, it's in play as
well. So, uh, we want to get out
of here and get to the floor. So
what is the will of the
committee?
I'm, I moved for a due past on
Senate bill.
right
Senate joint resolution 15.
Senator Ezel.
Senator Boone
Cinriel, Cinder Figueroa.
No.
Hickey.
Centin Nova, no.
San Ramos. Yes, Senator
Thornton.
Yes.
Senator Pope
Yes, explained my vote.
Tinder soul.
And I'll explain my vote. I, I
think there are some concerns
here. I think believe some of
this will be rich. We're doing
that right now on the property
tax. I think folks need to know
that, that all the, um, but I
trust that you're going to have
more conversations and we'll be
definitely with that senator,
Uh
Thank you, and you know, we're,
we're running quite a bit behind
what I thought we were going to
get to today, and I, I know, uh,
we've got some people that came.
Canceled class today to be here.
We're not going to class.
And so, um
We're going to do the
graduate scholarship Act
changes, HB.
89
Uh, and then that'll probably be
it for today. So people are here
for HB 193238 or HB 260, we will
not be getting to those today,
uh, we've got a commitment to be
on the floor in about 10
minutes. So please, if you will,
really quickly, I think we've
heard this bill or something
similar to it several times. Mr.
Chair, I'd like to reiterate
that this is a mirror bill, the
Senate Bill 68, that passed her
unanimously. So there might be
questions, but I, I believe
folks have already
ask these questions, it was
unanimous, so just keep that in
mind.
That Mr. that Mr. Chair, ah.
We will stand for for questions.
Um, do you want to go through
the process, those here in
support of uh
Of house Bill
And my eyes are not working well
today, 99, 89. I gotta get my
glasses up.
The
Yeah, give us, you know, like
the, the 32nd.
Overview of what this bill is.
Mr. Chairman, I promise it, uh,
is much less controversial than
the last bill you heard. House
Bill 89 amends the graduate
scholarship Act to require
recipients to be in New Mexico
residents, gives priority and
awarded funding to students from
groups of underrepresented that
are underrepresented in graduate
education, removes the
requirement that, uh, recipients
be a US citizen or have
permanent resident visa because
that's a federal requirement
already uh in place as a
requirement, the recipients must
have an earned.
A bachelor's degree and maintain
a grade point average of at
least a 3.0, removes the
requirement that recipients be
full-time students and replaces
it with the requirement hours
and removes the requirement that
recipients serve in an unpaid
internship or assistantship at
higher the higher education
institution.
Uh, allows the scholarship to be
awarded until completion of a
terminal degree or has been
received for 8 semesters,
removes the cap of $7200 per
year and replaces it with an
award not to exceed, not to
exceed the full cost of tuition
and fees
and non-substantive amendments
to correct outdated references
within the statute.
OK, thank you.
After the audience, those in
support.
Anyone in opposition.
You feel compelled that they
have to come up and support
you're welcome to come up and
spend no more than 2 minutes.
Please go ahead.
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Michelle
Rivera Ramirez, and I am
president of the uh graduate
student government at the
university in New Mexico. And
I'm also a 3-year law student.
Uh, I'm here to voice my
support, uh, uh, on behalf of
this bill because, you know, as
a New Mexican, as a burqueno, I
do.
Realize how expensive higher
education is, especially for
those of coming from a working
class background such as myself,
I know how uncertain finances
can be when trying to better
yourself pursuing a master's
degree, a law degree, and the
other kind of professional or
graduate degree, and not to
mention that many of these
programs are very, very well
needed in New Mexico, especially
in rural areas. Uh, I do.
You know, I'm cognizant of the
fact that, you know, there's a
lot of professional fields that
require master's and uh PhD or
other uh graduate degree are
much needed in the state. So
that's why GPSA as well as I, my
personal capacity support HB 89
fully. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I, I know this, we
don't usually do this, but I
like to move a do pass on House
Bill 89.
A motion for a due pass.
Um, and we'll certainly have
place for questions, Senator,
if, if you have questions, we
have heard it before.
And we do have a second. Is
there anyone else that?
feels they need to
We have 2 online, but
We don't have anyone in
opposition.
OK, uh, we're not gonna take
those comments right now.
Senator, did you have a
question?
Mister
Representative, I uh want you to
explain to me on page 2 of the
bill line 20 through 22.
Explain that to me.
Um, Mr. Chairman, and um senator
Eel, um, so line 2022, New
Mexico residents with the
greatest financial need and
students who are residents from
groups underrepresented in
graduate education, um, I'm
gonna, I'm gonna let my expert
answer it cuz he could probably
do it in a much more uh eloquent
and cogent manner, and I know
you guys are pressed for time.
Victor. Mm.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, who are
New Mexico residents, residents
it would be the same residency
requirements that exist for the
opportunity and lottery
scholarships. I also want to
note that um Heather Romero from
the Higher Education department
is here for any technical
questions if I get stuck. But,
um, the greatest financial need,
um, that's something that'll be
looked at with the FAFSA
application that's current
language that the scholarships
you're talking too fast. Oh, I'm
sorry, I get nervous, Senator,
um.
Uh, so, and then students with
the greatest financial need,
that's something that will be
looked at through the FASFA that
already exists as a, as a form
that the institutions look at
when giving out these awards.
And then students who are
residents from underrepresented
in graduate education. The um
what happen, will happen is that
the institution will look at
different programs that they're
looking to award grants to, and
they'll look at some of these
groups that are underrepresented
in the STEM field, it might be
women, individuals from rural
community, um, different, uh,
people from different
backgrounds that are important
to create that robust um
representation to make sure, as
you were saying that people that
represent the state of New
Mexico are represented within
higher education.
Mr. Chairman, I really have a
problem with that.
That being
It's middle class usually that
is paying for everything in our
state.
And right now what y'all are
saying are residents from groups
had represented or with the
greatest financial need.
And I really have a problem
there.
Whenever we are choosing people
just because, OK, that might be
a woman, it might be a person of
color, it might be this or it
might be that. I have a problem.
If these students
Which they do have to meet all
these eligibility requirements.
Does that need to be in there? I
have a problem with that. I
cannot support this, Mister
Chairman.
Thank you.
Other comments?
Not we have emotion and a
second.
If you'll call the roll, please.
Sender Boone,
sender is.
Senator, that's not necessary.
Please you can vote no, thank
you.
Ciner Figueroa.
Yes.
Senator Hickey.
Serova
and explain my vote.
Oh
Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton.
No
Senator Pope explain my vote.
Senator Boone.
Senator Souls.
And so we have on a 5-3 vote of
the bill passes on.
Thank you and Senator Novas
Senator Nava to explain her
vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you,
Representatives for bringing
this bill forward. I, I just
wanna thank you for that and
also to amplify the voices of
low income students across the
state and all the gratitude that
they deserve, so thank you.
And Mr. Chair Representative,
both representatives.
Regent Reyes, thank you for
bringing this forward. I know we
had a mayor bill in the Senate.
This is so important.
About programs and support.
People like me are not here.
I'm not educated. I'm not in the
Senate, so this is so important.
And thank you for what you're
doing.
this
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Thank you, members.
probably
