We are on webcasting as we speak
now.
Thank you
Hello.
let me call us Senate Education
Committee to order for March
first target believe were
already March.
I'll Senator changes on today's
committee there is a floor
session scheduled for eleven
o'clock today that means we're
gonna have a hard stop at ten
fifty we'll see whether we get
there or not in that this is
that time of year when people
are chasing other bills and
things are much more fluid than
normal and so things that I know
at this point is Senator Lopez
on Senate bill two eighty nine
is not able to do that Intel at
least ten o'clock we have
indicated if we are still going
at ten o'clock we'll hear it at
that point I'm hesitant to and
we'll see what if we get close
out to hold the committee for a
long period of time to come back
if we're within five minutes we
could take a short break and
then come back to that bill but
we do have a hard stop at ten
fifty
On the new business Senate bill
four oh one that the sponsor
request has been moved rolled
over to at least Wednesday
similarly Senate bill four oh
six I understand Senator Stewart
is not going to be able to
present were sixty day so those
will both get rolled over we do
have house bill eighty three as
amended which is Representative
Romero he is the chair of the
house education and so we will
attempt to contact him and
accommodate him moving over from
his house meeting with us and
then H. B. one seventy one
program units for certain school
personnel we will be hearing as
well.
So as I.
Comments from committee members
as we get up and running this
morning.
Ranking member the ability the
thing from your side Senator
Pinto is all good morning always
great to see you in your
beautiful backgrounds very New
Mexico always.
If not as I recall on Friday we
were had gotten through most of
the discussion and everything on
house bill fifty two is amended
up the Representative Figueroa
was bill I thought that she is
with us this morning I think we
were tentative the doctor ready
to take a vote but I always want
to make sure and open it up if
there were any other questions
from committee members on house
bill fifty two as amended.
Mr chair just confirm we did
complete everything the public
comment all the committee
questions and we are ready for
the vote but had to hold off
because we lost.
Yes and that's what I I just
want to check and make sure that
there wasn't anybody that a
pending question if not then
we're open promotion from the
committee.
Mr chair I move for emotions for
House Bill fifty two amended a
do pass.
Second to pass as amended thank
you bye Senator Kernan million
if you'll call the roll please.
Senator excuse me Senator
Brandt.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senate
renewable yes Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes Sanders Sauls.
Yes have a do you have it passed
I apologize we had to hold you
over the weekend in order to get
that but I think we're all
pretty sure it was coming so
congratulations you haven't you
passed out of Senate education.
Thanks committee.
and with that and again for the
public you're ready and Senate
education right now we just had
a few past motion on house bill
fifty two as amended out Senate
bill two eighty nine the sponsor
will not be available until
about ten so we will move the
Senate bill three eighty four
closure of certain school
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee and I'm sorry I
couldn't present this on Friday
the little bit better but
Is nothing contagious to some
I've been struggling with for
last several years it's decided
to flare up its ugly head of
this weekend so.
so Senate bill three eighty four
the first thing well let me just
give you the not shell of what
it does this bill allows
parents.
To do a petition.
To have their school closed.
This bill the idea for this bill
comes out of North Carolina.
Which was having a lot of
struggles and education they
changed this in their law and it
has dramatically improve the
education in North Carolina.
allowing parents to have that
role specifically fifty percent
of the parents would have to
sign the petition within any
count in the school year.
then we're present those
petitions to the school board
and that school would be shut
down.
There is a process for put re
opening that school.
that includes parental
involvement community
involvement that is really
trying to have some
accountability more at the.
Community level.
When it comes to whether our
schools are failing our children
all.
I want to call out the.
FY are is completely wrong on
this bill which we have seen a
few times this does not allow to
close down a school district
there's no where in here that it
talks about closing down the
school district so I don't know.
you know maybe it was for twenty
at the the the time that the
person was riding this.
FIR but the the FY are is
completely erroneous because
they miss understood this bill
and thinking it was to shut down
the school district not a
school.
A building not a single school
within a district.
The the process for.
Reopening the school.
Is a pretty.
Involved one.
Making sure that we are getting
things fixed that were wrong at
that school before they're
allowed to reopen this and I
think that's the most important
part of that.
The process.
With that Mr Chairman I'm not
gonna take a long time on this I
do think it's a discussion that
we need to have about what's
going on in our schools what's
happening and I believe that
this pulls it back to a student
first mentality.
and gets the focus back on
educating our children
and not as much on the adults I
think a lot of times if we can
just get the adults out of the
room and focus on the kids that
we could really.
Majorly change your education in
New Mexico so that a you'll for
questions and I'm sure there are
plenty.
Thank you senator are there.
The experts that the other
people that you have you would
like to speak for though Mr
chairman this bill is is all
from me there's no one
that has this wasn't for any
particular person or any
particular group so I don't have
any expert witnesses I did get
contacted over the weekend by
group that supporting the bill
and the that was a that was
interesting and exciting for me
to see that because you know you
know how it is you know you I I
have heard about this many of
you know Senator Qatar
and he used to be a senator with
us Sir souls and his brother
actually is from North Carolina.
I was working spent most of his
working career up there and had
talked to me about this and
shared this with me that that's
you know his kids were in the
school system where they
actually had to do this.
and it really really works well
for them and work well in North
Carolina and so as I researched
it looked at it more.
I.
Got some some help from some
other people to write the
language and the but the bill is
all for me.
That and I I know what Center
daughters brother JD we.
What did a bunch of things
together at a high school where
is I think it's Jamie is the one
you're talking about thank you
okay and.
Someone has there's not muted if
they would please from them yet
on.
Hello.
The card can you please mute
everyone for a moment to get
that turned off and then.
Everyone on my side but I've got
this whole thing about
telescopes point on my.
Nobody else is getting that.
Hi.
So I'll I.
Turn that off and will we'll
take this is public comment now
figure out what's wrong on that
knowledge on my end.
Senator.
Three eighty four.
Speaking against the bill first
up we had really may Ortiz.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee millimeter teams
on the Legislative lays on for
the New Mexico public schools so
ciation on we need to the
membership of eighty nine school
districts and we are four
hundred fifty strong school
board voice says Mr chairman
members of the committee we
respectfully opposes piece of
legislation Senate bill three
eighty four will require a
school board or chartered
authority to close a public
school.
With at least fifty percent of
the parents and students signing
a petition while this may
consider the wishes of half of
the parents it does not take
into consideration fifty percent
of the parents and the students
that have not signed the
position there's no provision in
the bill Mr chairman to allow
schools to allow an elected
school board to debate or
consider the petition which is
contrary to one of our guiding
principles that our roads local
control in our belief that
successfully successfully
petitioned Bob school would be
required to close at the end of
the semester remain closed for
that school year this could
cause and result in
complications for school budget
to school enrollment and data
collection the bill is not
making appropriation closures
would likely have a significant
fiscal impacts beyond what the
current budget and cover and the
permanent closure would result
in students transferring to
surrounding schools and could
cause again or redistribution of
SCG the bill does not address
all the petitions and signatures
would be certified for the more
in the FIR the analysis PED
notes the provisions of this
bill make school personnel in
regard to termination and this
chart school boys we
respectfully oppose this
legislation and thank you Mr
chairman for allowing us to
present our position.
Thank
you very much are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak against the spell
stand rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee good morning
Senator thank you for bringing
this forward I think it's
something we need to debate for
my chair after doing thirty
years of superintending I assure
you I understand the public
interests the going districts
what also understand how they
change year over year lily may
indicated a number of the
technical issues in the house
let me state one other reason
why I don't support the bill I
believe that the legislative
action on open enrollment years
ago again the ability of parents
for to vote with your feet move
their children where they would
like to move them and I think
that probably eliminated much of
the needs are in the US for that
on the issue of the issues that
were raised by the school board
association today will have to
stand in opposition to this and
Mister chairman Senator we'd be
happy to work with you as you we
move through the concerns you
have which we know are
legitimate.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
of Senate bill three eighty four
please raise your hand.
No other members of the public.
We will now move on to those who
wish to speak in favor of the
bills with Amanda are gone.
The committee my name is Amanda
of on the executive director New
Mexico kids can I statewide
education at least advocacy
organization we stand in support
of this bill because we believe
in true community schools
oftentimes we talk about
community schools but we rarely
if ever extend any true power to
the community of the school most
notably the parents and students
that attend that school any case
is Senate bill three eighty four
we'd actually be putting power
in the hands of parents in the
way that they've done in
California Colorado and as
you've heard from Senator Brandt
North Carolina we know that this
type of intervention works in
fact we need to look no further
than Albuquerque public schools
when three of the elementary
schools are identified for
intensive school turnaround by
PED three years ago they had to
undergo a similar process and
those turnaround plans have
yielded tremendous results
including increase academic
outcomes and increased
enrollment especially at
Hawthorne elementary we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward and look
forward to the discussion thank
you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in favor of
Senate bill three eighty four.
Please raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time thank you took are
appreciated thank you senator
rand any comments based on
public input.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
and I really appreciate and have
worked very closely with the Mr
teas and mistranslations
impressions or comments I do
understand that the this is not
something I take lightly I
really think we need to start
discussing how we can have some
accountability more to local
school level after serving a
school board itself I I don't
take lightly taking any control
away from local school board but
I will tell you coming from a
great district that I come from
there's at least one school in
that district that has needed
attention since before I came on
the board in the district and
hasn't gotten.
And the only way that you're
going to be able to get.
The real accountability is for
the parents to be able to get
involved and demand change and
this is a way to demand change
that we may want to look at do
we do that by shutting it down
completely or do we look at it
in another way but we continue
to slip further and further down
in education in our state.
Everything that we have tried
has not worked.
It may be time to dry some huge
changes that will actually fix
what's happening in our state
and we probably need to do that
school by school district by
district
thank you Mr chairman project
that.
Thank you senator will now go to
questions from the committee
senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman of Senator
Brandt if I could.
this does not really have a a
procedure basically sister two
percent and we close is that way
I read it I'm trying to avoid
the FIR because you've indicated
was enacted so trying to delve
into the details of the bill
myself but could you tell me
exit kind of coming in on the
procedures.
Iran's misunderstanding district
procedural process here yep the
procedure would be that you know
a parent or group of parents
would get together and start a
petition within that school
district
if they got fifty percent of the
parents to sign that petition
and then turned it into the
school district in that school
would be would have to close.
the children would then have to
be moved to other schools either
within that district or outside
of that district to make sure
that their education continue.
you know we have a lot of
Very poor families in our state
and they can't always afford.
The two.
Go to charter school.
And I know that some of your
language charter schools are
free well yes in a way.
But in a way they're not because
you have to provide the
transportation you have to to
find other things that sometimes
those charter schools require
that in traditional public
school doesn't require.
and so the that the procedure
would be very simply they fill
out they do a petition.
if long as they get fifty
percent of the parents on that
petition the that would.
Trigger that school being closed
it doesn't say in the
legislation so that would have
to write to in rural
who would verify those
signatures and who would set
those up that's the way our
system works if you don't put it
law that does rule to do it or
we can add something into that
that would have the school board
certifying those for the school
certifying those.
We would want some kind of third
party not either one of those I
hope that helps.
I guess my concern is
procedurally not concept I liked
the idea of having all will
procedure and worried about.
With.
Or in the local basketball
tournament.
The current stroll upset because
they didn't win the National the
state championship.
Yeah I'm I'm being ridiculous I
know but I'm just trying to say
that there could be reasons that
parents would be all upset and
I had an ex wife who served on
the school board and actually
lost her election because they
fired coach and that's the kind
of thing that to sometimes
convince and sense of community
and I'm I'm wondering if there
needs to be more procedural
process in the in the way we do
it you get fifty percent then
there's a step PED comes in or
whatever I don't know what this
but the that's that's my concern
I would like to see the bill go
forward so I am not going to
vote against it but I guess so.
Do you have any comments on how
we might each of the procedure
process a little bit to make it
more.
Representative.
We wouldn't be able to click
over thank you for not winning
the championship it has to be
clearly for of.
For a low student academic
performance.
Any effective teacher
performance or poor management
so those are the only three
reasons the protest and to be
done and that is purposely so
that we don't just have a school
being closed over sports because
we have seen things like that
happening.
In our state in our country to
where you know sometimes and and
I love school sports I played
school sports sometimes sports
becomes more of a priority than
education.
and so we've had that those
those go hand in hand in our
state but what we don't want is
a school being closed down just
because the basketball team
didn't do well
so it literally has to be for
one of those three iterations so
what would happen is a parent or
and I'm I'm guessing this would
probably be like the PTA or
something like that would come
together and say you know our
kids are not getting the
education they deserve I'm not
gonna name a school in my
district but there's one
district that I can see this
happening every one school I
could see this happening with
and the parents have been very
does happy at that school for a
very long time and they could
come together and say we've gone
to the board we've done
everything that we can do.
We need and we're demanding that
our children receive proper
education so it's got to be for
one of those three reasons
and so they would do that
petition they were circulated
around the school I will tell
you what I for see happening is
as soon as that petition starts
the school board would start
paying attention and that my
guess is that the
superintendents would start
paying attention
when that starts I doubt that
this would ever get to the point
although it hasn't North
Carolina gotten to the point
where they've actually shut
schools down.
I agree with you the gentleman
would get their attention to be
on page six says
if a petitioner local school
board your regardless what the
reason is I know it says and of
course in the academic forms
etcetera etcetera this limit is
school board the schools shall
be closed the end of the
semester and that's a that's a
little too draconian I think I
was.
pastor session on Mr chairman
I'll vote for the bill but I
hope that you address maybe a
little bit of a six of the
process for as you as you know
for thank you Mr.
Thank you said Senator poke.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Brandt
Some of the questions senator
bill brought up for some of the
areas of my concern so just to
confirm they would
Parents would fill out a
petition and he's it's the fifty
percent threshold and then
they're able to close the school
is there still any interaction
or any involvement of the local
school board.
Well the school board with would
be involved in where those those
children would be sent as far as
well as making recommendations
and then they would come in and
and fulfil the the requirements
to re open that screen
and I know there was some
concern in the FIR will cost
because we also put in a
building content components
through the reopening process
and I and I get that I
understand that however you know
sometimes you need a fresh
start.
when the school was closed and
all the kids are gone is the
best time to come in and fix any
deficiencies that you have in
the actual of the.
And you can go and you clean
those things up you can rename
the school if you need to and
have those kids come back the
next year to a new school
and so the school board would be
involved in everything to re
open the school they would have
to do the community meetings to
find out what's going on to
figure out you know how can we
get our kids back in the school
building and what needs to be
done there so so most of their
involvement in this would be
getting it re opened.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Brandt and I'm not trying to be
NIT picking with the bill but so
we talk about parents and the
fifty percent you know we have a
lot of of families with single
parent households right so
they're going to get one vote a
two parent households going to
get to I guess how do we
determine that fifty percent
threshold.
That's one of the things that
I've thought about and I I
really appreciate Senator bills.
There if questioning because it
it looks that we need to be more
detailed on the procedure.
As to how this would work and
that's one of the things will
definitely work on with the bill
just to set everyone's money to
these I'm not gonna have you
vote on this bill today
So.
And Sir souls and I've talked
about this I really want this to
be looked at by the LFC through
the interim but I really want
your feedback on how we can take
this idea and how we can improve
upon it to come back and do
something that's going to help
with our worst schools because
I'm guessing this is only going
to happen in our work schools in
the schools where we just
they're just not able to get the
attention sometimes the school
district just has to many irons
in the fire and one of the
schools gets left out in one
school just doesn't get the
attention it needs we need to do
something to address those
things we've pretty much given
all those things way that are
able to address those things at
this point we need to fix that
so
I hear what you're saying and
you're absolutely right we need
to set a better.
Procedurally.
How are the positions done you
know do you file with the
secretary state for those
petitions to let them know
they're being broader do you
actually you know we're you know
maybe we have the school board
were you request the petition
from the school board and I have
to give it to you but that gives
the school board the notice that
something's happening at the
school.
That we need to put pay
attention to so I think in
fairness you know this is one of
those things you know the that I
think in fairness that during
the interim I like to sit down
with the school board
association I'd like to sit down
superintendents association and
say how can we address this
concern.
and do what we're we're we're
all going to be comfortable
knowing that there's a system to
fix a school that's just isn't
working so I'm sorry if I I went
beyond what you're asking.
No problem that's fine Mr chair
Senator Brandt and it's great to
hear that that to me it sounds
like you brought this to start
having this discussion I think
we can all agree that locally
there would you know we need to
find ways to find you know hold
our our schools accountable for
kids so I I I think we can all
agree on that from some of the
other analysis there were there
was some concerns about due
process you know in this and a
petition and what happens I'm
not going to claim to be a
constitutional you know attorney
on that I don't have that legal
background but I just wanna make
sure those types of concerns are
addressed and then when we talk
about if this were to happen I
mean if we were to close an
actual high school.
I we just have concerns on what
we do where these kids go and
and and how we address that so
that's all I have on you're
welcome to respond but but I'm
just happy that we're actually
having this discussion and and
it looks like we'll move on in
the you know LFC in the in the
in the in term to have this
discussion and thanks for
bringing the bill for.
Thank you and and I do you know
one of the things is high school
would be difficult.
elementary school you know maybe
a place we want to start looking
at
to to see how this would work
with our district
but you know if you let's say
this happened in Rio Rancho New
closed I'm gonna pick on my high
school Cleveland high school
you know that's not mine I
didn't go there but it's
actually my name is on that
building so is on the board when
it was done.
but let's say you closed rewrite
Cleveland high school then yes
you would you would move them
over to your other high school
or you would have to find some
other places to to have those
kids get that education and it
would crowd those classes
absolutely
but you're you're talking about
shutting it down for your.
Or a semester if you if you do
it at the mid mid term.
and getting things fixed so
sometimes you got to do that so
you can come elect yeah and make
things right.
Yes sometimes you know.
When the system when you when
your Xbox system is failing you
have to reset the Xbox just
bring so you know you've got to
push the reset button and this
is making us push the reset
button when the computer freezes
up sometimes you gotta turn it
off in recent that's what we're
talking about is what a school
just isn't working they're just
not getting it together we've
tried changing you know the
principal we've tried changing
the assistant principal and
we're just not getting anywhere
sometimes you have to just reset
you've got just close it down a
re scan push the reset button
there used to be procedures to
do that they work follow and
that's why we're in the
situation we're in today is
because they want the they were
incorrectly or they want a
little.
Thank you very much I really
appreciate your input.
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator Brandt and you
know I'm looking at the analysis
and and trying to remember what
the procedure is currently.
Within the PED to close the
school I'm get can someone
remind me what what we can do
now I remember several years ago
at based on school grades and
and that was in place for a long
time yeah and then I think it
went away what what is procedure
currently when you have a school
that just simply is not meeting
any of the standards they're
they're not successful what can
PED do with those schools
currently just does anyone have
an answer I don't know if miss
Ortiz or Mr rants can answer
that.
I wonder if Mister Senate would
would be willing to answer that.
Mr chair Senator I'll do my best
so a lot of a lot of what the
PED can do is tied to federal
accountability that we designate
schools as in need of.
Improvement generally it's not a
closure is not the first option
that the PED would would would
use and and just etcetera
mentioned there are few schools
in Albuquerque and and others in
the state as well we're
designated as needed improvement
closure wasn't an option until
we find a lot of support both
technical assistance and
financial support to federal to
federal funds so that's
generally the way that we
approach schools that are not
meeting well I guess we would
what we would say is
expectations.
Well thank you very much for
that Mr chairman and senator and
and I wonder what triggers at
the PED to begin looking that
closely at a school where they
would go through that process.
Mr chair Senator Mr chair
Senator current thanks for the
question so generally that's
that's been tied to standardized
tests and in proficiency rates
in students.
Thank you very much and so I
wonder in in and I the idea of
the bill I mean I know it's
difficult to just shut down the
school but I also know that
parents often times they know
when a school is providing the
education that their children
many and so rather than I like
the idea of the petition in the
sense that maybe that could be
the triggering at peace either
to go to the school board or the
PED decide look we we have tried
and we're not getting anywhere
so when you get that percentage
maybe it needs to be a little
bit higher and maybe maybe the
procedure should be that every
family gets one thousand or
whatever that it to get to the
point where you have seventy
five percent of the parents say
they're not happy with the
school the school board is not
listening.
No one's listening maybe that
would trigger at the action of
the PED which is currently in
place so I think it is worth a
discussion going forward to.
Just the very rare cases and I
don't think that there are many
that certainly there are
probably some out there where
parents feel that they're not
being heard I remember a number
of years ago when guest in
school district they did a great
turn around within their
district and I'm not sure if
that was by school or how that
happened but I just remember.
And.
For us to listen to our parents
and and I appreciate the fact
that you price the issue I think
it needs quite a bit of work but
but I think parents giving them
a voice like that we would be
very helpful and and I think we
should continue this discussion
so thank you that's all I have.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
if I could just a little bit if
you remember back just a couple
years ago there were four
schools in our state that PED
did identify
as needing major changes
actually their recommendation
was to close the schools
and the three of them were in
APS of one of them was another
district on it just left me you
know how that works as you get
older thankfully to bring
but
There was a big battle over that
the wrist.
Finally there was a turnaround
on those three schools but it
was long hard fought it was our
secretary designate you never
did get confirmed between.
Scanned everything stems
crescent can trigger member of
us yes and that's why I can't
remember because it's just.
But you know those those schools
needed a lot of help and we have
seen some positive and one of
those schools has done really
well
author at the elementary has has
had some great changes in great
turnaround I don't know where
the other schools are and so I I
think that we see some of the
most produce Menteri.
What was that.
I'm sorry Mr loss but is a woman
who was one of the okay great
and I appreciate that and I have
your colon health or because I
know they've actually made some
huge changes and some big
turnarounds and and hopefully
the others.
can make some some large
improvements but it wasn't as
easy as it should have been I
think and there there needs to
be a way when parents get
involved and and I I did
struggle with what what should
the threshold should be fifty
percent should be thirty percent
should be sixty percent should
be eighty percent you know
honestly if given half of the
families in the school.
Our believe that their children
are not getting proper education
I think that that really needs a
serious look but school board
and by yes but I do like your
recorder your.
Thoughts there about maybe the
petition triggering.
The the actual.
or maybe we have a process in
place and this is why I really
would like the the LFC to take a
look at us a process in place
that would require the local
school board to put together a
plan to turn that school
district around and then maybe
give it a couple years and then
go back to those parents and say
did this work but so what close.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator I do want to circle back
around to what is already the
PED has with regard to
accountability and I believe at
one time at the PD did have that
option and and have a process
but one of the things we need to
talk about in the interim yes
what is that pathway for PED to
close I think that's been taken
away in related so I hope the PT
is listening and and maybe you
could find debate that pathway
that's in place now because I
think it was amended out of that
S. S. so let's dig deep and that
receive the PED still has the
authority because I'm not sure
what we're using for school
accountability now and we need
to look at that because it
shouldn't have to be up to the
parents we should be holding
schools accountable for the work
that they did and so all of
these things need to be just at
discussed during the interim so
thank you very much you.
Thank you and next I think that
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Brandt right now
I'm hard I made I just think
everything that everyone is that
I think your bank I'm coming at
the point of view I think then
that fort bend community well
that that and our local in but
and I also think that the.
The school will get the
junction.
You could do a projection of
by one third and set up a due
process that value waiting and
then have a vote at fifty
percent are the other pages how
does will reopen what are the
criteria with apps do it but I
think that on the concept of
community school and
accountability and that turned
around.
Not or one to three years but
that turned around.
But I would be very very helpful
and then taking action education
getting state effort in the
place to be thank you again for
bringing it out don't get to
combat.
Thank you thank your chair at
the Representative.
What.
You.
With some about moving and
nothing happening thank you
Senator I'm looking Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Brandt and.
You know I I'm back and forth on
this one to be honest with you
I'm I'm trying to figure out
Truthfully why is it needed
first of all because we do have
systems in place and you did
call out schools turning around
when we had the the M. R. M. R.
I. you know interventions on the
three or four elementary's
around the state one of them was
right my backyard
where a lot of my aunties and a
lot of my cousins and a lot of
my family attended less but is
so interest will and Senator
Hickey was right on the mark
when it really sent shockwaves
through the community that we
thought our elementary school
could close and so it got the
entire the business community in
the area which is not a huge
business community got a lot of
our not for profits I mean we
actually the the cafeteria put a
plan together we we got behind
it we were the first one I
believe to come out of the MRI
rating if I recall the time it's
not the first one the second
one.
And so can you tell me
again I don't want to rehash all
the things you've already said I
like the differences on what
you're proposing versus what we
already have in place today to
correct this kind of behavior.
Excuse me this performance yeah
I I think a lot of that Senator
is
Triggers it.
In this case it would be the
community it would be the
parents of the children who were
in the schools who would say our
school is failing our children
and I think it likes our current
said our parents really do know
when their children are getting
a good education or are not
getting a good education.
and so I think the big
differences hopefully this would
identify the schools that need
intervention.
Much faster than was done in
that situation that you're
speaking of the MRI process
was way way overdue with those
schools and I think you might
you would agree with that if
that'd been done ten years
earlier think about where the
the children in your community
would be at if those actions
that were taken in those schools
with done ten years earlier the
problem is that the way the
system is set up now.
It takes way too long.
For us to be able to go in and
do the interventions that need
to be done when we took out some
of the accountability that we
took out the last couple years
you no longer have the eight
throughout so you no longer have
anything that triggers.
You know those systems to come
into place and I know that a lot
of us to care for the A.
throughout
but we've left it where there
isn't much accountability for
the individual schools and if
there is it's not something
that's easy for us to see but
our parents now.
And so you know maybe what we
should look at as we go as we
look at this is a process where.
Parents can petition the pad or
the local school board I'm fine
with that to take a look at and
to seriously consider revamping
the schools.
I was a parent who the reason I
ran for school board is because
my school board at the time.
Didn't give a.
Plying flip what was happening.
And I'm in what I consider the
best school district in the
state we can all argue about
that.
but you know performance wise we
are the best school districts in
the state.
and yet there were still those
kind of problems they're still
school that the school in our
district that seriously needs.
I had to come in.
Or someone to come in and redo
the school the school still
amassing the kids in that school
are not getting a good education
and if you call the parents of
that school they would tell you
that I'm sorry I'm trying not to
go too long because I know that
the you know we have other bills
to get to but this is a
conversation that's got to be at
we have to start having so
accountability at the local
school level and Senator Hickey
is actually right this is about
yeah we've been talking about
community schools for last
several years this is getting
our community involved in our
schools
when in your right as soon as
that school district the issues
those schools are identified as
needing to be closed the
community got involved at some
point there's got to be a wake
up call and what I'm saying is
we need to put in place a
procedure where parents can
trigger that wake up call.
Thank you I appreciate that and
and you know I I.
I tend to agree with you I mean
I really do I mean I'm I'm
trying to figure out how we do
this the best way.
One thing I would hate to have
happened which I've seen I think
we've all seen as legislators
because you know that calm just
rings off the hook you know
twenty four seven three sixty
five
is I would I would also hate to
see this happen where a group of
parents or a portion of the
community just in like the
principal or just didn't like
the leadership in the school
so I want to make sure to be a
some safeguards on that because
sometimes as I say often in the
legislature leadership is lonely
sometimes we have to take votes
and we have to do things we have
to get things done that are very
lonely they're very unpopular
but we know they need to get
that and sometimes as a
principal goes into a school and
they're just you know they're
under water before they even
walk in the door how does your
legislation avoid something like
that I mean if you look at
there's a amid school in
Albuquerque that set up I
principles in five years.
And and there's there's sort of
a contingency of the teachers in
the school and a contingency of
the parents just keep throwing
the principal out
how do you avoid that with your
legislation.
Well I think for one if you're
not bringing in a principle that
that communities can can get
around there's not going to ever
be by from that community so
you're gonna have to figure out
how you bring a principal and
that that community get around
if it's the teachers that are
giving that principle chance
then maybe it's time to move
those teachers to other schools
within the district and bring in
a new staff and sometimes those
are hard decisions have to be
may.
Honestly this legislation that
would happen until schools been
closed down.
one of the things to restart the
school is you have to have new
leadership.
And you have the new staffing
now all the previous staff can
reapply but the new principal
gets to decide whether or not
it's good for the school for the
staff to come back or to go to a
different school districts the
different school within the
district and and that's the way
that would work so and that
maybe some we want to look at.
Mr Chairman all all I know we're
we're we're I wanted to just
move on here but what would be
the time line for community to
know what's going to happen with
your legislation I guess you
really wouldn't know because of
the the severity of the of the
issue but but you know
elementary schools as an example
were placed in a location where
the community was growing up in
in regaining larger and and this
facilitating you know
five seven minute ten minute
drive to the elementary school
what we do in those cases how
much time to communities have to
retool reinvent when they're
school would be closed.
I think the the the bill you
know makes it work can be just
as quickly or as long as as it
it takes that district to get
the act together on that screen
so it would yeah if it was
closed down mid term.
Then they would be able to get
it back re opened in the fall as
long as they took the steps that
are laid out in the bill to do
so so bring the school up to
standard when it comes to you
know the average standard that
we have is building issues
that's not as much as my concern
as it is all the other things
the the the bring in a principal
working with the local community
on what's the plan going to be
to get the school reopened and
coming up with a plan and then
reopening so I and I you know
we've laid those out fairly well
there may be a little bit more
work needs to be done in that
you know to to bring L. to help
the school district you're a
little bit more is always this
balance as you know when you're
writing a law help prescriptive
do you want to be and how much
you want to leave up to
you know the the path to do with
through rural part of this is
very prescriptive part of that
is not all.
I appreciate that and and I also
want to thank them the sorties
Mr rounds for their comments I
was very important for me to
hear I don't have another
question Mr chairman but I do I
do echo Senator pope's you know
questions or concerns and others
on how these boats would take
place and what would be the
apportionment and you know would
it be the household would it be
of the the two parents have
about would be the number of
children just want you to think
about all these things
would it be the number of kids
that you have in that school
that would give you a vote I
mean if there's any number of
ways to do it so I think that
needs a lot of work right away
and how that would come together
thank you Mr chairman.
Thanks for the Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you Senator Brandt we're
bringing this forward
it's.
Teaching.
To my understanding there was a
survey that had to be conducted
by The school at the end of the
year in which a certain percent
of the community
I had a couple questions on it's
supposed to come back and I
think that's what mechanism that
they were supposed to use are
utilized to give us a heads up
on the screen and the
satisfaction of the students and
the parents even with the
teachers and the faculty I don't
know what the percentage of
feedback was especially for the
schools in my district
which would be very interesting
to hear especially because of
the technology we have now that
you know with but even putting
in more technology and having
that feedback which should drive
the data
you know we do we do have some
things put in place I think just
very recently and and Ted
there's a the longitudinal data
system and you know we have
these other multi late systems
up support that are incorporated
within PED that we should
utilize
to drive this board and also
give us a heads up on but it's
going on especially when we.
PED are not PED but whatever
decision is finally made on what
kind of assessment we are going
to use in the schools and that
survey though especially for my
district which is a paper copy
even the B. I. E. school was
responsible to pay for.
Would not that set and making.
thought about that Senator
Brandt.
I want to comment on that
conduct a couple things I do
have questions on.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Pinto I appreciate that and I've
recently keep looking down as
I'm writing down notes as you
guys within the suggestions of
things that we can actually look
at in this and I think that
maybe an early indicator I will
tell you a lot of families are
hesitant to fill out the surveys
and be truthful on them because
they're afraid will come back on
and so if you're gonna do that
it needs to be done in a way
that's very that that that the
school can't put together who
sent survey and that's that's
very important
just like with our when we vote
no one knows exactly how we
voted to accept us
and that needs to stay that way
so there are concerns within
that realm you also the
percentage of surveys returned
is usually very low within the
district we've we've done things
like survey monkey in in Rio
Rancho which is an online survey
also the ones are sent home the
ones that are sent home rarely
make it to the parents and even
rarer make it back and so that's
those are some drawbacks of
doing that kind of system but it
could be an early indicator of
you know things that we need to
look at and and you know the.
The real point is.
That are.
Rules are failing.
A lot of our schools are failing
our kids how do we know that
well we have judged that
actually determine that in the
R. C. Martinez lawsuit.
And what was that judges
primary.
Student outcomes.
The judge said we're not doing
things right now state based on
the outcomes of our students I
agree
I don't necessarily agree that
pouring more money into the same
system is going to fix that.
What I do think Is bring some
accountability at the local
school level may help fix that
we've seen that in other states
and so that's what the idea is
behind this and you servos right
this is to try to force the
conversation to get started
sometimes.
Before you can get the
stakeholders is set down in a
room and talk you've got to
bring a bill that wakes them up.
I hope that I've done that today
I hope that I've brought a bill
that will wake people up and say
we really need to take a look at
this and we really take a look
at what's happening at our
individual school level but I
really do appreciate that I did
write that down.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you
Senator Brandt because I do
think it is sent them something
that does need to be addressed
even with the bill that we voted
on just before even though it
received to do past that because
of and I glad you brought up
that case because of Mr Martinez
Yazzie.
That the whole system that was
in place prior to this
litigation should be looked at
we we need to we put the money
there now it's going to look at
the inner it should go the
course it should but now it's
all putting those.
Councils liaisons you know a lot
of this some of their disabled
it's been there so long has it
been too long you know and
that's why talk about technology
coming in because there is some
things that need to be
incorporated into care and you
know some places are not
effective anymore and when they
want to talk about
representation and a true
representation is if we have
someone.
That's been in there for you
know quite a long time where's
the new stuff where how do we
you know I'm not saying that
experience is not valued but
that they might need to be
shifted somewhere else to give
that evidence so that we can
continue to hold onto the things
we need to but also move forward
and make progress for students
and in my district it's been
that's one of the things they
hold over some people is the
word petition you know we're
gonna petition this we're gonna
you know any decision they did
not like it it it was held over
someone's head in that sense and
brought back negative publicity
and would cost them and Office
or some some sort.
But I think there has to be
mechanism put in place that to
the district in some sense two
is not involved in to skew
whatever's coming back when you
were talking about the survey
you know that goes to the
district are back to the school
whether it gets lost goes into
the black hole which would have
been a lot of times V. I. E.
with anything that was brought
back or any kind of feedback in
which nobody knew where it went
so.
I think it is a to bolting I
think we do have to go back and
look at all our systems now that
are placed with bilingual
education everything that was
the ball with the LFC Martinez
needs to be revamped and also a
way for the community in some
sense if we don't have enough
community members in which they
do leave
you know that that's a trigger
right there would we have a low
enrollment it can't just be
because of we really need to
find out why especially every
time a student leaves the
school.
We need to really have a better
day and say well it's just
disciplinary issues there has to
be something else that
need to be put in place to
protect the student and the tax
thank you so much Senator Brandt
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you senator.
A couple of questions or
comments I have money and and
yes I mean we're we're having a
good discussion but I think this
has all kinds of concerns where
it conflicts with current law
complex with the state
constitution I could do this as
trying to questions back and
forth.
Let me just we're just put out
my my concerns
First the school board is
elected by the community if
there's a school within the
community that doesn't feel like
it's being heard it's kind of
like you know then you need to
garner the votes and change the
school board that is the duly
elected representatives of the
schools to the the community and
that's the proper mechanism not
say well we didn't like the
outcome of what we're doing so
we're going to go around the
elected process the school board
then elects or appoints the
superintendent who has
responsibility for every single
school as response ability for
the staff for the suit for that
principle in is then has the the
year or should of the community
if there's school that isn't
getting that their proper is to
petition but a petition is
different than a vote that says
you must
and I have serious problems and
concerns with that this also
conflicts with things like the
Person act in that it goes
around that add to the staff has
gets moved fired or whatever
because the parents decide they
don't like the situation there
and multitude of things where
that are not defined it says the
parents can do this for low
performance.
What is low performance who
determines what level of low
performance that's not defined
and low performance in Los
Alamos schools make a high
performance in another district
you know how is that the
following how is the.
And I think I missed the words
it's in here somewhere but the
teacher or for poor management
how do you define for management
because those must be defined at
this has legal power to then
change the.
What the state's open or not
those must be defined terms in
something of this sort to move
forward and so I just see a
multitude of places where this
conflicts with.
Several areas of current law you
charter schools are several
areas the complex with charter
school law charter schools the
charter board is essentially
appointed by the parents you
know there isn't really a public
election for the charter board
and so how with that location
with the charter schools and all
of there is where they look like
a small committee school
district and so I think and also
and I think it was amended on
indicated.
It's the mechanisms we currently
have work I mean it was pointed
out a couple of schools that
were in trouble went through the
proper mechanism through.
And there's been a major
turnaround in does it sounds
like the systems we have in
place are currently working
Certainly there technical
concerns and problems the
finding that says fifty percent
of the parents well we've got
grandparents we've got people
that are the the
my last word but you'll have for
the custody of the children
grandparents yeah and what's a
single parent households no
multitude of other things that
must be defined in all of this
that are not.
So yeah and I know you were
taking some notes and I
appreciate that you had
requested that yeah we know this
forward and I appreciate that so
that we have the discussion
about.
Thank you and I do want to
address one thing you so we have
a system in place actually we
got rid of the system a couple
years ago so we no longer have
the system in place that was
used in APS so we don't have a
system right now that's one of
the reasons we need to take a
look at this is because we got
rid of it when we changed much
of our accountability system
we we went too far and so we
need to go back and look at how
we do that how we fix that this
may be a bridge too far but that
that's okay sometimes you gotta
sure the discussion and get
things rolling we we continue to
slide down education of our kids
are being felt I know we don't
want to hear that I know we
don't want to think that I know
that we all think we're doing a
great job but in this area we
are all.
So.
Is our local school board goes
You know it is probably a lot
easier in a very small district
but in your district in my
district and center produce
district
one school is not gonna change
the school war
and the parents can get mad at
that school and that most they
might be able to change one
member of the school board and
that's the one that's over that
direct school we're talking to
Albuquerque you got one school
board member who has about you
know who knows how many schools
within that school board members
area one school.
Is it going to be able to get
that screen.
Board member replaced
and in my district it's even
hard so
we need to bring yeah we've been
talking a community schools with
this post community and.
But we need to figure out what's
the best system for our state.
To make sure that we are holding
education accountable at the
local school level not just at
the board level I wish you all
the but we want to thank all the
things we need to look at is
where were we at the education
what house bill two twelve was
passed verses where we are
today.
And the school board association
are conversations around the
slot we've gone down since we
removed authority from the
school boards.
The school board can just go
ahead and shut down the school
yeah the higher superintendent
but are you gonna get rid of the
superintendent like you have in
my district because you disagree
with with one what's happening
in one school no you're not that
would be ridiculous.
So anyway there's there's just
some things that need to be
looked at these things need to
be tweaked I think the the the
the school gets the conversation
started and I hope if you're the
chair I think you will be
of value to see that you will.
Put this on the agenda for us to
have this discussion thank you
Mr.
Thank you pleasure the committee
please well Mr chairman I will
of this bill an asset not be the
thank you.
Thank you Senator Brandt so it
will allow remain permit from
from this point on the Senate
Bill B. eighty four thank you
for the discussion everyone.
We'll now is Representative
Romero with us.
No he's Cherry hosted U. cation
I don't know whether we can get
we're doing that we're ready is.
As we're waiting to get him over
here is house bill one seventy
one Representative Ferrary
program needs for certain school
personnel available.
I don't know where they are.
Senator this is Mariann give me
just a moment all run in and
call their secretaries see what
we can do about that okay let's
take about a five minute break
We all probably can use it get
up out of our chairs from
enrollment get copied or do
whatever it will be back
about somewhere around twenty
till two so everybody take a
short break and we'll see if we
can get them back over here and
get get those bills heard so
everyone please take a short.
Welcome Representative Romero
and Representative.
As we get all of our members
back we took a short break yes
we're trying to get you all over
here we'll get started here in
two or three minutes definitely
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
Representative Ferrary we're
gonna do a house bill eighty
three first that may take I
don't know how long so we will
my guess is at least fifteen
minutes you're welcome we're
happy to have you here but if
you yeah I need to make some
phone calls whatever the profit
least fifteen minutes I would
guess.
Actually I'm in health committee
and I'll just add let them know
that I'm still going to be able
to do things I was going to it
try to do that anyway so okay
well I I think we got a
mechanism for calling you what
we're it looks like we're
getting within a few minutes if
you're able to come back over at
that I'm gonna keep I have two
different computers on so I'll
keep this one zoom Dan and just
listened as I am on the other
one so thank you thank you.
Looking to see if we displaces
come back on as for our
committee and either Tokara
Marianna can kind of watch that
we got our our team back.
We have four of our team back
okay waiting for Senator Kernan
Senator Hickey Senneville and
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
And back.
We now have a quorum if you want
to get started Sir.
Okay.
Representative Romero if you'll
take us through house bill
eighty three as amended and that
the public will go back house
we'll do house bill one seventy
one of the house house bill
fifty two as amended Senate bill
three eighty four was pool that
the sponsor request Senate bill
one is rolled over to Wednesday
as is Senate bill four on six
Senate bill two eighty nine will
be hearing sometime after ten
o'clock if there is time we have
a hard stop at ten fifty because
we have a more session at
eleven.
Representative Romero if you
would please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's
good to see you all on another
week day this is house bill
eighty three as amended on so
this is changing the graduation
requirements for high school
students so instead of I think
we're we're accustomed to
hearing a lot of bills some
certainly in house education for
you all and Senate education
that are looking at adding or
subtracting multiple components
to high school graduation this
is taking a look at the high
school graduation credits
holistically so I would like to
start off Mr Mr chairman and
members of the committee by a
kind of explaining the the broad
the less often goal approach to
to the bill and then go into to
the actual nitty gritty of the
requirements
So basically the approach to
this is getting student buy in
into their high school education
I think a lot of us that are in
the education field and have
worked with our young folks or
even adults folks there tends to
be a lot more by in a lot more
effort put in certainly when
students have the choice of
class to take in the type of
direction that they are taking
with that in are there are there
education so certainly with the
with the students that I teach
when they can see themselves in
the work and have that sort of
freedom and flexibility to
choose the classes classes that
they wish and have the necessary
guidance along the way that
they're more willing to taste
being gates stay engaged and and
really engaged with the
material.
So that's really the the point
of house bill eighty three as
amended
To get into some of the
specifics so originally the bill
had three credits for mass we
bump that up after discussion
and house education to for and
also setting a floor of a
minimum of algebra one we heard
that from various stakeholders
that they wish to see a floor of
algebra one for students to
complete D. for their able to to
opt into various other math
classes that they wish to choose
there's the English component so
for credits of English stays the
same except there's a floor of
English line in English ten.
For social studies there's an
added tax credit so we have
removed the New Mexico history
half credit that's currently in
there for high school students
on part of that reason is
because middle school already
has a very rich New Mexico
history component I'm also I've
been a part of the workgroup
along with the public education
department that it's looking at
changing the standards for
social studies right large and a
lot of that work is centered on
culturally responsive curriculum
within all of our social studies
so I talk about this in the way
that I teach US history is that
I try to and that our rich
cultural history here in New
Mexico into how we fit into the
broader US history narrative in
this country so that was the the
reason there we've also
increased the government in avid
civics to the requirement and in
the way that I explain this is I
think that through our standards
we're kind of creating this
trajectory we're we're having
students situated in New Mexico
New Mexico history and then
we're getting more and more
broad US history world history
and then government and civics.
Where students really start
engaging within their social
studies right is where
everything was history what's
happened prior how it leads up
to today and then finally having
government and civics be of one
year class as opposed to the
semester it currently is so so
students can really start
engaging and thinking how
they're going to start engaging
and working I will stay with us
in our positions as senators and
representatives
And and within government more
broadly
one of the others components we
added is financial literacy I
think full Senate education and
health education Harvard heard
various bills over the years
including this year on financial
literacy so the way that the
amendment re reads from our
state government committee after
our discussions and house
education was students would be
able to take hi there economics
Mike they currently do or
financial literacy so those of
you that have taught
economics before like I have
already know that a big
component of the economic
standards is financial literacy
so either way you slice it for
students whether they choose
government or I'm sorry
economics or if they choose
financial literacy they're going
to be getting
financial literacy either way.
So that that's a broad overview
of the components of of house
bill eighty three as amended I
think what we're trying to do is
really broadened the scope of
what can be considered various
credits in various fields so for
example one of the ones that I I
keep fielding questions on it's
become a bit of a lightning rod
is culinary arts as a science as
a potential science credit those
of you that are into cooking or
baking no that the requirements
are different depending on
various elements that keep that
you use on the elevation that
we're at you know that getting
us certain listed in Brad is
dependent on on the ingredients
you put in not only but also the
altitude in which your baking so
I'm I still contend that
culinary arts is very much a
science and for those of you
that that may be skeptical I
would refer you to a book called
salt seat that in acid in order
to read the whole point of it is
the science aspect and showing
how people can with the
ingredients in their kitchen
cook whatever they need as long
as they understand the science
behind cooking
but it's all to say that these
courses still have to go through
the department for their
authorization that these courses
are meeting on the standard set
out in for what what ever
category they may be placed
under for district right so it's
not to say that every culinary
arts class would constitute a
science credit they would have
to demonstrate that still to the
Department but that's just one
example it's really broadening
the scope of what could be
possible for for these various
credits on and one last thing Mr
chairman and committee is.
That it's more
inclusive of career technical
education within the standard so
really embedding career
technical education into the
existing or I should say these
new standards
for students that want to
pursue a career technical track
or a higher education track and
the standards are flexible
enough for students to be able
to jump from one or the other
and not sacrifice on their
credits are have to rearrange
their credits ahead of time so
with that Mr chairman I'd be
happy to stand for questions I
also have on Dr Byrne Steen here
just in case there may be any
sort of questions that may need
to search.
Thank you chairman Romero of the
and until current you will take
us through public input.
Thirty three.
Staff will go for those who
beginning and then that one.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and an audit on
director New Mexico kids can
what guiding stars of our
organization is actually options
and so we'd really like to work
at Representative Romero for
working toward creating more
pathways towards graduation we
believe that every option that
is provided to students should
provide them with more pathways
and opportunities that you are
and therein lies the one major
concern we have related to this
bill especially in removing
algebra two requirements without
having taken algebra two and
high school students will be
unable to attend our flagship
universities or many other
universities across the country
because out of range you is
often a prerequisite requisite
for admission.
Maybe something of student
things that they want their
sophomore junior year but what
if they change their mind we
understand that this can be
mitigated with accent plans but
our experiences and schools are
that next step plans are often
times not implemented with
fidelity on the part of the
staff for students are here is
that this could result in a lot
of graduating seniors you
realize only when it's too late
that their options are more
limited than originally.
Read more man twenty now is very
serious business and it is one
of the most impactful policies
that you all set as the
Legislature indirectly affects
the life outcomes of our
students we ask that you
carefully debate this proposal
and keep in mind a long term
interests of our students thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you very much next up we
have so we know at planning now
we.
yes high school and the
president of our local two views
fourteen fifty.
I want to start by saying that I
support the spirit and intent of
the bill and I'm not against
giving students a wider variety
of options and pathways to
graduation.
I do have concerns that bill
could have unforeseen impacts on
district districts particularly
that have schedules that make it
possible for students to earn
more than twenty four credits at
the at by the end of their
senior year.
I think that in the bill that
the graduation requirements are
sort of calibrated with the six
period schedule in mind we're
students really can only earn a
maximum of twenty four credits
by the end of their senior year
but many districts offer seven
eight period schedules for
example my district runs in
eight period schedule at the
high school and that enable
students to earn up to thirty
two credits by the end of their
senior year and importantly that
they can earn up to twenty four
credits by the end of their
junior year.
Now in the past what's kept
students in the high school
after that is that they still
had to take one year of English
at house high and so often
students set house hi would have
their English class English for
or AP lead or or whatever they
selected and then they would
have a wide open schedule that
enable them to do internships
dual credit classes and and so
on.
With second the with this bill
sort of does by allowing
students to receive CTE credit
in place of certain English
credits is it would allow them
to graduate early.
And once word gets out I think
that we would have at in
districts that offer
you eight period days sept eight
yes seven period days many many
students would elect to
graduate.
Thank you very much.
We have a meal.
Good mornin chair members of the
committee I'm impose Neil and
executive director of state New
Mexico provided health and
physical educators are main
concerns with this bill
obviously are regarding really
the lack of specifics around
health education and physical
education I'm sure we'll hear
later from from both it thank
you and in the PED that the the
bill as amended does not change
anything that's already on the
books for health and physical
education but what I would
really ask of this committee as
we move forward and look at
changing our graduation
requirements for students that
this is the time to actually
strengthen any existing
requirements around health
education and physical education
the bill as written has great
intent there are parts of it
that I love there are parts that
that I worry about is an
educator and as a parent
but the intent is great but what
I would ask is that we really
look at a time when our students
need quality health education
physical education physical
activity options that that this
bill by continuing to keep
health education as something
that can be pushed down to
eighth grade or can be made a
required elective really makes
our students have to choose
between a subject that is
crucial to their successful and
healthy life and taking elective
that they would enjoy I think
it's an unfair choice to
continuing to marginalize health
education programs ation one
there's never been a more
important time
thank you for that for for your
time this morning they I
appreciate the thoughtfulness
behind the bill and I appreciate
this committee's decision as you
all move forward thank you.
Thank you very much then we have
doctor Christine member.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Chris here I
am speaking for myself on this
bill not for any entity in
particular and I wanted to say
that I I thank the sponsor for
bringing the bill forward it
started a lot of good
conversations about graduation
requirements I'm not sure that
we're ready to move in that
direction without having a
larger group actually have that
discussion with right the right
people at the table to really
talk about it my biggest
opposition to house bill eighty
three is amended is the
information in there around
health education and physical
education specifically for
health education making putting
health education against a
graduation and elective
requirement does even though it
doesn't change the fact that
it's still required it does
Put the pressure to say well if
we put it down to eighth grade
then we can have an extra
elective
sick kids learn different things
in different ways they take
riskier behaviors a response
they had and the high school the
youth risk and resiliency survey
that's an it's taken in New
Mexico shows is that kids in
high school do different
behaviors than they do in middle
school and so having the
requirement in middle school I
think that now is the time for
opening up graduation
requirements think about where's
the best place for the
graduation requirement for
health education it needs to be
in the high school and so I
wanted to thank you all for
hearing that and appreciate your
support.
Thank you very much next up we
have match about and.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman souls Representative
Romero members of the Senate
Education Committee for this
opportunity to comment on HB
eighty three I'm here is a
member representing the math and
science Advisory Council New
Mexico whose charge is to advise
the legislature in the PD on
science and mathematics
education.
We oppose the bill as written
although we have a lot of the
spirit behind it as many of us
to but we have some real
concerns that H. B. eighty three
does not promote the state's
goal of all high school students
meeting science and math
standards to fist sufficiently
prepare them for college career
and citizenship.
And so we've prepared a written
document and of the summary of
the rest of our recommendations
are.
Is that all students would be
required to meet all signed
standards within their three
years of required science
standards as you may know we
adopted new science standards
and twenty eighteen.
so we suggest we have suggested
boarding there that students may
choose any three science courses
that collectively meet all
credit requirements and save
state science academic content
and performance standards.
We also thought it wasn't
necessary to name all of the
specific courses for science and
that that should be disclosed to
the discretion of the thirty
second PED.
Similarly for math we would want
all of our students prepared by
beating all of our math
standards and that would mean
reinstating the algebra two
requirement
and.
Provided that we also reinstate
the waiver.
And we would also ask that the
specific.
Course is not being mentioned
so.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
of health bill eighty three as
amended at this time raise your
hand.
Then.
Thank you I'm currently a
teacher through the A. T. L.
program but I was a lawyer for
thirty five years mostly in
California representing
corporations and businesses and
major litigation
I'm speaking against this bill
and maybe I'm completely out of
this but what I see is that
under this bill you can graduate
high school and not take biology
chemistry or physics and as miss
Aragon pointed out that even in
the CHP study that's in the L.
E. S. C. says that algebra two
and these courses are what's
required around the country it's
gonna be very easy for students
to just screw off and do the
most minimal thing and then they
wake up and then they have to
first they're starting behind
even with a high school degree
in New Mexico.
And I want to talk about what's
not been set.
This state is suffering from not
enough people graduate high
school and that is centered
ironically in Hispanic
communities where we know the
history nvidia's discrimination
what California did to get that
up in the last several years was
a project where they said we
will go into those communities
to overcome the culture where
it's family respected Education
third and they have increased
just the last few years the
amount of Hispanic students
graduating that they are now up
to twenty five percent of the UC
incoming class is Hispanic.
And I think if we really want
to.
Problem we have to do that and I
can talk to people about that
who to talk to but what I'm
saying to you is that this is a
dilution and you should get rid
of the S. A. T. before you get
rid of these requirements thank
you very much.
Thank you very much.
Those who wish to speak in favor
of house bill eighty three as
amended first off we have thank
you and me.
I might remind people there we
do have a two minute time limit
we enforce and education so
please go ahead.
A good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is tiap looming field director
for think New Mexico we're
particularly interested in the
financial literacy component of
this bill last year we did a
report about predatory lending
and we're delighted that
chairman schools caring that
bill Senate bill sixty six which
addresses that issue but also
dovetails with our reserves were
really came to appreciate how
important it is for people to
have an understanding money
matters and how that works in
their lives one of the first
things to note is that New
Mexico's ranks forty seventh out
of fifty states and financial
literacy and currently it's an
optional electives only eleven
percent of students this take
financial literacy last year are
we seeing this work in many
other states seventeen states in
the last decade have made
financial literacy a requirement
for high school graduation which
also includes three of our
neighboring states Arizona Texas
and Utah it's also a great way
to address poverty in our state
by helping bridge the gap
between lower income students
and their wealthier counterparts
and they have easier access to
financial literacy either to
other courses or that type of
information taught at home so we
just want to thank the sponsor
Representative Romero for caring
this legislation we ask that you
go in support of this bill thank
you.
Thank you very much
we have Hey man why.
Thank thank you Mr chair and
community members my name is
Eileen van we I am the co chair
of the Education Committee for
the league of women voters of
New Mexico and thank you
Representative Romero for
introducing house bill eighty
three the primary goal of of the
bill is giving students more
choices and greater
responsibility for an engagement
in their own learning this
supports the goal of the league
of women voters to have every
student receive a high quality
equitable education.
The capstone course guided by a
highly qualified teacher could
be structured to be culturally
and linguistically relevant to
the students lives and give them
practice in real world public
presentations giving students
more choices for core courses in
the expansion of government and
civics education strengthens
meaningful learning goals we
appreciate the amendment to
continue requiring four credits
of mathematics with more options
of course is to meet the
requirements such as financial
literacy.
Other important courses are
health physical education
digital technology critical
media literacy and the arts
courses such as these could be
more intentionally integrated
with core courses for example
Health and visual arts with
biology.
Encouraging team teaching could
also positively influence course
learning experiences one concern
is the need for high quality
professional development for
teachers and counselors who
would have a significant
responsibilities to assure the
capstone courses meet the
intended learning goals the
goals of the bill have the
potential to result in higher
graduation rates and improve
readiness for post secondary
education which could also lead
to strengthening the economy of
the state please support HB
eighty three thank you.
Thank you very much next I
think.
All right next up we have shown
Berman.
We are doing.
We had remained an annual.
The medicine.
T. R. ng good morning sorry good
morning Mr Mr chair members of
the committee and Representative
Romero.
My name is passing Nelson and
I'm a retired school nurse and a
member of the New Mexico
Alliance for SchoolBased Health
Care and I apologize I am I in
opposition to the bill I didn't
see the link prior to just a
minute ago
however I I do appreciate the
intent of the effort that's
being made here we oppose house
bill eighty three is written
because it would allow the
require health education
graduation credit to be provided
in eighth grade and this we feel
has the potential unintended
consequence of not providing age
appropriate education at a time
when students tend to engage in
riskier behaviors in high
school.
Cation is part of I school
performance.
Teaching high school performance
standards in eighth grade may
not be developmentally
appropriate further no other
high school graduation credit
requirement be proof be provided
in eighth grade so it's
difficult to understand why
health education is singled out
for this option we know that
students who are not healthy
have difficulty learning and
students who are not educated
tend to be less healthy health
problems whether due to physical
or behavioral illness or injury
are a main reason for poor
school attendance a key lesson
learned from the pandemic is the
need for increased health
literacy our students are facing
more social emotional and
physical health issues than ever
before and need accurate and age
appropriate permit provided
through health education to help
them be healthy and educator
excess for health education.
Messages should be taught at all
levels elementary middle and
high but the graduation credit
requirements should be taught in
high school if the bill is not
amended to remove the option for
the graduation credit course in
health education to be offered
in eighth grade I recommend that
a study and be done that include
many of the health experts the
school help fix.
Thank you very much we have a
team.
Morning Mr chairman millionaire
Jeez representing the New Mexico
scored Association under
legislative liaison and we speak
in support of house bill eighty
three we appreciate the options
that are provided for student
choices we believe this
legislation broadens the career
pathways for a high school
student.
And also provides flexibility
adult or trying to demonstration
of competence and graduation
requirements The New Mexico
score Association supports this
legislation and appreciate the
sponsor for presenting that we
specifically appreciate it thank
the sponsor for listening and
responding to our comments in
the previous education hearing
to maintain the current for math
credit requirements and not to
lower to three credits we thank
the sponsors for the bill and
for the amendment and we asked
favorable consideration will be
forward and we thank you Mr
chairman for allowing us to
voice our position.
Thank you very much.
Those with their hands.
As COVID all.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Albuquerque
public schools stands in support
of this bill and we think the
sponsor for bringing up for it
does provide local control for
districts and schools to design
programs to provide options to
students and one of those local
control options is health
education we thank senator
Representative Romero and we
hope you all have a great day
thank you.
Thank you very much John birch.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is John
urgent with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and we are also here in
support of house bill eighty
three as amended we don't we
duplicate of all of some of the
comments that we've heard but we
do want to underscore the the
promotion of flexibility the
promotion of local control and
decision making and the
promotion of viewing career
technical education as a
legitimate and viable pathway
for some of our high school
students to to pursue one of the
other items that I think ties in
with that as we for a lot of
testimony and prior committees
regarding those local options
and how this is been embraced by
many educational leaders in
rural districts especially
around like agricultural
sciences and other issues that
may hit more close to home in
our rural serving districts so
we did want to lift those items
up and to urge your support in
consideration of house bill
eighty three thank you.
Thank you very much what.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Superintendent Dennis Roch I'm
speaking this morning is the
president of the New Mexico
school superintendents
association please to be
standing in support of the bill
we actually had expressed some
concerns early on with
Representative Romero that the
the bill may actually have have
watered some things down as we
reduced the numbers down to take
three maps and and and fewer
sciences English but of the
sponsor was very gracious work
with us we we kept the bar high
on graduation requirements while
still allowing the flexibility
superintendents have been
calling for in our platform for
the last several years asking
for districts and more or more
precisely school counselors and
teachers to work with students
on crafting an individualized
sequence of courses that will
lead to graduation and beyond
lead to college preparedness
lead to career.
S. and that's exactly what this
bill does I'm grateful to the
sponsor for it I know there were
some issues raised by health
advocates on the call this
morning the the health
requirement for graduation has
always been middle school or
high school at a local
determination local decision
it's been that way for the last
ten years or so this bill
doesn't change that provision at
all and so I'm sure there change
maybe a a positive one that
they're asking for but that's
not what this bill does and so
we stand in strong support of
the bill thank the sponsor.
Thank you very much.
The New.
Good morning Mr chair it's a
pleasure to be in the Senate
Education Committee this morning
I would like to just point out a
few other things about house
bill eighty three
it really paves the way for
districts to create options for
students based on skills and
relevant knowledge for their
personal future aspirations
house bill eighty three does not
mandate that it district create
more course options it allows
for local economy based on each
districts ready nest and
capacity most importantly it
allows for more student
engagement the and that is a
factor and graduation rates the
more students are engaged in
their own education the more
they are likely to graduate and
just one more comment on the
capstone courses I think this is
a great path forward it's
something that other states are
doing capstone courses are
projects that are described as
culminating activities that are
basically passion projects for
students and allows for cross
curricular work and can be
offered if the teacher is highly
qualified in an area to be one
of the core requirements for
graduation it is the best way
for us to move high school
forward in in reforming the way
that we've been require great
credit since two thousand seven
and it does so at no cost and
and with great innovation so I
thank you very much.
Thank you very much Steve CNN's.
You are muted.
It's not just.
Moving on that anymore.
We're unable to hear you.
Okay.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee John set up with
the public education department
we stand in support of HB eighty
three I thank the sponsor for
bringing the bill as others have
already said it it offers
flexibility for students and
local decision making we also
think it's really important
because we've the department has
and the legislature has invested
heavily in career technical
education of the last few years
and what the bill does is it
allows schools to provide equal
pathways to career success right
we mentioned earlier we had we
heard concerns earlier that this
might be a lesser past that
students might take a lesser
path we think that's that's not
true we want to offer career
technical education as an equal
and equally rigorous path to
postsecondary success and and
the bill does that among all the
other things that you've heard
from other supporters we sense
from support the bill thank you.
Thank you very much and to those
of you who we could not hear due
to.
We could not hear the to
technical difficulties your
support has been noted and that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you.
and first I always like to go
back to the sponsor any comments
based on public input
Representative Romero.
I'm thank you Mr chairman I I
think the the.
Comments were certainly well
appreciated I mean I think the
the folksy in support had kind
of talked about you know we're
not changing anything about
health it'll be left up to the
districts whether to make these
more stringent but it certainly
provides that flexibility for
our students moving forward and
I do have doctor bird stated she
may make additional comments Mr
chairman.
Representative she was able to
do that through the public
comment type of thing if they're
questions where she's able to
act as your expert that would be
appropriate time sure thank you
Mr.
I stand for.
Thank you in first Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
Representative to the bill
Representative in there thanks
in the bill that I I certainly
agree with and support and
thanks in the bill that I don't
and to be honest with you I
think this is an issue that.
Really needs to go for the LA
yes see I feel quite frankly I'm
a little disappointed and and a
bit.
I'm.
Frustrated because I have not be
part of this discussion I know
that we've talked about that a
graduation requirements loosely
of the last few years but this
is something that really needs
to come before the LA Essie and
all senators and all
representatives that Madam body
need to have a very third
discussion including the
comments from all of those for
and against when we change
graduation requirements a number
of years ago that process took
well over here and it involved
everyone I feel a little bit
left out of this process and and
I'm disappointed because I think
this is something that is
critical to our students we need
to get it right
I have concerns about the
science portion I'm trying to
meet the standards with many of
that listed data opportunities I
don't think that's going to
prepare our kids for for college
I want to make sure that
whatever is required at the
college level we're able to
provide going that direction did
you several things in the bill
that I have concerns about that
more than anything this needs to
be a broader conversation where
we all can join here and we all
can participate and I don't feel
that this is the the platform in
the way to do this I think we
can spend the interim talking
about this so we all have a
voice so we can all hear the
discussion that obviously is
taking place between
the sponsor and and members of
the PED and school board and
everybody that's supporting it I
have not heard that conversation
some a little bit frustrated
that we're trying to do this
during this session without
having addresses through the
alley estate and I really don't
have any questions because I
think that this bill just.
Positivist many the changes are.
It has been fully vetted to the
level that I think it should be
before we take or take action on
this bill that's all I have
Mister chair.
Senator Kernan
I just have Senator public.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Romero for
bringing this bill I just want
to confirm so right now this
bill does not change the health
class requirement that's in a
way middle school right now it
doesn't change anything to the
current.
Statutes.
Mr Chairman Senator pope no it
does not it keeps it the same as
the as the current
statue reads.
Thank you I just had gotten some
concerns and some calls from
folks about this and you know.
I think there is the argument to
have this done in middle school
because unfortunately some of
our kids are you know making
some decisions there that they
need it but I think it's also
need in high school so I think
we just need to have a larger
discussion of this bill doesn't
impact of where we have these
types of classes because I would
argue that needs to happen at
the middle school and high
school
moving on the the requirement
for a hundred per to.
For me being a stem degree
graduate I just don't want to
limit options for students when
they graduate in getting into
college and getting into some of
the stem degrees and I
understand a lot of folks might
not want to pursue that but I
just don't want to limit that to
our to our high school students
I know for me I didn't get to
that level and I had to struggle
a taken some remedial classes to
get my biochemistry degree and
so I just want to give all of
our graduates to tools to
succeed whichever direction they
go and not limit that so that's
just that's one area of concern
for me and that's not a question
but just a issue for me but
thank you for bringing this
forward and I would and you know
I had a for a lot of this to you
people like you Representative
Romero's you know Senator Kernan
Senator souls who have the
educational background.
but I also think
there maybe needs to be a larger
discussion on we move bills like
this because there's all these
bills that you know mandate this
or this course and that and I
think we need to come together
and I'm glad you brought up in
the beginning about a holistic
approach but I think we need to
look at that again on on when we
look at graduation requirements
so thank you.
Thank you your vote.
LFC.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you for bringing this bill
forward Representative.
Y. E. R. Y. on the back and is
anything being done on the front
as far as primary elementary
middle level.
Mr chairman and senator Pinto I
think in this case it's because
I'm a high school teacher I'm so
we're looking primarily at high
school I think I would defer to
a lot of my colleagues in middle
school somebody like
representative Sarinana that's
looking at middle school and we
have various reforms that are
aimed toward elementary school
but not to this extent but I
would say that it's because this
is this is definitely within my
my brown within high school that
I'm looking at at doing this.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair members of the committee
when we talk about a subject
within the school and teaching
in a high school math teacher
the problem I had was my kids
came and they didn't have a very
good foundation not foundation
it's created all the way from
when they are incorporated
to County especially when they
start learning the operations in
the third grade and they're
expected to master for
operations all the way up to
division before they get out of
that but they've been pushed
through school and all the way
up to the high school level in
which that basic foundation is
lacking so when we talk about
making reforms you know just on
the ladder and I think that has
to be holistically turn look at
all the way from the inception
of when we begin to teach them
and that's one of the things I'd
like to see because I also think
even when we talk about language
in teaching it at the high
school level you know our kids
are bilingual but we try to put
a teacher in there that
bilingual to communicate with
them but should we also be
teaching them you know in that
sense that language a little bit
early
so that they do have a better.
Because it's required for
graduation to have another
language but the mastery of it
is something different.
But the level.
What they could do something
more and we're we're trying to
say we want to expand these to
our children's horizon so they
have better opportunities are
more opportunities what are we
really looking at it the way we
should be instead of doing this
piecemeal things we've been with
them dust Martinez and talk
about bilingual education
because.
With the Navajo Nation
scholarship the chief manually
tell scholarships a full ride
scholarship and you're required
to take two years of language
which is only offered at the
high school level and not
throughout the state of New
Mexico
so these
requirements and some of these
criteria that really would be
advantages for students
needs a better approach I think
I'm not just these are.
I understand the intent of the
bill I think it is
Something that we do need to
look at but I think we're just
trying to do it grade level by
grade level but really that's
the whole to childhood education
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members.
Thank you senator US senator
Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
I'm not in secondary education
but I have had opportunity to do
some.
Of college level one of the
things I've noticed is that a
lot of the students are headed
to college level did not have a
very good background just in
basic stuff that doesn't am I
missing something are are we not
offering the opportunity for
kids to actually dilute their
basic training by some
rearranging some of this I I
have no problem with financial
literacy and all those kind of
things but I'm a little
concerned we maybe diluting the
overall education experience to
some degree do you have any
response Representative.
Mr chairman and and senator I
think that we heard that
concerned early on in house
education from the
superintendents about
potentially doing work with them
in order to to strengthen and I
think that part of what we're
doing is obviously as I
mentioned giving students
options but we have those sort
of guidance and guardrails in
place for students that
whichever path they see
themselves taking in the future
they're they're needing to
evaluate it through next step
plans every single year with the
guidance counselors
administrators teachers in order
to to help them along those
tasks so if they have ambitions
for career that they can work
toward that if they have
ambitions toward higher end they
can work toward that and it's
flexible enough first for
students to to switch between
ball so I don't think we're
lowering the bar by any means I
think we're contributing to it
by increasing it by providing
for more students by in in the
choices of classes that they do
take.
I think that's the concept is
good if
If the whole system works on I'm
not sure that that's the case
for our kids and and and and
some community some school
districts the to that they get
the kind of counseling and
advice that they need to do.
Make the choices that you know
some kids are not designed for
stem careers some kids are
designed for more of an arch
arching signed arts type fine
arts type of background.
I'm just concerned we're gonna.
I think all kids need a good
basic math understanding a good
reading understanding and we're
not doing well as a state on
those numbers and I'm concerned
this may be.
This bill might contribute to
that in some form or fashion in
school districts were of the.
Counseling is not up to par and
that's a that's a problem
probably with Martinez Yazzie I
think that's a a lot of what has
gotten us into the problem the
the goal is to get to get out
and it's not necessary to get
the kid out with the best
educational promote their their
life long career choices and the
I'm a little concerned about
that and I I don't know that
this bill actually goes very far
to to resolve that and that's
that's my concern any comments
on that Representative Mr
Chairman said Representative.
Mr chairman and and I I think
it's a great to addressing those
concerns having the student body
and pieces scroll to getting or
staying cage showing of a
classroom in the scene
themselves curriculums I see it
act opposite waving these
choices relate get a student
support within their education
to really grasp that and bring
them into the classroom truly
engaging or meaningful.
All right thank you
Representative Mr chairman thank
you are you.
Thank you senator I don't have
other hands up and so I wanted
to ask a couple of questions and
and I had some conversations
with Representative or with
chairman Romero but.
Gentleman was consulted as far
as determining what the credits
in the changes were on this as
far as you know some sort of an
open process.
I think it was for most of this
week teachers from Albuquerque
public schools A. S. T. you
heard we brought in the
Attendance season with concerns
we had conversations with the
public education department Mr
chairman.
Thank you and gentleman was the
the map.
Advisory group consulted.
Mr Chairman now.
That was the social studies
advisory group consulted.
Mr Chairman now.
You see where I'm going with the
science group consultant.
Mr chairman I'd I do see where
you're going.
Yeah we have a number of of
other ones such as the fine arts
council their groups that
represent CTE of the counselors
were higher education
The advisors where they
consulted.
Mr Chairman now.
And I think similar to Senator
Kernan I think that's where I
see the biggest concern is and
certainly there are some things
I like I think we need to have a
very broad discussion but I
think all of those groups need
to be part of that discussion
and doing it without I described
our high school graduation
requirements as a Jenga tower
yeah we keep going to bright
walked out of the bottom we put
it on the top and it's going to
fall over and it's been many
years since we've actually had a
holistic view and looking at all
of that and this almost
and knocks it over a bill that
without anybody having input as
to how it gets rebuilt.
In particular many of those that
that have very serious concerns
about how those are particularly
done
and gentleman does this reduce
the number of electives that
students would have.
Mr chairman it does but I would
say that in broadening the the
requirements elsewhere is is
where we make up for it and it's
not restrictive it's it's
actually.
more inclusive of the student
interest outside of the
electors.
And gentleman and I understand
except for we've got a number of
students that band is an
important part of why they come
to school band for many of those
students uses up all of their
elected or the vast majority of
them and as a high school
gifted facilitator I had
students who already have to
make the very difficult choice
to whether they're gonna
continue in band or whether
they're going to take AP classes
that actually get them college
credit and move them on and your
we're taking away another one of
those options and I realize but
already most of those AP courses
are able to account for some of
the other requirements we also
have a number of students that
take athletic P. for credit and
this starts to of the to reduce
their options by at least
another credit and their
students with languages and
other things that are typically
considered as electives that
have those reduced a bunch
so I I got serious concerns I
think Senator Kernan it
indicated in that indicated to
you and many others this is
something that I already had on
on the plate for what we should
be doing in L. E. S. C. is have
a long and serious discussion
that is open to all to flesh out
all of the pieces of this
particular area what we do with
our high school requirements
because I think to do otherwise
we either continue to build our
that's about all over more
people don't have their input on
to rebuild a solid base for all
of these things and so I don't
disagree with what you're trying
to do in the attempt and I think
this helps force that we do it
in a holistic manner
then certainly if you'd like to
respond but those are kind of my
questions and concerns.
No I I certainly appreciated and
I appreciate the comments from
from many of you and I've worked
with many of you in different
capacities in a joint those
experiences but I will say that
you know when we when we look at
various other programs the the
the extent of the involvement
that you'd mentioned prior I
mean I don't remember any of
those discussions going through
at the discussions around K.
five plus or extended learning
either so we do have programs
that that don't necessarily
have that sort of brought in dat
stakeholder input but are put
out there is programs as well Mr
chairman.
Yes but and gentleman it's kinda
interesting to go about calling
each other German German German
But it all of those those words
did have a long hearing to the
L. E. S. C. where we were able
to talk about those and look at
the actual research and what it
said about those things as they
were then being discussed in and
implemented and implemented on a
pilot program and so there was
an opportunity where everybody
had notice about the the process
and so I would disagree that
those did not have more about
four.
Senator Brandt we have not heard
from you yet Sir you Mr chairman
I move to table.
We have the most people.
Doesn't require a second it is
not debatable.
Please.
Brandt yes Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
I can.
Kernan mass yes.
Yes.
Well.
Yes.
Your body up.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
The pope.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator souls yes.
We have a cable bill so
Representative your bill is
tabled but you do have my
commitment that that this will
be fully discussed better than
no we may spend even a couple
more than more than a day you
will is least one of the
sessions of not more than that
discussing it over the interim
because I think it's important
conversation so thank you Sir
thank you committee for
indulging me thank you Mr
chairman.
It is Representative Ferrary are
you still watching it with us
here she's here Senator.
Representative Ferrary we are
now ready for house bill one
seventy one.
As we move through just for the
public hearing Senate education
we had health bill fifty two as
amended got to do passed SB
three eighty four was pulled
that the sponsor request house
bill eighty three as amended was
tabled we are now on house bill
one seventy one it does not
appear that we will get back to
Senate bill two eighty nine
because of a hard stop in a
little bit over ten minutes so
Representative Ferrary if you
would please Michael of the time
yes Mr chair can I have my
expert Ellen burns Steen brought
to the panel.
She is already in in the waiting
room and and waiting and again
yeah we've got a hard stop so
yeah don't mind my advice don't
over talk it as well as that
with any of the people that may
be in favor of of it thank yeah
we got a hard stop so
Representative if you would
please.
Thank you Mr chair the
legislature decided years ago to
recognize and honor teachers to
achieve national board
certification with a pay
differential and achieving this
credentials very difficult with
only about a third of those who
attempt certification passing
and it signifies that the
practitioner has a deep
understanding of their
discipline and puts that
understanding into practice
every day and accomplished level
nationally the evidence is clear
board certified teachers
positively impacts student
learning and over time the
National Board has added
I'm sorry I was walking.
They've added additional
certification areas of forty
central school personnel who
serve students every day and
such a school nurses and social
workers and unfortunately our
language excludes counselors
because it specifies teachers
and this small change in
legislation is a step toward
treating counselors and other
essential personnel as equals to
teachers and it recognizes the
incredible professional
credential for all educators so
house bill's one seventy one
changes language in the existing
areas state law which governs us
type in eligibility for
educators with the national
board for professional teaching
standards certification and the
current law allows a stipend for
teachers only and H. B. one
seventy one changes that section
of language to read license.
employees so H. B. one seventy
one also ensures that stipends
are provided to all current
National Board professional
training
The standard and certificate
holders and who are not in the
administrative role.
And of with my expert like to
add anything first.
We can.
Representative Mr chairman
members of the committee just
one thing it is so important
that we focus on the whole child
and I think more than ever we're
aware of all of the needs not
just the learning needs but the
social emotional needs of our
students and this is one way to
bring counselors and other
school employees that are
essential to every student's
education into an equal footing
with their teaching appears
thank you.
That we stand for questions Mr
chair.
Thank you and to Kara.
Would you like to take us out to
to public comment.
Senator we did not have any
members register in advance for
public comment would you like me
to call for the members who are
in the meeting at that time.
I'm not sure that we need that.
Okay.
We can go to the committee.
Mr chair yes Senator pope I like
to make a motion for do pass on
house bill one seventy one.
Second thank you we have a
motion and a second is you'll
call the roll please merry and
I'll third Mr chairman thank you
thirty.
Brandt sure.
So it would be.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Novell yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto yes.
The pope.
Yes.
Senator all.
Yes.
We have a two passed
Representative yeah you passed
out of Senate education thank
you for being with us and
hopefully we'll see you again.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members Mr.
For the public we have a floor
session is scheduled to start at
eleven o'clock so we are not
going to be hearing Senate bill
two eighty nine today it'll get
rolled over to Wednesday along
with Senate bill four oh one in
central for a least six is
already on our calendar will see
which new ones probably a couple
of house bill's we'll be back
with us on Wednesday Senator
Padilla thank you Mr chairman
just just very respectfully to
the committee thank you for not
hearing Senate bill for one I
just wanted to report to you
that I believe we do have a
workable solution there so if it
all possible if you have a vice
chair will consider putting that
on Wednesday I would appreciate
it thank you if you if you can.
Senator it is already scheduled
we had only rolled it over at
this point.
So we are planning on four oh
one please let me know if that
changes but it will be on our
our Wednesday schedule.
Mr Chairman.
This time of year things can
switch around quickly we're
trying to to make sure we're not
putting things on at the last
minute but only if there are
things that need to be removed.
Else from from committee members
I'm not seeing any hands up and
if not then we will adjourn
Senate the Senate okay Senator
Pinto.
you just waiting to buy.
See you all later Senate
education is adjourned.
