I have a list on the the zoom
also if there are people to give
public testimony on zoom I think
we've got that all set up to
function and work I would remind
people so that we can be
efficient in things also is we
don't need a hundred people all
saying I agree with with a
particular bill if you've got
particular things that you would
like to say we certainly want to
make sure and hear your voices
but we we don't need to hear
everybody say exactly the same
thing in order to the to get the
point across so to speak and so
I don't want to limit people
speech but your we don't want to
have a bill that everybody
agrees to and have a hundred
people tell us that they do.
Any questions from the committee
before we get started with the
first bill.
Representative.
We just check and make sure that
everything's up for Senator
Kernan.
Hello yes.
She said as a panelist but we
make sure she can speak fluently
yes.
Mr chair I can hear you all can
you hear me yes thank you and
it's a good having you with us
this morning sorry we were a
little less Representative with
the systems on Monday or on a
day when we had our planning
meeting.
That's not a problem on the line
and I think it's a master for
getting this worked out so thank
you so much.
Very good anything else.
Where we get started not Senator
store if you'd like to kick us
off this is the first time for
our meetings with several of our
freshman in person in the
Education Committee of and.
Just remember to go through the
chair on different issues and
welcome to everybody both those
in person in the whole.
Senator Stewart please thank you
so much Mr chairman members of
the committee this is Senate
bill one of this bill is both
from the governor and from the
L. E. S. C. we endorse this in
our interim Education Committee
so.
Twenty years ago in two thousand
three we set up our three tier
system.
It was in part a response to now
tell of the height where we
started with high stakes tests
and we didn't have enough
teachers and we didn't have a
good.
A system for them so this is the
result of the very long
committee name education
initiatives accountability
task force that this bill came
out of so setting up our three
tier system we're now in Linda
Darling Hammond books about good
a teacher pay systems this bill
moves those three tiers from
their current.
Forty thousand fifty thousand
sixty thousand to fifty thousand
level one the sixty thousand
level two and seventy thousand
level three.
You know when not when I try to
pass house bill two twelve and
two thousand three I tried very
hard to index the three tier
system.
And the money committees would
not let us do that here we are
twenty years later raising them
twenty thousand so because like
about a thousand years a good
index for this but I will remind
you to that this is not only an
increase to the three tier
system but principals and
assistant principals salaries
are tied to the tier three tier
system that that yes examples of
that is on the back of the LFC
have fire which shows you the
responsibility factors that are
associated with principal and
assistant principal salaries.
so
I've heard that the HA FC is now
moving towards adopting this
bill from the governor of the
PED is suggesting that about two
hundred million which isn't
their budget will not only cover
the three tier on the principles
increases but has some wiggle
room for compaction you'll hear
about compaction so Mr chairman
that's the bill and I'm happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you senator
first we'll go out to the
audience the audience here with
us in the room in education we
limit people the two minutes so
please keep your comments short
and concise so that everybody
has an opportunity to do so and
so anybody would like to speak
in favor of this bill for.
Mr stand around please the
general fund for this purpose
committee members and staff
around what is the usual.
Mr call maybe and the executive
director of the New Mexico
college of education.
And the New Mexico school
superintendents association
service center will provide
thirty years around the state of
a lot of vested interest in what
we do.
this bill is part of a two part
problem we have an education
teachers today we recruitment
issues which is what this bill
squarely does as the sponsor
indicated the settlement program
that that we need to continue to
be competitive regionally this
brings our face up when that
will happen these are the states
that surrounds this doesn't
solve all the problems of your
second alright we'll talk about
you heard about compaction
compaction is when you raise the
base you don't raise the top
like you need to review talk
about seven percent of things
like that in other provisions
and come before you and your
general appropriations act but
this is a very important
move it's a necessary step we're
your positive consideration that
and Mr chairman thank you for
the opportunity to talk.
Thank you stand.
Anyone in the room yes Sir
Representative at.
Good morning everyone again for
the freshman of the don't know
me Representative Rigby and the.
Longer Sir Richard education and
houses cation Committee so I
have to be here today the help
and support of Senator was there
with you putting all those of
the bill get it but this is an
important bill been here
forever.
And the fact in the manner in
which you're doing it right now
compaction was really talked
about is so important but I tell
you it's just an ongoing fight
and senator thank you very much
for bringing the bill but
everyone else this is what needs
to happen is happening out of
the community were I I still get
calls about what's happening in
New Mexico and we take this to
be a feather in our cap further
in the the families cap because
they get the compaction taking
care of they were gonna be able
to take care of all the other
issues regarding the the rays
that come with it but in the end
of course it's the teachers who
really need this and are showing
and I really appreciate all of
you given this is a two passed
by any means thank you very much
thank you Sir anyone else in the
room.
Pandemic we were in the room
against the bill.
Now we'll go to those is this
our list of people that are on
the the zoom call and we have a
Lisa Cooper and then we'll have
a mi pada so miss Cooper if you
are on the.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning I'm only
speaking for they would even a
first grade teacher at New
Mexico international school the
twenty twenty one New Mexico
teacher of the year and the
current teach plus policy fellow
I would support for Senate bill
one I'm a level three teacher
and sole breadwinner for my
multi generational households
every.
I came to teaching because my
legal education and my mission
for giving back to my state but
having worked in other sectors
from human resources to
immigration law and having heard
from other teachers across the
country I see how the
competitiveness that was
mentioned in salaries is
essential to attracting and
retaining teachers in New Mexico
so through this bill we have the
opportunity to really value and
continue valuing the expertise
that we bring to our state just
teachers and to increase
competitiveness with states and
other professions because
currently the average teacher
salary is less than Colorado
Arizona and Texas compounded by
the system for the starting base
salaries of forty thousand
dollars are often below the
living wage for single parents
with more than one child one of
my new colleagues this year it
seems so wonderful in fact
yesterday more than one student
dressed up as first for career
day complete with red hair
sandals and desire to teach I
think of the role that she can
play in the future of bilingual
education and how she came to
the teaching from a retail
position which rate
significantly higher than what
she makes of the level one
teacher this bill can help
mitigate the costs for educators
and bolstered by stipends report
the staff positions like ours
million sure that she and many
other current and future
teachers remain in a profession
in New Mexico thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak
this morning.
Thank you Mr Stewart next we
have any product and then lily
may Ortiz is on deck this
product.
The Amy potter with us.
Mr chairman Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Amy
pada I am the network
coordinator for teach plus New
Mexico my role I've had the
privilege privilege of working
closely with some of our state
best educators who are policy
fellowship and statewide network
it is clear educators want to
make a difference for their
students and communities our
teachers have conducted research
and have developed ideas related
to the recruitment and retention
of New Mexico educators teacher
vacancies have almost doubled
leaving about twenty five
thousand students without access
to a certified classroom
teachers are teacher leaders
understand the impact related to
this crisis in the overall
profession and most importantly
the impact it has had on our
students we support salary
increases as one of the
strategies to address teacher
vacancies retainer teachers and
recruit teachers more
competitively in addition our
teachers have partnered with
other educational organizations
and recommend dedicated funding
to support S. firing teachers
with costs associated with
licensure and assessment fees
Furthermore they recommend
providing statewide funding for
stipends to teachers for
effectively for feeling
additional responsibilities or
working in high need areas thank
you for your time and
consideration in this most
important matter.
Thank you Mr and next we have
lily may Ortiz and then with the
Holland is on deck.
Really make.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the Senate Education
Committee it's a pleasure for me
to be here this morning I am the
only major parties the
legislative liaison with the New
Mexico scored Association the
New Mexico scored Association
regional meetings and membership
of the high school districts
throughout the state of New
Mexico with four hundred fifty
strong school member places Mr
chairman and members of the
committee since two thousand and
eighteen legislative session and
MSBA has recommended and
supported the raising of the
three tier minimums to the fifty
sixty and seventy thousand
dollar levels along with those
higher levels and Miss Suazo a
has also for the five years as
well recommended and supported
the increased to eighty nine
hundred thousand for elementary
middle school and high school
principals we strongly support
and wholeheartedly support
increasing the minimum salaries
of a tier three license the
system we appreciate the funds
will address the compact issues
have been a problem for school
districts and as previously said
the raising of the base our
places our state in a position
to be competitive with other
states in our region which is
which is critically critically
needed raises to these levels
have been long in coming and we
sincerely appreciate the work of
the LFC members for their
endorsement to move this forward
and we think Senator Stewart
preparedness bill we ask you Mr
chairman members of the
committee to favourably consider
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you lily may address we
have Whitney Holland and JD
Bullington is on deck.
Is how in.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Andrew Holland's and
president of the American
federation of teachers for
Mexico I was a new teacher in
two thousand twelve and maybe
thirty two thousand dollars I
found myself living paycheck to
paycheck and worked a second job
as a nanny on the weekends to
make ends meet this investment
in our certified educators would
be truly life changing as we
focus on what is needed to
recruit and retain educators
this is a eighteen New Mexico
fully supports this effort and
also recognizes that there are
many other educators in our
schools to ensure students
exceed our ancillary staff
social workers therapists and
specialized positions we look
forward to working to identify
ways in the budget will provide
them with equitable races thank
you to the sponsor for this bill
and work to be done in this
committee to fully staffed are
schools.
Thank you miss hall and JD
Bullington and then on deck is
Joe dental about though JD.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
JD Bullington registered
lobbyists for the group right
around the chamber of commerce
strongly supports increasing
teacher salaries and raising the
minimum salary level across the
teacher licensure tears did you
get the key workforce shortage
area in New Mexico and to the
extent that increasing pay is
helpful in alleviating that
problem the chambers support of
specially the year revenue was
plentiful the chamber also
believes that every child should
have access to a great school
in high performing teachers and
kids should spend more time in
the classroom each year and we
hope extended learning
requirements will accompany this
additional compensation for
teachers so as long time
admirers of the difficult job
that teachers do on a daily
basis the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce is happy to
support this legislation and
thanks the sponsors for bringing
it forward.
Thank you J. the next we have
Joe deadlocked though and Joseph
ask about is on deck.
Mr Lobato.
Morning members of the committee
Mr chair my name is Joe down of
block to help understand in
journalism educators well as
first Florida justice program
lead for mark on the academy
charter school located in south
valley in Albuquerque on the two
thousand and eighteen New Mexico
teacher of the year finalized
and the two thousand nineteen
New Mexico teach plus policy
fellow of the year as a veteran
educator of fourteen years I'm
fortunate to continue doing what
I'm passionate about I'm also a
husband a father and the sole
breadwinner for my family I love
working directly with students
and I'm affected about it
however I have considered moving
into administration partly
because of the salary increase
we need a better compensation
plan in order to recruit highly
qualified educators and so that
effective passionate educators
like myself can stay in the
classroom were we matter most
and are able to make a more
livable wage although I believe
this will help recruit and
retain educators I also ask that
you consider additional ideas
like providing funding to help
mitigate the costs for inspiring
teachers like those associated
with assessments and licensure I
appreciate your time this
afternoon or this morning your
consideration and commitment to
New Mexico teachers and students
thank you.
Thank you Mr Lobato and next we
have Joseph esco as COVID though
and I need taught us is on deck
Mr just could be the.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee just west of the with
Albuquerque public schools we
want to thank Senator Stewart
for bringing this bill forward
and her tireless commitment to
education as we're in the middle
of a staffing crisis in
Albuquerque public schools this
is listening this necessary
increase will benefit the
recruitment of new teachers we
currently have two hundred and
thirty seventy two vacancies in
APS we have other staff that
provide direct instruction and
support to students that are
paid on the three tiered
licensure system they include
nurses librarians counselors
social workers interpreters and
ancillary staff thank you for
this bold statement in support
of educators across the state.
Thank you Mr Mr ask avail though
hi me put S. in turn would lock
is on deck.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jamie torrez and I'm a
special education teacher in
Santa Fe working with students
with autism.
I am astute investor for the New
Mexico public education
department a local any a board
member and educational education
drive for young candidate and
have been teaching for over
eight years.
I honestly believe education is
the profession's going soon and
I am here solely to speak for
myself and did not speak for my
district PED or any other
organizations.
I want to speak in favor for
Senate bill one increasing the
minimum pay for educators and
counselors.
Well educators have always been
willing to go above and beyond
for students schools and
communities out of kindness and
compassion we are long overdue
for the proper recognition in
composition part education.
As an educator living in Santa
Fe I spent my first year my
first three years teaching
moving between family members
willing to take me in because I
could not afford the high cost
of living at the level one
teacher unfortunately I am not
the only one who has struggled
to live off of low educator
salaries forcing many of us to
take on additional jobs and even
forcing many quality educators
out of the bills.
Our schools are facing a
staffing crisis now and we need
to act now to recruit and retain
quality educators and certified
professionals.
I believe implementing
competitive salaries will help
modify quality professionals to
work in the schools our schools
our students deserve to be
taught by trained educators and
not simply supervised in
classrooms our schools deserves
counselors and our students need
them particularly after these
few years with the pandemic.
Educators deserve to be paid
salaries that reflect our years
of dedication and investment in
to decrease for higher education
fifteen seconds please.
Please implemented the salary
increases for the three tier
licensure is giving our students
a fighting chance to access
certified educators.
Thank you and I apologize for
calling home instead of Jamie.
Mr chairman with lock followed
by Ellen burns the.
Chairman members of the
committee Karen would walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter for all the reasons
stated we are in strong support
of this legislation we would
like to suggest that social
workers are added to this bill
however social workers work
alongside teachers counselors
principals in our impacted at
the same level as financially as
teachers please consider adding
social workers to this bill who
are also educators thank you
very much.
Thank you ms wedlock Ellen burns
dean and then on deck is the
least scea deal.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Ellen
burns Steen on the president of
the Albuquerque teachers
federation.
Twenty years ago I was just
starting my work here in the
teachers union one doctor women
cracks resented data about how
we in New Mexico in higher ed
prepared hundreds of teachers
who then left to go to
neighboring states in response
to that information Senator
Stewart and many others twenty
years ago created a unique and
progressive statewide career
ladder and I want to thank the
sponsor for maintaining her
efforts over twenty years to
make our state competitive with
the rest of the states around us
this bill at this moment in time
is so important because the one
thing making our schools more
stressful than ever including
the pandemic is not enough
adults attracting and retaining
excellent educators is one of
the most important things that
we can do in our state.
As many others have mentioned
teaching conditions which help
retain our people in our state
in our schools are also learning
conditions for students and we
need along with high quality
well prepared teachers
appropriate staffing so like
many people have mentioned along
with teachers and level three
counselors we need to pay
attention to equity with
counselors nurses social workers
and therapists I'm sure that
we'll do a lot the session to
address the above this bill is a
perfect start thank you very
much.
Thank you Ellen Lisa deal
followed by Sylvia met on that.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is on the city hall and I'm
gonna turn with the New Mexico
Center on property and a member
of the legal team for the us to
us we ask Martinez lawsuit.
The New Mexico Center on party
stands in full support of this
bill for the many reasons given
here today I won't belabor the
point about the critical role
that teachers play are the
urgent shortages with currently
facing Senate bill one is a good
step in the right direction
towards building a request
teacher workforce in addition to
filling teacher vacancies there
remains a critical need for
teachers who are native
Americans finally willing to
swim the worst and those license
and special education we need to
provide training to all teachers
in these areas and racial equity
as your instruction and finally
the teacher workforce to reflect
the diversity of our student
body we can only solve this
complex issue with research and
planning to address all elements
of teacher recruitment
preparation of professional
development.
Hope that raising teacher
salaries is one aspect of a
statewide teacher workforce plan
on how to achieve a fully
staffed effective and diverse
teacher workforce that's
responsive to the needs of our
students will honoring and
elevating the teaching
profession thank you.
Thank you Mr so be a settlement
that followed last by Carrie
Brunner to wrap us up
miss madam that.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Amanda and I'm a reading
specialist from Clovis a twenty
eighteen teacher of the year
finalist twenty eighteen Milken
educator were recipient and the
twenty twenty presidential award
state finalist I am the state
ambassador for the New Mexico
PED and have been teaching for
fifteen years I am here
representing myself I stand in
support of this bill why one
teachers why they became
teachers you will never hear
teachers say they are in it for
the money teachers choose this
profession because of the
students because teaching is our
passion and because we are
invested in the future of New
Mexico but it is no longer
feasible to stay in our
profession because of R. Y. the
demands of this profession have
increased especially during this
pandemic teachers are overworked
burned out in very underpaid the
amount of work that is going
into helping our students learn
and thrive during these trying
times.
I grew up in a very low income
households and my dad worked
long hours and when there was an
unexpected expense that came up
he worked overtime to get the
extra funds to support I learned
very quickly that you get what
you work for I joined the work
force at the age of fifteen and
then I also learned that if you
wanted to end the cycle of
poverty education was key being
a Hispanic female this was no
easy feat.
But I earned my bachelor's
master's and and a national
board certified teacher and a
national award winning teacher
and very underpaid my work I am
not paid for my overtime hours
for my expertise in any other
profession my resume would mean
a higher salary but with our
current New Mexico teacher pay
there is no way of earning a
better salary no matter what
education professional
development for amount of work I
put it our state is in dire need
of teachers high performing
teachers and minority teachers
if we want to recruit and retain
we need to stand behind our
teachers while increasing
teacher pay isn't the only
solution our state needs it is
definitely a big step second
pipeline thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you Mr.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee Kerry
rob and groomed registered
lobbyists for public charter
schools of New Mexico we are so
very grateful to Senator Stewart
for bringing this legislation
forward and for the nation that
seven or Michelle Lujan Grisham
has had to make sure that the
teachers who are professionals
in New Mexico are the top rate
some of the most competitive
rate professionals in our area
we believe that the teacher
shortage is one that we must act
urgently to address and we
believe that increasing the
minimum salaries of our teachers
across the state of New Mexico
is a major step in the right
direction to ensure that we are
able to recruit and retain our
most important professionals for
our children thank you Mr very
much Mr chairman and members
thank you Mr chair at this point
Senator would you like to
respond to any of the comments
are you ready to go to questions
from committee thank you Mr
chairman I'll just say that this
is not the only salary increase
that we are moving forward with
this year there's an additional
seven percent across the board
in addition the.
LFC and the PED have worked out
language in the budget to offer
flexibility in the extended
learning program to use in a
variety of ways but when they do
that the No set though that will
increase salaries also so
there's several ways to increase
salaries this year this three
tier the is really specific for
teachers and that is the purpose
of this we we have a thousand
forty eight teachers missing
this year that we are struggling
to find anybody to fill we are
in a crisis they're also
retiring at a much higher level
this year so I think everyone
thought COVID was going to be
done this really is the third
year that teachers have had
this the way they have to teach
so it specific for teachers
because that's the largest group
of people.
Thank you senator questions from
committee members.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman yes madam
president
Just I'm I'm in favor of the
bill of but I do want to figure
out how to.
Understand a couple things
average salaries compared to
other states maybe Mr rounds
could weigh on in on this
doesn't tell me much because I
don't know how many.
Our new teachers versus all
teachers in one state versus in
New Mexico do we have a aging
population or do we have a young
population is there any feel for
state Texas is got a higher.
About a three thousand dollar
higher average salary that is
that because they have an older
population or not can you give
me some insight into that so
Mister chairman of the
statistics I've seen is that New
Mexico is.
Fourth highest in the nation
with older teachers I think
perhaps it's because we have a
good system to enable teachers
to teach longer of than other
professions there there the
pension increases with longer
years of teaching in addition.
You know you should probably
just ignore these the the salary
averages etcetera because after
talking with senator gate
current mean Texas has an
average but on this towns across
the border from us.
They don't have the state
equalization guarantee like we
do they don't have the robust
away to fund schools the way we
do and those towns on the other
side of New Mexico are much
higher than average are much
higher their starting salary in
Hobbs has had to be pushed into
the fifties because that's their
competition so everybody is
raising teachers salaries were
not the only state with the
teacher shortage it's everywhere
because COVID is everywhere so
it it it hardly I mean it hardly
means anything these figures but
it's kind of what I was getting
at is that I remember when I was
graduating from college we did
not have state equalization and
all of the teacher majors that I
was in school with want to go to
work for gel New Mexico said why
Jalen Mexico they have the
highest salaries in the state
the time and that was a by far
this is the place to go if you
wanted to get a high salary so
that's that's kind of what I was
leading at is that Texas oil
patch schools pay much higher
because they can pay whatever
the local economy will generate
so the other thing is budget how
do our budget from the
standpoint of how much we take
out of the check have those
stand up against some of our
surrounding states here in East
information on that yes Mister
chairman Senator Neville.
You know we the education
community because they have been
paying attention to the ERP
have lowered the benefits
available to to teachers and
other educators over the years
our cost of living adjustment
has been tied to the solvency of
the E. R. B. fund for the last
ten years so up for the last
several years when we've had
when our economy is been that
there's been hardly any cost of
living I think it went below one
percent for several years so
although we have you know we're
proud of our pension funds we we
have reined in and cut back the
benefits to teachers now you
don't get the if you if you re
if you come into teaching in the
last several years you don't get
the same multiplier when you if
you retire in ten years are you
get a lower multiplier to try to
push people into teaching longer
that the contribution from
employees has been ten point
seven percent for almost as long
as our contribution has been
tied to the solvency of the fund
online at P. VRA we're it's only
been tried in the last several
years so we have reigned in the
the Cola we have reined in when
you can retire we still have a
lower form of multiplier than P.
E. R. A. of those two systems
are still very dis equal I'm
proud of our community for for
making those changes and making
that fund more solvent through
those actions I think that's
good from the retirement
standpoint but the actual
dollars coming out of the
paycheck.
Is it much greater in New Mexico
that is state in Texas or
Colorado somewhere in terms of
how much we pay into the
employee patient of her are not
pair of but here B. R. is it
higher isn't than for insurance
and all of those kind of factors
we have any numbers that say
that our teachers are getting a
bigger cut out other check
because of all these benefits
cost of benefits that are good
they're great to have but does
the state fund less in New
Mexico than say Colorado.
Mr chairman so I don't have the
exact figures but I can tell you
that of the the employee
contribution at ten point seven
is among the highest in the
country I'm not I also believe
that the employer contribution
is among the highest in the
country so we pay for the
benefits week at both the
employee and the employer you'll
hear about that my next bill
okay let's go with that Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
So I I have a couple of
questions we we just did this
couple years ago right bring it
to the.
Current level
what have been the result of
doing that we've seen less
teacher shortages better
results.
You know Mr chairman it's really
hard to answer that question
because of the COVID has just up
and did all of this its up and
did everything we were going
full bore with K. five plus an
extended learning we we had
thousands more kids signed up
and then we couldn't do it
because of COVID in March twenty
twenty so we had just started to
have fewer retirements and a
smaller teacher vacancies so yes
that did make a difference by
about three or four hundred
teachers a year but it's so
excuse my French it's not just
all gone to hell with COVID it
really has our I mean the
absences in the schools are
outrageous ugh going back and
forth between hybrid in in
person I mean we have just we
have laid.
Yes on our teachers that they
never thought they need with
very little training and with
changes all the time that's that
nature of the pandemic or and so
you know you'll have to sort of
say pre COVID.
And then where we are now so pre
COVID we were doing better.
And and now we're not thank you
Mr chairman and senator I
appreciate the answer and and I
think it's more the our response
to comment and comment itself
but that's okay
my my wife stepped away.
You know from teaching so I I
know that it has affected
our ability to to get new
teachers but we've struggled in
our state with education for a
long time.
Way before cope so you know we
we can't just use COVID as an
excuse and I know you're not and
we actually agree with me on
part of that so
I guess my biggest concern and
and you know the last time we
did this was the first time I've
ever supported changing the
tears are few knew that and I
think you brought up last time
and and I supported it because
it was so low that I felt like
we needed to adjust it might my
biggest concern with the jesting
is is I'm a huge supporter of
local control.
and in some areas.
They may not need to pay as much
for one area of teacher work
because they need to put that
money into a harder to recruit
area for teaching and no I think
you understand what I'm saying
Really hard to find special
education teachers and by
setting these minimums are
requiring districts to pay these
minimums they may not be able to
take some of that and move it to
You have they need to have
seventy thousand for starting
special teacher just to get a
special ed teacher and we tied
their hands to keep him from
being able to do that because
once they do all of this there's
nothing left.
And so how do our districts
supposed to address that.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt
you know the districts do have a
lot of local control and
according to the PED the the
funding that they want into the
budget for the systems allows
this compaction issue I mean
you're you're talking about that
a little bit so certainly
districts have always been able
to say we're going to do a
signing bonus will pay you more
for this and I mean I know what
you're saying is that we're not
sending them to the money to do
that
I believe our formula is
flexible enough for them to do
it I agree we haven't been
putting enough money into that
formula but I think we're
starting to turn that around so
and you have to remember that.
These districts eighty nine
districts receive nine hundred
million dollars directly from
the federal government through
our the funds that they didn't
even have to come to us to ask
how to use it we have no control
over that they can use that
money for signing bonuses for
for hard hard to staff which I
think they are so and they've
used a pretty creatively
creatively I I believe so I'd I
don't think we're I don't think
we're missing out of money we we
need right now to do things that
you're talking about.
Thank you Mr chairman center I'm
gonna have to respectfully
disagree with you on that I was
on the school board
and once things were dictated
from the state there's really
almost no local control
and you know that's that's just
a fact of you know so when it
comes to the art of funds yeah
they got a lot of money with one
time funding they can't put that
a budget you know the they have
maybe with bonuses to recruit
teachers yes but that's about it
you can't put that into their
salaries you can't put that in
to you know read the recurring
things because it's a one time
dollar
which is what some of the
concerns I have with what we do
with our budget but that's a
whole nother subject
so I I struggle with this I I
would prefer that we put that we
give the districts the money
that we're talking about and
allow the district to set the
tiers within their districts
that they need so
and so I'm struggling with
whether or not supported because
of that not that I don't think
the teachers need pay increase
I'm just not sure that you know
when when Senate Bill talked
about the a budget there's not
just the disparity between
budget and our state versus
other states there's a disparity
between budget within the state
and Albuquerque public schools.
When it comes to the cost of
health insurance if you're APS
teacher you pay much much less.
For your health insurance
copayment than anywhere else in
the state and you get better
insurance and so there's
disparities even within our own
state when it comes to budget
because APS's been given more
local control what what they can
do with health insurance versus
every other district in state
and so those are some of the
issues that we need to get the
control back to the local
governments backed local
districts to do what needs to be
done in their area so the jail
can pay more because a lot of
people don't want to live in
jail it's kind of a small
community and you know my wife
would never let their
traditional Walmart close enough
but you know that's just the
facts they may need to pay more
because of that and so I just I
really support local control I
think we should put the money to
the schools I totally agree with
the money side I'm just not sure
if we need to put law with the
minimum salaries are thank you.
Thank you senator Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam protein for bringing this
bill forward I support this it
sounds like this is been a long
time coming in just want to
thank you the other advocates
for fighting for this.
The one question I have I know
you mentioned Mr chair that.
this was really the focus on our
teachers have been getting calls
and emails about social workers
or counselors and nurses so are
they not included in the FTSE
and.
Madam chair
Madam pro tem if I might just a
moment of privilege before you
get to that question is I just
wanna make a shout out organ
mountain
government classes watching
right now they got five minutes
to the end the class they just
text me and so I just want to
say hello to the organ mountains
government class thank you for
watching you being with us sorry
to interrupt thank you.
So Mr chairman and senator pope
the the seven percent is cross
the border salary increase as I
said before any school that as
by extended learning plan adds
more days at full pay for each
of those of the three tier
system is it is a teacher
advancement system so
of course we need social workers
etcetera wouldn't we need people
in all of these categories the
purpose of across the board
salary increase but this this is
a teacher at system.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
for.
Thank you and I also would like
to have Secretary Stein house is
on line with us and so if any of
these if there's a direct
question for him please feel
free to do so and we'll get him
on the soon to to do so but he
is online watching with us for
any of the bills and so please
feel free to do so other
questions from the committee.
Of Senator Hickey this year.
And and senator you on then also
thank you.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
thank you senator pro tem of
since I came into the
legislature this is been kind of
one of the to me kind at what
are we doing this so thank you
for bringing this forward and
and the if I'm reading correctly
we're actually more competitive
than others and in this world we
have to be because of the
competition is so huge so thank
you for bringing this forward I
do have one question maybe it's
covered in the and another bill.
One of the things that I hear
from the teachers in my district
is we need more training we need
more training and I'm hoping
that as we address the the the
base issue of compensation we're
going to address additional
training as well do you have any
thoughts on that Madam pro
tempore.
So Mister chairman.
You know it's there been some
pretty lean years in the last
ten years up here where we've
cut budgets of one of those
budgets that was cut was
professional development so we
are now putting funding back
into that that the Feds has a
significant increase for
mentoring it has it continues
with the early literacy that we
started a year ago where we're
focusing on elementary teachers
ability to teach reading
according to the science that's
on going so the answer is yes
and according you know if you if
you join into the extended
learning program from the
schools we can get more money
you get more money and you can
use that for professional
development so I I agree with
them and I think if you look at
this budget we are putting back
into everywhere we can money for
professional development thank
you mayor pro tem thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator Senator
Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of the joint the converse
session and split up all yes
simoni is very important as we
make this decision that many
more just a question of language
in it was the mission that will
the work average be included in
the language as this bill is
implemented through the budget
so that districts basically do
have some flexibility with
regard to have these dollars are
expended and I wonder if and
protein would have an answer to
that Mr chairman and Senator
Kernan that averaging language
goes with the percentage
increase so we've been trying to
keep that average along with the
percentage increase it's not in
the three tier system that's
where it goes so I don't know if
we've we've we've convinced the
governor to leave that language
in there she's she's vetoed it
several times
but that averaging really does
help districts to do a lot of
different things so I don't know
you if it's still in the budget.
Thank you very much and just
another question and maybe I
would like to give secretary
Steinhaus an opportunity if if
we could just to kind of hear
his thoughts on on this
particular issue as well as
we've heard a lot from our
constituents related to
ancillary staff and and I know
they're included in the seven
percent but I wonder if there
was a recommendation in the
executive budget to maybe do
something in addition to
increase the opportunity for
hard to fill positions and for
answers that if secretary
Steinhaus would like to speak on
on that I would really aren't on
anything I would like to give
him a chance secretary St house
are you with this into the that
you hear the question to
respond.
Mr Chairman good morning yes I
did hear the question and yes
this particular bill is part of
a an entire package to address
the shortage and crisis we've
got in the workforce across the
New Mexico schools and our our
recommendations do this
particular bill does include a
minimum for everybody that has a
license and then the seven
percent races as Senate pro tem
Mimi Stewart said would address
the the other classifications
and Mr chairman if I may just
three additional points that
will help us this conversation
answer some questions this bill
uses the word anymore and when
you take a look at the school
district budgets and their
salary schedules very few
districts pay the minimum Sliq
goes to local control the school
boards will in most cases pay
above the minimums to bring in
teachers second point and it
also features a school district
superintendent this three tier
system that that Senator Stewart
has been steadfastly supporting
and leading for many many years
helps the school district's
superintendent recruit better
teachers and the other thing to
remember is that in the
requirements to get third tier
you get paid more money but you
also have an expectation to be a
leader within the school and you
have to provide mentorship to
new teachers and take on
additional leadership
responsibilities in the school
so that does help with the
teacher training initiative and
then Mr Chairman last point I
think it's important to make it
has been made this morning is
the executive recommendation
about the order of how this
would flow the first thing that.
We're recommending is that the
minimums be implemented for all
teachers and then just seven
percent raise be added after the
minimums and that will allow a
lot more local control more
flexibility and up greater
opportunity to address the
compaction issues that are
brought in brought up so Mister
chairman I'm happy dance unit
the questions thank you thank
you Secretary.
And let's see we've Senator
Kernan I think we're still with
you.
Well thank you very much and and
really I don't have any
additional questions that that
last comment I think it's really
important because I think I
wonder if the LFC recommendation
is different from that I do
think when you set the minimums
first and then on top of that
the seven.
Maybe that would.
Might need more information on
that but I certainly support the
bill and I don't have any
further questions thank you very
much Senator did you I responded
that last comment
Mr Chairman note that the money
people really do kind of control
things at the end the LFC is
never done it that way
so I pretty sure that the
funding for putting in the
budget does it the other way
that you first put the seven
percent and then you put the
minimums so that's a that's a
fight with the LFC and the to
finance committees yes thank you
of bills the only list.
It gets more of the questions
about this bill but just as far
as tracking and after with the
PED and how effective I guess
how quickly and how effective
this will be
that it's.
If you can very curious to see
how we
click pandemic and exactly what
we're looking at.
From the Mr chairman Sir Senator
really good questions and.
You know we're kind of in the
middle of changing the way we
collect data both on teachers
And students were kind of we've
abandoned that yes we were doing
for years with the park tennis
well we're now we have a new
standards based assessment we
didn't use it last year because
of the chaos in the schools we
are using it this year we're
hoping it's kind of the
baseline rather than a let's see
what we've done this year so
these salaries will go into
effect July one in the summer so
for the new school year that
they should be in place and then
then hopefully we will start
better data collection about all
of these factors because right
now.
It it's just weird sort of it's
it's kind of chaotic that we we
haven't really been testing we
haven't really been evaluating
teachers anything more than our
our usual and we have been
tracking what we're doing up
here because we it it it's like
we've been trying to.
We've been just trying to stay
above water just try to keep our
heads above for.
Just have a good person in the
classroom we don't have a
teacher can we have a good
experience with those kids so
it's just been rough in
education community and so we
have to get back to all of those
data collection.
Thank you and Senator I just
have a couple of a very short
probably more comments than
questions but certainly if you'd
like to comment on them I very
much prefer that we do the
minimums first and then the
seven percent that is much
better for the salary schedules
for teachers and does better
with that and so as much as we
as a committee or others.
That works out better for our
teachers in deals with the
compaction it gives more
flexibility to the districts so
certainly as we move forward and
I hope that the through the
administration that they
continue to push that also the
second comment is.
Just before we came up here I
was out in Oregon mountain high
school talking with students and
teachers and they were thrilled
with everything that was going
on and both that this solves two
of the problems is it deals
directly with retention of good
teachers one of the top teachers
there he was the Los crucis
teacher of the year a few years
ago has been thinking about
retiring said he's probably
stick around another couple
years because of this
and on the other side as I was
talking with students and our
next teachers are all sitting in
our classrooms right now and
several of them put up that
maybe I ought to be a teacher if
I know that I'm gonna started at
least fifty thousand dollars a
year and have good benefits and
so it deals both with the
recruitment in the retention
side of things and that's
important if we're going to deal
with the crisis of a shortage of
teachers so and senator you know
Mr chairman I'll just add one
thing and this is what we're all
hearing right now in that
respect.
Yes you know teachers have been
under paid for ever.
If you look at any other
profession salary I mean it's
yes it's outrageous we like to
get things on the cheap in this
country the other high
performing at that high
performing countries make
teachers be their nation
builders that's what they call
them in Singapore and they train
them better and they pay them
better and if we could only get
their.
We would have a much better
system.
Thank you senator vote for a
motion.
Thank you bill a second Mr your
motion.
Thank you.
and the second by Senator pope
if you'll please call the roll
man.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Candelaria.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes Senator McKenna busy ask
yes.
Senator develop yes Senator
Pinto yes Senator pope yes send
your soul yes we have a deep
center you have a do pass thank
you for.
Nice job everybody in for our
first bill through Senate
education we now and because I
know Senator to trying to get
over to rules we're going to
skip down to Senate bill thirty
six contributions to educational
retirement fund we had a preview
of that in your discussion with
senator Neville but if you'll
take as the SB thirty six us so
Mister chairman you may remember
last year that I tried to do
this we did a of the the funded
liability of our fund needs work
the employer contribution
currently is much less than P.
E. R. A. this bill doesn't make
them equal but it moves E. R. B.
up one more percentage points
this year and one more next year
so at the end of next year the
employer contribution would be
eighteen point one five percent
the end of next year employer
contribution for para is going
to be nineteen point two four
and the reason you have this
bill is because the LFC looking
at the new funding decided to
move instead of one percent this
year to two percent so then they
asked me to do a bill and then I
guess maybe they don't know yet
that I've added the other one
percent next year.
But that's what it does it
what's one percent this year so
that it would be a total of two
percent because of the bill we
passed last year and then one
more percent next year.
And already talked about a lot
of other stuff.
Wait for the questions.
Thank you senator we are now
going to go out to that the live
audience first and we will then
go to the online audience I also
got a note Mr David Archuleta
the are the director is online
to speak on SB thirty six but
also if you need as far as
expert witness or direct
questions directly to him the
anyone in the room who would
like to speak first in favor of
SB what are we thirty six
mistranslations.
I just stand around school
superintendents from.
In New Mexico we fully support
this this is a second leg how we
gonna recruit and retain
teachers this on the retention
side.
We don't have a retirement CENIC
and you can gauge Gen two and I
was there in the future.
You don't have that advantage or
whatever reason to come to work
for the Santo Santo was current
earlier this helps us put our
retirement fund slightly above
our surrounding states.
The more important to get the
chair of the in the future.
We need to cobble together make
it work this is the year to do
this and we want to thank the
senator for population are
looking at the current year and
information but also looking at
one more year which allows is a
parity with P. R. A. but also
allows us to ensure that we're
going to be able to but first
the funds to be able to pay the
retirements that are that are
good for teachers if you'll stay
with us so we have the in the
first we have the recruitment.
This is a part of the retention
there several parking review
seven percent another you'll
need to pay attention to and we
do want to talk about that Mr
Chairman we support the notion
of raising the base and then
stacking on top of that for
those dollars are and will even
be you'll hear is advocate for
medicinal questions because
trying to take those our
schedules what what is different
in other states is there not
compacted like ours are the
third tier teacher with thirty
years maybe making only thirty
dollars more than a first year
teacher territory in most
districts in New Mexico and that
is the work of your FIR had
external sour that's part of our
family thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr Allen's.
Mr Abbey please.
Members of the committee have
you with Mexico State University
on the director of government
state government Asians are we
want to thank the sponsors you
senator Senator Stewart we for
this bill as well as the funding
in the OCD's recommendations to
support.
Though there's also additional
funding and executive
director so thank you for the
support.
Thank you anyone else in the
room and support.
There anyone in the room live in
opposition.
If not we'll go to the online if
you have not I would like to
speak please raise your hand
please keep your comments short
of so that we can get to our
other business first I have Mr
to miss the Bacchus it looks
like followed by Roger grew with
a a RP Mr Bacchus please.
Asked us to.
Mister banks please unmute I
think you're on on the server.
I'm sorry thank you Mr chairman
Senator Stewart committee
members my name's Ken back just
on the current president of the
UNM retiree Association.
we have six hundred twelve
active members in the
association we support
legislation that requires the
state employer contribution
increase of two percent over the
next two years Senate Bill
number forty two and twenty
twenty one was only partially
funded we received four by four
we need.
Fund over the next few years on
a personal note twenty five
years ago I accepted employment
at UNM in no small measure
because of the pension and
benefits actor acted to offer.
This is a recruitment tool that
I'm positive is not unique in my
decision to seek employment in
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you Sir next we have
Mister Roger Greer with a a RP
followed on deck with Russell
Goff.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
thank you so much for hearing
might give me give me the option
to speak with you today my name
is Roger Greer finally A. R. P.
consumer team lead.
And I'm asking you do hear info
in support of Senate bill thirty
six contributions for education
retirement fund A. R. T. New
Mexico is a strong supporter of
Senate bill thirty six an
estimated a high priority for
twenty twenty two.
We've built a retired educator
should have the security of the
strongpoints injuring recalling
years and this bill will help to
provide that security for New
Mexico educators for many years
it will also help to retain New
Mexico's teachers in our
schools.
As I stated before this is a
high priority fuel for a or P.
New Mexico this session and we
think Senator Stewart preparing
it for thank you.
Thank you Mr Greer next Russell
Goff followed by Mateusz.
Fund tele.
Good morning Mr chair.
And members of the committee my
name is Russell Goff I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico association of education
towers I stand in support of
Senate bill thirty six we
believe the additional employer
contributions will further help
to reduce yet funded liability
and improve the solvency of the
ERP fund.
What a fake Senator Stewart for
bringing this bill for thank you
very much for allowing me to
speak this morning.
Thank you Sir next we have
Mateus Montella followed by I
have former Rep that Dennis Roch
and then at two others after
that this is the last chance if
somebody wants to raise their
hand and for a good cause my
list Mr Fund missed Fund tell Mr
Patel thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
thank you Senator Stewart for
this and all the work that you
do my name is yes one thing not
I'm a professor of economics at
you and a member of the year
reports to cease I am here today
in a personal best.
Besides the benefits mentioned
before I wanted to provide an
alternative perspective you
could think of this bill perhaps
not a spending this is a savings
and investment.
In the year
where we have plentiful Revenue
and lots of proposed bills are
rightly so about increasing
spending this could be thought
as a savings and investments
thank you.
Thank you Sir and next Dennis
Ross former representative
welcome Mr up.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Senator Stewart good morning so
we often talk about these kinds
of proposals as a benefit to the
individual employee I I and and
also to the solvency of the fund
I want to speak to it as a
superintendent of Logan schools
and something that the committee
may not be aware of it every
single school district when we
undergo our annual audit have to
taken on a proportionate share
of the unfunded liabilities from
the ERP pension fund and so as a
result of the unfunded nature of
the of the pension fund my
school district alone has an
unfunded do I do first help
those what liability over six
million dollars.
Our cash on hand take our assets
are in and our budgets about six
million so the unfunded
liability from your be alone
puts us into the red without
that it would have our budget in
the black an audit would be
perfectly clean so from from the
from the school district
perspective we stand in strong
support of any measure to help
improve solvency and reduce our
unfunded liabilities long term
thank you so much.
Thank you Representative next we
have Ellen burns dean followed
by Josh Anderson and then last
quarter Bundy of his burgeoning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on birds seen
Albuquerque teachers federation.
I want to think again the
sponsor of this bill.
As Mr rounds pointed out that we
focus on not just it tracking
but retaining.
We know that education
retirements this year were up by
forty percent in large part
because this year has been the
year of the great exhaustion and
I think this people who are
considering retirement stay in
our classrooms for awhile longer
for that reason I totally
support this bill thank you.
Thank you doctor bursting the
next Josh Anderson followed by
carbon the.
Mr Anderson are you online with
us.
I'm here Mister chairman I
didn't I just got a new button
now thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Josh
Anderson without the council
eighteen we don't represent a
lot of folks in in New York V.
but we do have of workers at an
image you and western and want
to of course thank Senator
Stewart for bringing this
forward one of our biggest
concerns is always the solvency
of both the army and para and of
course we're talking about
recruitment and retention I'm
not only do we have to look it
up salary increases in wages but
of course health care and
retirement and this goes a long
way in helping helping with
recruitment retention ensuring
BRB thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr and part of any
you're going to finish this up
here.
The.
Well Carter are you with thank
you thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Karmenu passing I will
repeat the point so we're just
be by Josh and others really
just want to thank all of you
and thank all the sponsors
Center Stewart for their
commitment to to keep these
funds in good shape for decades
to comics one of the most
important things we do for
public employees in the state or
grateful for your support thank
you.
Thank you and David Archuleta
who is the head of the E. R. B.
would like to make a couple of
comments and then we'll go to
questions from the committee
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak you
this morning and we just want to
express our sincerest
appreciation and gratitude to
the center for bringing forward
this legislation goes a long way
to improving the solvency of our
trust fund a tool that's been
sent might work for for many
years now and with that I'd
stand in support of it and would
like to help to consider anti
question the I can't.
Thank you Mr to let up
Senator I always like to go back
to the sponsor right after
public comment before we go to
questions anything you like to
respond to are ready to go to I
think provide for questions Mr
chairman okay good questions
from the committee.
senator bill.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
president's
One of the concerns I have and
again I'm in support of the bill
but one of the concerns I have
about all of our pension asset
on the governor's pension
prepare a last year couple years
ago.
And one of the concerns we had I
had.
Was the percentage of dollars
that were paying between the.
Employer and the employee says
ten point something percent is
going to put that up a pointer
to.
it's getting to be a big number.
What what would be the with
holding out of the employees
check so Mister chairman of
Centerville the employee's
contribution is already very
high at ten point seven this
does not change that even in the
future there's not a change in
their percent now.
But there is a seven and a half
percent so security deduction as
are not.
we don't we a social leader you
yes we do we're one of the
states allow both pension and
social security and then there
is a whatever to come to the
church thank you I'm sorry I
missed and I'm to.
With that in practice yes.
Federal that's our
Mr chair madam president the
Yeah and that that's the point
is that we're getting so much
out of the paycheck in the the
insurance cost is another big
number that comes out of
everybody's paycheck and.
You get to earn two point three
something percent per year is
that the then the number comes
to mind for your retirement
credit.
Mister chairman Senator you're
talking about the Cola because I
don't know I'm talking about
when we calculate your
retirement you get twenty twenty
years and there's a percent
number yes Paris three percent
but didn't educators a different
number two points Mr chairman
it's two point three five at the
fire and we start teachers at a
lower multiplier than that
you're talking about the
multiplier most for yeah.
Yes so we.
We are new benefits start off
with teachers having a lower
multiplier for the first number
of years if they want to retire
then we only go to that higher
multiplier in want to pit I
think I don't know exactly when
but it's after a number of years
I don't know if anybody can tell
me that I'm so yes so that the
multiplier is smaller for a or
B. then pair.
Mr chairman Senator the.
Funded ratio of the year of the
fund is what sixty five seventy
percent somewhere in that range
is that the number that comes to
mind
government yes Mr Torah's online
you might have a better number
but that's kind of what I wanted
to.
Can can we get their career get
to a hundred percent or
something close that's that's
what we're in leading up to well
Mr chairman you know we we all
talk about getting to a hundred
percent the actuaries don't talk
that way they understand that
we're not going to get there we
just have to get up closer to
fully funded than we are now so
that is what we're trying to do
with both P. E. R. A. and ERP.
Mr and I would remind everybody
so security is zero five.
So having a hundred percent
funding is a nice goal but I
don't understand the the way the
math works that we don't need to
be a hundred should we need to
get higher.
Just in case things aren't so
good.
One question colleges Mr average
here and he had been on board
long a few minutes it will leave
you with other colleges so
many of the professors and so
forth have the option of paying
through another program TI
eighty I believe is that is that
the correct craft I believe or
something to that effect you
know anything about that program
because a lot of them go from
one state to the next to the
next.
They have an optional program to
the not.
There is this Mr Abbey can go
ahead with.
Thank you.
Senator I'm not the phone for me
with that myself even in.
I didn't know if there's if that
is a significant percentage Mr
Sims Senator do you have any so
Mister chairman I can get those
numbers for you yes the
universities have a system of
this more flexible than that
here be for the rest the rest of
us we have twenty two thousand
teachers I think we have
the forty thousand some that are
actively putting into the system
so that that's a more
complicated answer I can get you
all of that but I don't get it
now I just wonder if it was a
significant number that would
affect anything that goes on in
the would would would be losing
if we're taking too much of a
paycheck of a university
professor are they all going to
defect to the other system that
the I think they have available
and that.
May be insignificant but I was
just curious.
Mr Chairman I don't know if Mr
Archuleta can answer that I mean
I will get you the information
that I can't really answer that
right now that's alright man.
President
The other.
I and I don't know if there's
anyone here can answer it Mr
chairman the extension service
employees with New Mexico State
University.
I understand have the option of
going to the federal program.
and again I don't know this
issue significant number but I
believe they can elect to either
reduce federal or state or both
if they want to take a bigger
hit on their paycheck.
That used to be the case and if
it's currently the cases.
If you have any knowledge of
that would be great to know a
just curious.
So.
I think I'm done Mister chairman
Senator I just to.
Couple things on the back burner
there those kind of curious
about thank you Mr and Mister
chairman I'm and get you all
that information because now
you've got me curious okay thank
you.
Thank you questions from other
senators and Senator Kernan you
have any questions will make
sure we don't forget you.
I asked her to a new place
Senator I think you're still on
mute if you were trying to to
speak.
We're we're not hearing from you
questions anyone else I got a
text from her Mr Chairman said
she can't hear the protests
thank you participants she may
be having technical issues okay.
And certainly you know if she's
able to Texas you.
Particular things will will try
Maez that way Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and again
Madam
procamp thank you for bringing
this forward I member you
mentioned this to me last year
I said my gosh you got to do it
I was part of here at one time
the University of New Mexico
and while I know we're kind of
inching our way there
I'm encouraging you to keep
pushing us in this respect
because retirement is is really
critical now that I'm older and
retired
and as you get closer to what
you really think about it and it
is going to affect people who
are kind of mid career I mean
where am I going to get a better
situation so thank you for
bringing this and it makes me
think a little bit when I was
running I learned about Finland.
And in Finland they have some of
the best scholastic.
Scores of anyone in the world
they also in my area have some
of the best health care the
world and education.
Mexico correlates with better
health care as well as income
and almost higher so I hope that
as we continue to pursue these
issues we emulate family and in
Finland the highest rate
professions.
Not doctors.
Lawyers.
Teachers the highest paid so
please let's keep moving in this
direction because well I'm gonna
work on some of the health
things from hello this is going
to do a huge amount on top so
thank you again thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you senator I just got a
text that the zoom is not
currently up use the zoom up.
Senator yes.
Okay and so I got a text from
lily may or tease the the zoo
wasn't working so I was just
passing that on Senator Kernan
are you with us again and did
you have questions or comments
and while we're getting you we
do have a photographer from the
Santa Fe New Mexican I gave him
permission to take pictures
that's typically been the case
in here that it's not a problem
for the media to be here
provided it's not disruptive of
our processes so it if that
changes in and certainly as
ranking member of senator
Neville if if there's a concern
or problem fuel just work with
me and let me know and we'll
deal with that.
Thank you.
If there Kernan did you have any
questions.
Senator Kernan to and.
Senator Kernan they say that you
are still muted.
And I just got another word from
someone else that the webcast is
working the webcast but maybe
not this and so we're working it
out.
If.
Not hearing from Senator Kernan
of sensibility that text from
her is that she was concerned.
And I don't I'm not getting a
text from her either so.
Okay Senator Kernan I just heard
that yes sometimes with zooms
you may need to leave the
meeting and come back in if
you're hearing us either through
the webcast if you'll text me or
Senator Neville if you've got a
particular question before we
get to a vote on this will hold
for just a moment so if there is
something like that we can get
to it.
I'm not getting anything from
Santo Kernan through text so if
not the there a motion from the
committee.
Hello Senator Hickey move move a
do pass just but we have several
options so that one make sure
I'm clear what you're moving
that's all Sir and seconded by
Senator McKenna.
We have a due pass some Senator
Hickey and seconded by Senator
cannot if you'll call the roll.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator McKenna yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes and it might just because
Senator Kernan is been having
some technical built
difficulties does anyone on the
committee have a problem if she
gets to either senator bill or
committee to add her vote.
Okay and seeing that there's no
opposition yup we want to make
sure that she has an opportunity
to to add her vote is she's
trying to be in the meeting with
us.
Senator Stewart to for to this
morning thank you for kicking us
off on a great start the Senate
education.
Flat I was parents can land.
The end so Senator Hemphill if
you'll will not go to Senate
bill thirty two for those
watching the outdoor learning
program in funding I believe
this bill started as a wild
friends program last year and
this is now a combination of the
work that they've been doing.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning the members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to introduce Senate
bill thirty two it is in fact it
started out as a memorial last
legislative session Senate
memorial one that created of
task force to see what we needed
in New Mexico to promote outdoor
classrooms and I believe Eileen
Averitt the director of the E.
NM is joining us yes zoom and
sue George director of wild
friends as well as some students
I think that may be able to give
us testimony if they're still on
so what Senate bill thirty two
does is appropriate five hundred
thousand from the general fund
to the public education
department and that would be two
hundred thousand dollars for an
FTE for an outdoor learning
specialist and an assistant and
then three hundred thousand for
training support materials for
educators to help school
districts really be able to
establish some really nice
outdoor learning spaces and the
reason this is so important at
this time as the last couple
years it's no surprise it's it's
been some of the most
challenging years in education
right now we've dealt with many
tragedies and and equities and
Education trauma and all of this
is just highlighted the
inequities across New Mexico in
our education system and outdoor
learnings an evidence based
approach directly and alignment
with New Mexico Public Education
Department vision.
That students in New Mexico are
engaged in a culturally and
linguistically responsive
educational system that meets
the social emotional and
academic needs of all students
and it also supports New
Mexico's roadmap to xcelerated
learning in renewal for the two
thousand twenty one and to any
twenty two school years
research shows that expanding
classrooms to outdoor spaces
improve school attendance it
improves academic skills
physical emotional social and
spiritual health and well being
as well as improve students
motivation connections with the
community interest in civic
action critical thinking and
problem solving skills and this
isn't just applicable to the
pandemic but it will improve
those things for students for
years to come.
Spending out time outside it's
critical to all of our mental
wellbeing and right now during
the pandemic it's more important
than ever to create safe
learning spaces that are going
to promote better mental well
being and physical health.
And if I lean average is
available to give some thought
so I'd like to turn it over to
her Mr chairman thank you
senator I was going to ask if
you had your experts the some of
the students and and that group
as part of your experts instead
of us public testimony if we can
get to that I also getting
another that the zoom doesn't
seem to be working.
Senator Kernan.
So I'm not sure we're gonna need
to stand in place because I
think you the year experts are
on zoom and not just through
webcasting as well as I think
the Senate rules indicate that
if the the the zoom isn't
working that we.
Because this turned and then I
determined.
Hello Senator.
Yeah we there's a problem with
with the zoom and we're working
on it right now and so everybody
hears me talking to you but
that's just fine because we've
been talking about you.
So we're going to stand in place
until we can figure out what's
going on with Senator.
Okay thanks.
What you were trying we'll try
to get worked up.
Our office.
The jury's of technology spell
party equipment system we're
just gonna stand in place here
for.
For a few minutes.
And.
Question.
Okay.
Will be a few minutes and.
We were and Mr chairman it looks
like the other committees are
also down soon maybe it has
something to do with our the the
the broad.
Seven computer is on the way
okay.
Research secure we can't log in.
That ultimate secure nobody
gives a system and therefore we
can't get hacked.
A lot of friends.
This is the first time the most
everybody in the office of the
problem the.
Because last year we by the way
and I don't think it's any
problem today but for this
committee we always stop fifteen
minutes before the scheduled
floor session wherever we are to
so commitment to the the members
will get to the floor session.
Four sessions not till noon
today so center and less you've
got people they're gonna talk a
long time on this I don't think
we're in danger.
You know me.
Chapter eight yes.
Yes.
For that appears.
This is to do it.
Okay there's good good.
State senator.
Yes.
We ask what what is your name I
lean average Senator okay are
you able to hear as we see your
picture up on the zoom now as to
whether that's working or.
I'm checking in to see if anyone
can hear I still can't hear
anything being broadcasted
Williams we hear you and see
your pictures so I don't know
what that means.
She could listen to
there's a thirty second delay.
We've got I. T. is supposed to
be on their way to to see we've
figure out what's going on so
we'll just hold in place.
Early in the session and that
for what we've got on the
schedule I think we've got time
today other than everyone just
sitting here.
Thanks.
Four what is it about.
Total.
Is it.
Senator.
We've been talking about it
since the summer.
In radio so she is sitting
member of the LFC I'm I'm on the
LESC committee and I was
scrolling through that we
traces.
And she saw on the scrolling
through the sea I think dresses
from there too and if that would
be fun to current and so we have
been talking about it for a few
months and see some of the blue
dress that I wore during special
session she said I'm gonna read.
Will coordinate so we have two
more cuts.
This is a great way to model
like bipartisanship.
And not taking ourselves too
seriously and having fun and we
did get some criticism like
somebody's like is the fashion
to
kind of check if anybody that's
on the zoom if somebody could
send me a text.
Saying something effective yes
you're able to hear the
committee or see the committee
or I guess probably maybe not
see the committee on the zoom
but if you're able to hear would
somebody send me a text to tell
me that that's working in that
we could proceed.
Well there's.
Thank.
So maybe you're.
Percentage change thank.
Just audio back and curious if
you all can hear me yes we can
hear you and so I think that
we've got audio that that
satisfies our requirements so
we'll try to proceed.
With that
Okay it says they can only hear
the staff and so you know there
may not be able pick up when the
zoom or other people.
Are on.
If you're on the more people
only see the people on zoom.
Thank you.
This.
Her.
We've got some experts coming in
the room and other experts
because they're less than thirty
years old.
Here for the full.
Thank you for that.
It's okay.
The fiscal.
This.
Okay I'm getting text messages
that it's now working yes if
anybody is not getting that
please let me know that from a.
Dr Warniment that it's working
now so with that we will proceed
I believe we were on your expert
testimony and so if you'd like
to introduce them and if they
are able to unmute on zoom and
join us please so Senator thank
you Mr chairman I will introduce
Eileen Averitt the executive
director of the NM.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I first of all want to
check to make sure that you can
hear me now.
Yes we do have the right as we
hear you thank you for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
Senate bill thirty two and
supporting outdoor learning
across New Mexico I am Eileen
Everett executive director of
environmental education of New
Mexico currently we support the
outdoor environmental education
network over a hundred fifty
organizations serving two
hundred and eighty thousand New
Mexican kids pre K. through
twelfth grade annually with
outdoor environmental learning.
Since twenty eighteen
environmental education of New
Mexico has hosted over forty
five community events for you
educators teachers program
managers and parents along with
supporting over thirty five
amazing fellows to share their
experiences with outdoor
learning and their ideas of how
to increase access and
opportunities all of these
voices contributed to the
development of every kid every
day every way this shared vision
and strategy the first of its
kind in the country provides a
framework to support equitable
daily access to the outdoors
environment to learning in New
Mexico for all kids Senate bill
thirty two is directly in line
with policy recommendation
number one of every kid every
day every way to resource an
office of outdoor environmental
education at the state level to
support teachers and school
staff with environmental
Education of New Mexico strongly
urge your support Senate bill
thirty two and we are at the
ready to work with the public
education department on
implementation thank you to all
members of the committee and to
the sponsor Senator saya Franco.
Thank you and senator I think
you've got some young experts to
with you and so if we're able to
get them on or hear from them
that would be wonderful thank
you Mr chairman I would like to
go to the students if they're on
and ready to give their
testimony.
So students present yourself
we're ready to hear from you.
Hey.
I tell.
So Mister chairman there under
the name on a live five to.
Okay.
You get that there under the
name of on a live often about
the.
We don't really have a lot of up
to one can we get to them later
on you know whenever they get on
please yeah we'd be happy to it
so if we can see where they are
we certainly want to hear.
The number of students you Mr
chairman I'll turn it over and
line to sue George they expect
the director of wild friends.
Thank you senator Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so much yes I'm sue George
on the director of the wild
friends program at the UNM
School of law we're a thirty
year program based at the law
school teaching experience all
hands on civics and science and
normally I would not be in this
chair and the only reason I am
is because our students are not
I'm I'm merely channeling are
her fabulous experts who they're
from Carl the Carlsbad
intermediate school students and
hopefully they'll be able to
transcend the students have been
working on the topic of outdoor
classrooms for the past two
years they voted to work on this
topic last year when it became
evident that the solutions to
education we're needed and this
seems like a common sense
solution to provide options for
calving students still be at
school but in a safer
environment there have been so
enthusiastic about this topic
they help to draft Senate
memorial one last year advocated
for its passage it's it's
successful bipartisan passage
and this year participated in
that task force that came out of
a Senate memorial one and this
bill currently before you from
the senator is a recommendation
from the task force to establish
a program at the public
education department and again I
I hope that they're able to use
their voices Senator video to
each of you as committee members
X. with their answers to any
questions you might have so I
hope you all are able to view
that and I think they also sent
two emails
with thank you my understanding
is we do have them on now that's
families so right if our
students and I think that
in there about that a lot those
in and so it.
If they are available please.
We we saw little video but the
new we were getting sound.
So I I.
Yeah we we heard that it was
still muted over on your side.
Can you hear us now yes now we
can that's wonderful please.
Readings Mister chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Anthony to genco I am in the
seventh grade of Jeremy middle
school for girls that New Mexico
here she said talk with the
legislators are state to show
our ideas for the outdoor
classrooms and schools I think
it is important for us to be for
you to pass because it brought
straight you Madam students
reduces CO nineteen
transmissions and support
students physical mental and
emotional well being.
And it does also show that
students will learn an outdoor
classroom or have a higher grade
point average engine to not I
think it is important for
students to be able to learn
environment where does not
stifle creativity promotes it.
Well friends asking for our
state legislators support via
funding build five hundred
thousand dollars does that was
outdoor education most schools
standard outdoor classrooms in
cost for a range of two thousand
dollars ten thousand dollars
however of all friends students
have created prototypes before
budget two thousand dollars
each.
Six states in California
Maryland Pennsylvania Washington
and Wisconsin that's a bill
similar to this bill with New
Mexico's beautiful climb in a
small investment we can become a
state leader in innovation and
learning in the simple plan to
encourage students to go
outdoors and more can we count
on your support to pass as the
for example thank you.
Thank you student.
Members of the committee I'm
actually I'm just I'm separate
from Charlotte middle school and
I would like to employees to do
to consider the necessity of
outdoor classrooms in our state.
Many states such as Colorado
Arizona and Texas have invested
in our classrooms especially the
COVID nineteen pandemic on our
hands.
Well education is insurance to
increase grade point averages as
well as positive behavior.
Outdoor education can also make
school feel more hands on amount
of lesson or subject.
And other education.
Is also a much safer more
ventilated area in terms of
COVID.
Outdoor classrooms have been
shown to have a very positive
outcomes and effects on the
students as well as learning
environments such as calmer
state of mind better grades and
better behavior so why should we
investments.
I was spending a lot of time
outdoors whether it was fishing
camping or simply playing in the
backyard so being outside very
comforting to me personally.
My full name my brother that we
became a better kids stepped
outside being siblings we've
ever a lot I'm sure you've never
heard that before.
But when we step outside you
brought up this.
And we can be best friends.
So clearly being outside has an
effect on people's attitudes.
I also think focus and being
outside is a perfect way to suit
the need for distraction between
fresh air and natural scenery is
a perfect way to tone down the
stress and the anxiety that I
and students like me deal with
on a daily basis I would like to
ask and county representatives
and senators to support the bill
for other classrooms I know many
students and I know many
teachers who greatly benefit
from that thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee.
My name is Serra that I'm here
in a middle school.
Is this I think outdoor is a
great idea.
After classroom basically all is
outside space with protection
from the weather that we can use
just in our house.
I went outside and in a much
better rate I know that one of
your however due to family but
there's no one better.
I have been raised this doing
outdoors if there's a
requirement in my house I don't
come to the room and that we're
going outside we take but cannot
do something.
And I think this would and when
I'm outside I get along thanks
it looks better.
I know that this will be true
with classroom to.
State Colorado and Texas hoping
other cost increases because of
this pandemic.
New Mexico also expressed
interest after education in
order to get you want to give
them the help they need to make
this happen.
And with New Mexico's great
climate I'm sure after caution
should be a great step in the
right direction everybody.
The committee have any questions
for us.
Thank you will you may get the
state around because we might
have some questions for you as
we go throughout I'm gonna go
back to the the sponsor and then
to the in person audience and
then back out to the other
audience but there may be some
questions of state nearby
Senator thank you Mr chairman we
stand for questions.
Thank you of first to our live
audience anybody related to
speak in favor of yes Sir
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee can more of the
superintendent of Alamogordo
public schools over the last
couple of years during the
pandemic we had to get very
creative to build outdoor
learning spaces right at first
it was just a specific in the
park and then we start looking
at how have the we're learning
affects student achievement we
got creative tree stump seating
beach beach umbrella shade
structures and we use a lot of
our work in the US or money to
purchase more permanent
facilities for outdoor running
and we're currently working with
PS you'll see and P. as a fait
to update their expects and
adequacy standards to
incorporate outdoor running into
the plans for the school and we
have designed a into a new
middle school what we're
planning to building a real so
what I like about SB thirty two
is it gives us that one we don't
really have the expertise it
gives funding to hire expertise
in afterwards because it's a
paradigm shift for teachers you
can't just go outside with
worksheets and blow away we want
to experience a learning and we
need experts in training in this
for teachers so I stand in
support of this B. thirty two
thank you for the opportunity to
speak thank you others in
support yes please thank morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee this is first time I
got a chance being Education
Committee.
Director of government and
public affairs for PNM one of
the fun parts of my job is being
able to work and support our
community partners like well
grant programs and their
initiatives that also support
our mission PNM is committed to
protecting the environment and
we do support opportunities to
teach outdoors during this as a
lot of the students had
mentioned data shows that
students who are engaged in
learning in the outdoor settings
not only become connected and
passionate for planet.
But are also likely to have
higher grade point averages
perform better at school and
increasing concentration and
motivation for these reasons and
as part of this bill and thank
the sponsor thank you thank you
anyone else in the room stand.
Mr chairman thank you and from
the superintendents family
actually as we support the bill
I would point out Mister
chairman I know you always want
to get built out of here in
round shape under FY are you
having a change of name for
these assistant position not a
point that out of the committee
my want to correct that issue
with this
through a business friendly not
trying to get in later but just
I know Mr chairman and I worked
together over the years we try
to work in getting planes also.
Thank you stand and I might
point out the sponsor of
probably one of the easiest ways
if it's a simple fix we can do
here otherwise just a quick
amendment as it moves to the
next committee that it's ready
to go when it gets there.
Thank you Mr chairman that's a
friendly amendment.
Anyone else here in the room.
If not we'll go to online last
chance for anyone to raise your
hand you form your cut that part
off first up we have Allison
Martin followed by Camilla field
of all human the.
Mr Chairman and Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in favor of Senate bill thirds
you sporting outdoor learning in
New Mexico my name is Alice
Martin and I am the board I'm a
board member for environment
education of New Mexico as well
as the education program manager
for Valencia's on water
conservation district our
districts offers environmental
education programs to twenty
four schools for students of all
ages throughout or X. account
and has been expanding to offer
opportunities around the state
outdoor learning is important to
me because over the last fifteen
years agency for I seen the
engagement community support
critical thinking web technology
and stewardship every time I do
a program event or project with
their communities and after
learning program at the New
Mexico public education
department will provide much
needed support to lift up over
four hundred already existing
are drawing programs and
opportunities throughout the
state including the ones that
I've created here for our
district one of the biggest
hurdles I run into is the lack
of direction support funding and
commitment to environmental
education opportunities and
programs for students across the
state when I talked to teachers
directly they are engaged in my
program and they do see the
benefits but they're often not
supported by administration and
are unsure how to commit to
furthering student opportunities
in environmental education at
the school and into everyday
curriculum this bill will help
integrate the outdoors into the
curriculum while also providing
students equitable access to
these resources to support their
learning and understanding of
the outdoors on a daily basis
this will also increase students
awareness of their surroundings
and help them feel connected and
engaged with the spaces they
interact with every day
ultimately this is a huge step
in creating stewards for land
protection conservation and
preservation to me environmental
education is not a separate
subject but an integral part of
everything we learnt.
I need to learn no matter what
job me into doing this bill will
help create the threads to weave
outdoor learning into daily
curriculum at every single
school it will provide the
needed funding programs and
positions for schools to
implement outdoor learning daily
ultimately this bill will enable
our New Mexico schools to have
the tools knowledge direction
and resources for our teachers
administration students and
their families thank you for
your time and support to make
this happen thank you.
next we have Camilla the movie.
Followed by Camilleri Meryl.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and sponsor for
bringing this important
legislation I am the director of
the Rio Grande chapter of club
representing over twenty five
thousand members and supporters
we strongly support this effort
our organization hosts the
global warming express which is
an after school climate action
program that has gone outdoors
because of the pandemic and
because of the benefits to keep
my family personally benefits
from outdoor learning my five
year old was able to do a pre K.
program this year at elevation
children etcetera they are
outdoors and minimum date of
three days a week and that's
because of the understanding by
the school leadership of how
important outdoor learning can
be for kids I've seen the
benefits to him and his little
friends being in the foothills
being at the both state and
sometimes just being outdoors at
school and the way the kids
learn so intuitively with help
from their teachers so we hope
that all the members of the
committee will vote yes and move
this along thank you so much for
the opportunity.
Thank you Camilla and next we
have Camilleri followed by Emily
will that.
Camilleri metal with us please.
If not we're gonna move on the
Emily will down followed by
Steve see on us we get that Mr
metal back on welfare she is.
Morning Mr chair committee
members can deliver Merrill with
the New Mexico State Land
Office.
Land Office stand in support of
this bill and are looking
forward to seeing it because I'm
so sorry our idea just one out.
We still could hear you also
stand as part of what we do at
the State Land Office and
expanding outdoor education.
Opportunities will complement
align with our mission
Furthermore we are excited to
work with the public schools and
expand elderly state trust land
thank you.
Thank you next Emily will down
followed by the CNS.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the family will doubt
Representative New Mexico voices
for children I'd like to thank
the sponsors of this bill today
and stand in support of SB fifty
two as you've heard outdoor
learning is right for the
physical emotional mental health
for students as well as
providing them with a new way of
learning that offers lifelong
benefits by providing support
resources for those already
engaged in offering and those
interested in expanding or
starting a program this bill
will provide one more
opportunity to support the
health and education she meant
for kids I ask that you join us
and support us thirty two today
thank you.
Thank you ms will doubt next VS
DC honest followed by genco in.
Mister Z. honest.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee can you hear me
yes Sir.
Thank you Steve see on his
government relations director
for any a New Mexico and on
behalf of our members we support
SB thirty two are members of
told us that this is an
excellent idea to reach the
educational programs of our
students also both medical and
educational research
demonstrates the importance and
significant benefits of outdoor
education activities and most
importantly because our expert
witnesses today our students
just told us that this is the
right thing to do we support
this bill given the ongoing
pandemic which seems to be
sticking around longer than we
would like New Mexico is the
land of enchantment and the
beautiful landscapes and outdoor
activities our state has to
offer is indeed an educational
resource resource that we need
to tap to you too in favor of
our students we thank the
sponsor for bringing forth this
bill we echo the voices support
and respectfully request that
you vote in favor of this bill
thank you.
Thank thank you Mr CNAS Dan
Cohen followed by Stephanie
Weissberg.
is going I think you're still on
you to I've been told.
Syscoin please go ahead.
Thanks to be having some
problems will go to Stephanie
Weissberg followed by Claudia of
Reno so as we get back to ms
and nobody would get that
technical taken care of so steep
Weisberg.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to address you and
Stephanie Y. spirited number
three fifty rural advocacy group
but I'd like to speak to you
from my experience as an
educator at UNM engineering the
bullet train we're wind turbines
anti microbial films whether
these inventions have to do with
each other they were all based
on nature and engineers do this
a lot they go out to nature to
find amazing designs that have
already been made there and so
if you don't know nature you
would have to spend a million
years inventing these on your
own so this is why we support
outdoor education thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you Claudio Reno so.
Good morning everybody I am
right now so I'm co founder of
the New Mexico environmental
education network and I've been
serving New Mexico use the last
five years and have seen the
multiple benefits that it has on
our use and how it really
engages them in environmental
science and all the sciences in
general our goal is to create a
lasting infrastructure that
reduces barriers for all New
Mexico used to participate in
environmental education
educational opportunities we
serve rural students who have
limited access to resources that
allow them to participate in the
outdoor opportunities we've seen
that they're limited by how far
they live from these
environmental programs they are
limited by economic reasons and
limited staff availability I've
been a science teacher for four
years and I realize that we are
limited by the amount of
resources that we have and I
have state grant funding to
bring gardens to our students
because I know how it benefits
them I know how it improves
their health and their learning
so I really would like to ask
you guys to support SB thirty
two today and thank you for the
time thank you and one more time
do we have agency the New Mexico
one on.
You are you can unmute otherwise
we'll go to questions from the
committee.
I see.
I don't see the Mr Cohen on so
anything that you like to
respond as far as from any of
the public testimony before we
go to our questions Mr Chairman
I'm not sure if anyone from the
PED office was
on but I think they were going
to give some COVID as well but
if they're not I just want to
thank everyone for their support
of outdoor classrooms especially
wild friends in the students for
their advocacy and involvement
and creativity and finding
solutions for some of the real
challenge is that the
educational system has right now
so thank you Mr chairman we
stand for thank you and I do
know secretary state health I
believe is is on watching so if
there any specific questions for
him that need to be answered of
certainly feel free to to try
and refer to to them I think
they're on a watching if we we
do thank you of questions from
the committee.
Separate though thank you Mr
chairman committee thank you
Senator for being in this work I
don't know if you want to answer
or medium.
Secretary how will this affect
the native American students.
Thank you Mr chairman for the
question Senator
It this is a really important
initiative that will address in
equities cultural and equities
are across New Mexico and so if
we can provide support for
school districts and our tribal
communities then we're creating
at a an outdoor learning
opportunity where they can be
more involved in their community
and
have opportunities for civic
interaction and culturally
relevant activities whatever
that looks like for their
particular communities so it's a
way that all children are able
to learn at a more relaxed
setting so we're we're not being
exposed to the the lights that
can sometimes be dis regulating
and I've been a school
psychologist for a really long
time and across all cultures
students always ask to go
outside especially when they're
dysregulated just being outside
in nature just is really calming
and helps us come up to a higher
brain state reduces stress and
we know that when we're under
stress our brain is releasing
cortisol which negatively
affects learning and memory so
whatever we can do to to
alleviate the stress of all
students are going to be in a
higher brain state and with the
pandemic and so much uncertainty
and and unpredictability and
disruption to routine all of
those are things that create
stress for all of us whether
we're adults or children so
what ever we can implement our
school district that is targeted
to reducing stress is going to
be advantageous to academic
performance social emotional
skill development and
Problem solving critical
thinking skills all of those
things thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee and climbing date the
impact is far as an example
within because we talk about the
Navajo Nation in particular and
I have four schools in one area
Kate you pre K. all the way to
high school
as far as having access to you
know the the liability issue
would you take them off the
school grounds and even in that
sense I think someone spoke to
him at that time consumption of
actually going on a field trip.
To.
Public lands that's taking.
Half an hour from where this
what is it up before schools
have now from them to commute
off the reservation to have that
access the transportation the
cost that's in here's does seem
to really reflect the.
For my area of reality of
implementing this even with in
higher at and the curriculum and
having the teachers that we're
trying to get into our system to
have the confidence to implement
this in their school.
And those students that have
that as far as ADA compliant
State and that being left out in
the when we say all students in
that sense but within the bill
it doesn't seem there's any
wording as far as collaboration
are we just gonna assume that
collaborations gonna occur.
Nettles and no further PED
secretary could.
As far as implementation with
In those areas we were and Mr
chairman I'll just speak real
briefly and then if the
secretary wants to add anything
additional I'm more than happy
to to yield to to him but thank
you senator for those concerns
and and I absolutely hear what
you're saying
in my vision what I believe the
vision of this program is is to
create an outdoor learning space
and depending upon the school
district that we're talking
about that is going to look
different for every school
district depending upon what
their outdoor area looks like so
it doesn't necessarily even have
to be transportation to another
area it can just be an outdoor
learning space where children
are being provided instruction
across all subject areas and an
outdoor area that has some shade
and and it could be as simple as
under the trees or with the
shade covering so depending upon
the resources that are available
and the the administration that
that school district has it can
look difference but the the
point of this particular
appropriation is to create that
outdoor learning specialist who
is going to help provide that
support for the school districts
so that they can come and they
can see what's available for
that particular school district
what the priorities are for your
particular community what's
available in the community and
then help you problem solve and
and create an outdoor learning
space that really meets the
needs of your unique community
and as far as eighty eight goes
again that can look if you have
a child in a wheelchair my I
have a son who's twenty six now
who's within a letter sent to
the he's been in a wheelchair
since he was four so he went all
his school career with the
wheelchair so that's all is at
my my priority is figuring out
like how can all chill.
and benefit from something like
this and so as long as you have
access to that outdoor learning
space even a child in a
wheelchair child who has other
mobility limitations my sons
also photosensitive so it would
be really important to have
sheet covering for all children
we don't want them exposed to
sun or our son is really intense
in New Mexico so making sure
that we're providing that
support and that's the what the
three hundred thousand dollars
is forced to make sure that come
our school districts have the
resources that they need to
create those outdoor learning
spaces that are protecting our
students from the elements.
And and Mr chairman if the
secretary wants to add anything
to that thank you I just got a
text the secretary left but W.
secretary Warniment is on as
well as John Santa are available
I don't know we have the second
deputy Warniment if you want to
respond to to the question.
Mr Mr chair this is this is John
I believe W. secretary Warniment
is on but she needs to be
promoted to a panelists in order
to.
Okay.
When one.
Even get her promoted to being a
panelists so that she's able to.
To get on live with us.
Get her on will will trying come
come back to that any of the
other questions Secretary I knew
Senator did you of course
etcetera please go ahead and
start Mr chair Senator.
The more like the implementation
of this especially so schools
have gone through renovations
already and in that sense and to
go back to it how
the plan to to put the sport
because even the
I school one of the high schools
is up this year in to to have
the school three done and I
guess because there are some
requests that can be made by.
The local.
School board member click
feeders and stuff is this going
to fall into that are is this
gonna just be mandatory for
every school because when we say
all students
the is that going to be in
automatically put in there as
far as a the the capital outlay
with this public schools thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that question and
clarification request so it's my
understanding that this would be
an incentive this would be
support offered to school
districts if the so do.
Choose to create an outdoor
learning space and they would
like the additional support to
it's not anything it in my
understanding that would be
required across all school
districts so if this would be an
incentive so the support would
come from PED and then there'd
be methadone like micrograms and
supplies and materials that
would be available through PED
to create an outdoor learning
space if the school district
would like that support.
Mr chair members of and this is.
I it seems in New in in
historically in the past there
would there's inequities in the
schools on the reservation.
Look at in the public school
that's not on there and whether
there's limitations as far as
the plan
that could be used to for
sorting bin not in the plan to
implement something like this
and the cost to do that in the
rural area you use in some
places they would have something
there's a very easily done.
I just feel that would kind of
be a little bit.
The we say all students either
it is or it isn't either it's
going to be something that they
all get to have
at what level and what's the
plan as far as implementation I
know we need to take steps I
mean in support of it because I
think for my background.
A lot of this could be a
corporate through special
education that the gate students
go on their field trips teachers
are to do you implement these
things at the end of the year to
do some kind of field trip with
their students.
To have access to the school
would be great but I don't think
it's equitable in the matter of
saying well if that districts so
chooses to have if you don't
have the.
Support.
I I know it's very hard to
implement it I don't know if
that could be something
incorporate to make it mandatory
but I don't know how the school
districts still to something
like that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you and
and I do understand that that W.
Warniment is available and so W.
if you would like to make a
comment or two.
Thank you Mr chairman and
deporting members the committee
and thank you Senator Hemphill
for bringing forward of this
bill
I can answer any questions on
behalf of the public education
department but generally I'll
start with Senator Pinto and
address and I think it's very
important in terms of all
students
in terms of implementation that
would certainly be at the
forefront of making this happen
so yeah there are two things
that are very specific to this
bill one is that there would be
a outdoor learning specialist
house to the public education
department and the others really
development professional
learning activities curriculum
materials in support of school
districts as they engaged and it
would be very critical to have
that outdoor learning specialist
really grounded in culturally
relevant pedagogy and looking at
prioritizing students across the
entire state and way that they
engage with land and place in a
variety of ways that is really
critical and grounded in who
they are and connected to their
identity and I think that.
This bill would really allow us
to do that and then I think in
the development of whatever
curriculum the does arise we
have wonderful partners from
across the state you've heard
eloquently from many of them
this morning including those
students around what it means to
them and how that would look in
a variety of ways so we would be
very mindful.
Thank you W.
Senator Kernan I think you were
next on my list please.
Thank you very much and and I
appreciate the opportunity to to
hear this bill and I I support
the concept at that students
definitely need to be outside as
much as they can during during
their instruction time
I didn't you know I think about
how we implement this and I
agree with that.
W. secretary Warniment that that
they're going to put in place
that person it's going to be a
resource to every school
district that is interested in
doing this and I I'm going to
guess that it may take a while
for all districts to implement
certainly right now today this
year every district in this
state.
Has the funding available to do
this type of program we they are
inundated with money from the
federal government they're going
to see an increase in in the SCG
this year then it will be
available to implement the
capital piece of this but it's
up to the local district whether
they're committed to this type
of a learning experience so I
think that as long as we look
districts make his decision on
their own we have an expert at
the PED to help every district
regardless of where they are in
the state.
My district would be interested
in would be different from what
Senator pantos District might be
interested in so we have to have
that specialists not regret that
and professional development
should be made available but as
far as making this something for
all kids I don't see a problem
with that at all I think the
district wants to do this
project do this type of learning
they have the money they're
going to have the support from
the PED but it should be a local
decisions
one thing I do want to mention
you know I think about being
outdoors and and I know the what
for instance in very concerned
at with regard to to the quality
of the environment over the last
few years and every every day I
kind of take a peek at the
whether or not look at air
quality across the state in New
Mexico and I think that are to
be considered you would think
that maybe in my particular area
maybe we shouldn't be outdoors
based on what a lot of people
think about air quality in
southeast New Mexico but I will
tell you when we checked air
quality figures at Albuquerque's
hired in southeast New Mexico in
Carlsbad today and so I think
that yeah we just need to
recognise it being outdoors is
very important that maybe school
districts are to have a policy
that way and now they're
qualities about fifty thank you
may be reconsidering sake well
we need to stay in today so
let's be real careful about data
about they had and I think and
we we need to be sure that the
just a state that we support one
another we want our kids to be
healthy and safe with their
indoors or outdoors but but I
just want to raise an issue and
if anybody wants to check on the
air quality in their particular
area just under the weather
channel click on air quality and
it's all over the place in New
Mexico Carlsbad is probably the
safest place to be today so
anyway I support the bill I
think it should be for all kids
if that's what the local
district decides and I think
there's plenty of money to in.
Amid this even with some help
from the state or not because
federal government is spending
quite a bit of money out to
districts right now thank you
that's all I have thank you
senator Senator McKenna.
Thank you chairman
thank you senator call week for
bringing this forward to us this
morning I was an early fan of
the memorial last year so it's
really great to see it
develop even more and I'm I'm
wondering chairman and Senator.
Senator Pinto brought up a very
good observation when we see the
word all for all New Mexico's
kids I'm.
I'm thinking would be practical
to include language chairman and
senator that the
That the subject matter expert
collaborate with the Indian
Affairs Department so that they
could be involved with the idea
that Senator Pinto put forth of
reaching out to the B. I. E.
schools and see if they'd be
interested I know it's kind of a
mouthful but.
A what she said really resonates
with me as well and maybe
involving that agency the Indian
Affairs Department could help
address that.
And I guess my my response might
be and and senator you certainly
respond also I would recommend
maybe work with the sponsor and
with the the head whether that's
something that ought to be in
rural as it goes over to the
rate for actual implementation
or whether that's something that
ought to be written into the
bill as part of the the lawsuit
so to speak and so certainly
that's something that between
here in the next committee if if
that's important and needed and
work with the PED's so that you
get the language right I'm very
nervous and less it's very small
grammar changes are wording
changes like that about doing
things on the fly and so they
having time to do so and so if I
misspoke for how people feel
about a please feel free to
respond thank you Mr chairman I
will consult with the secretary
and deputy secretary PED and see
how we can address on those
issues and I think there you
made great points Senator so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
chairman thank you senator
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Hemphill for
bringing this forward
I would be remiss in my role in
health care not to point out
what you actually are pretty
pointed out the evidence
continues to grow that
connecting with the outdoors in
in multiple ways does reduce
stress the cortisone as you said
and so I look at this bill in
many ways again trying to move
us along as a state and health
care and education and this is
another area where they come
together and so
at as you also know I'm looking
at the school of public health
school of public health would.
Actually get grant studies to
look at two cohorts inside
outside impact on stress and
multiple levels this is a public
health issue as well and so I
want to thank you for bringing
this forward but also just want
to be sure that the committee is
aware of all the impact that
this will have the continues to
ripple out it just doesn't
having the education at the
outdoors as well thank you very
much it's just a comment thank
you.
Thank you I don't see anyone
else is there a motion.
What you think the Senator
Popal.
Long one of the call pregnant
pause.
Motion by Senator pope and
seconded by Senator McKenna I
did call the roll please Senator
Brandt.
Senator Candelaria Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
Neville yes under pandemic yeah
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes to do that are you have a do
pass in please does indicate
work with the the path and and
the others as to whether that's
an appropriate with the language
and or whether the working
through the pad on on their
mechanisms absolutely thank you
so much Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you we are now going to
move on to Senate bill thirty
eight which is early childhood
education department
authorizations I just want to
remind the committee we have a
hard stop at eleven forty five
if we're in the middle of the
bill we're going to stop at that
point so please keep comments
short and such so that we can
get on to those if in fact that
is the desire of the committee
we still have Senate bill thirty
eight early childhood education
department authorizations and
then also Senate bill fifty
expand nursing programs at
colleges and so Senator Gonzales
welcomed education and if you
would please Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the Mr chairman I
do believe that we have our
secretary the total she is also
available.
And the Mr chairman of the
members of the Senate bill
thirty eight you know what it
does is the early childhood
education and care department
authorizes the bill to ensure
that it has the full clear
authority to conduct the
departments essential functions
and responsibilities mandated by
the federal law and the state
early childhood education Care
Act of two thousand nineteen
which consolidated all early
childhood programs service New
Mexico state government under
one single cabinet level
department Mr chairman the
members of the highlight of the
bill is so as it mentions is
priory will so the two
departments and now a being a
one under one cabinet this gives
the authority to have will the
full authority for the
background checks and then also
will membership on behavior
health cooperation.
And the the bill also you know
is establishes worry would
bring.
A membership to the behavior
health to.
To establish a an independent
member to be part of the New
Mexico behavior health
cooperation the bill also
addresses so.
Membership into the New Mexico
development if disability
council and the secretary as a
permanent member to the New
Mexico the development.
Disabilities council and also a
choke childcare act forty the
bill establishes this that that
would be under the department
and transfer the duties to
convey family infants toddlers
to the inter agency coordination
council Madam chair of.
Mr chairman and members
also so one of my Sanchez with
Senator of Korea.
field in the on the oil deal to
her to see if you want to add
any comments.
Senator thank you Mr chairman
and I'll just add that on as
part of our ongoing involvement
with the pandemic it's just
really important to me and I
know to members of the committee
that we move forward with
legislation that's going to help
to protect our use our infants
during the first through three
those are such critical ages to
really make sure that children
are safe and getting the
nurturing care that they need
for the most advantageous
developmental
development of their neural
system so this isn't an
important piece of legislation
that will go a long way just to
help protect children and keep
people safe so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir Mr Chairman though
I will just give the opportunity
to our secretary of this above
Congo to see if she has any
additional comments.
Thank you Secretary Groginsky
are you with us and I know
you've got a number of people
who are in support if we can
manage to not have to hear from
all of them necessarily because
we do have another bill we're
trying to get done by eleven
forty five but that secretary
Groginsky are you with us thank
yes I am thank you Mr chairman.
Yes ma'am yes yes okay wonderful
I'm here I'm joined by our
general counsel page record and
our director Family support
early intervention might and yet
is and I just want to thank
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Hemphill for helping bring this
bill forward it really does
exactly as the senator said it
gives the new department as full
authority to act on behalf of
our people to five families in
the state and to add our
contribution to the behavioral
health collaborative as well as
developmental disabilities
council and to bring our intent
early childhood our family
infant toddler program the
interagency coordinating council
under apartments we do have the
chair co chair of that
interagency coordinating council
with us here today as well as
the CEO of the behavioral health
collaborative and the director
of the devil developmental
disabilities council who are all
in support of this bill.
Stand for questions.
The secretary and out if there
any questions directed towards
any of them it's nice that we
have them on board anything else
for you go to public comment was
chairman of the we're ready for
public comment okay first the
those in the room in support of
Senate bill thirty eight.
Like speaking please again work
work we've got a couple of the
bill so please keep comments to
short if possible thank you.
Looking at the register of this.
Childcare and education
association and health care
providers across the state are
in full support thank you thank
you I quickly thank you that
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Hemphill and all of you that
supported the department Kevin
Freeman from going up New Mexico
and this bill simply allows the
department to do the work that
we've established that the death
of thank you thank you do we
have any.
Online.
This.
We have a couple of people in
the U. given please if you're
able to keep your comments short
that Beth Gilly at and then
followed by it's like Bernice
pump off.
This bill we are you with us.
I am although I'm not sure my
camera is working we can
proceed.
Right thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman and members of the
committee on that Kelly that W.
secretary at the children youth
and families department and on
behalf of the secretary
designate and the entire
department we stand in full
support of this bill for the
reasons that have already been
sent thank you.
Thank you very much of our news
Papa and then followed by Alice
Liu McQuay.
Two members of the committee my
name is Mary nieces
and the commitments Senator
online poverty we just want to
thank you for making healthcare
priority and support the bill as
a common sense cation thank you
so much.
Thank you and Alice McCall I our
our last one please.
Mr chair members of the
committee on the house we would
point executive director of the
New Mexico developmental
disabilities council CDC stands
in strong support of Senate bill
thirty eight how the request a
friendly amendment at the
secretary ward secretaries that
the needs of the Council so that
the secretary to name a proxy
and attract language other
agencies.
But the ECC do become a voting
member of the council so that
the voices of young children and
families and programs as part
have a seat thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you would not go to
questions from the committee.
The questions in the committee
concluded that we have.
From Senator renewable Senator
Kernan did you have a question
I'm sorry I please jump in okay.
Thank you very much I have a
quick question to the secretary
and just I agree with with
everything that that has been
sent today but is there any
impact or anything related to
the public pre K. that would be
impacted by this bill.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
no there will not be this only
affects licensed facilities that
that agency regulates and
licenses.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you Senator Kernan of any
other questions.
A second is that we have
a motion for a new path from
Centerville seconded by Senator
Hickey you'll call the roll
please Merion Senator Brandt
Senator Candelaria Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator McKenna yes yes yes
thank you Senator Kernan Senator
Lovell yes Senator Pinto yeah
Senator post yes Senator souls
yes the path.
You have a due process thank you
very much and wish you well as
it moves forward.
Senator panics if you would
please for our last one we've
got about ten minutes on this
and again if we the does get
hung up at all that we will have
the first on the list for our
for Friday.
So please thank you again be
concise because we do have a
heart stopper quarter till
twelve.
Brief.
I thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee this bill is
fifteen million dollars for the
higher education department for
two year four year colleges to
apply for grants to expand their
nursing programs.
Right now we know we have over
six thousand vacancies or need
for nurses in the state this is
only for higher education
institutions I have a different
bill that would help students
with disabilities for
institutions with me today I
have ever Walker the executive
director of the New Mexico
nurses association and there
might be others I saw one of our
presidents in the audience I
don't know if he's still here.
Thank you for thank you Mr chair
members of the committee I will
spare you background full food
simply say again.
The goal of this legislation is
to increase the capacity at our
purpose of nursing so they can
add new.
Students.
Get the students successfully
through.
Taking their licensure exam this
is for pre licensure students to
increase the capacity of our
nursing programs it is supported
by the nursing community not
only New Mexico nurses
association but the New Mexico
community reflect and I'll stop
there given the time Senator now
I must stand for support
opposition questions thank you
so our live audience the one in
support hello this is again yeah
we are very effective lines of.
The short answer.
As Robert rose Representative
college we very much stand
support in this survey.
Why rural communities.
To help more people and I serve
that.
Thank you.
and.
This this this the chairman
protocols on a register of this
for the next college I am just a
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of courses on the
sociologist and we stand in
support of this piece of
legislation thank you thank you
everyone else in the room.
Not that were raised watching we
have two people so first name
Kathy Levine.
This is not a Mike Carrie
Brunner and then have the
Labadie.
Hello Mr chairman I carry rather
Bruder registered lobbyists for
the New Mexico Medical Society
very shortly physicians cannot
do their jobs as well without
very very good nurses around us
we fully support the recurring
appropriation in this
legislation thank you Sir.
Thank you Kerry capital body
print please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee and Kathy
Lee body representing the New
Mexico independent community
colleges will be incredibly
incredibly brief and saying
we're grateful to the Senator
for bringing this bill forward
we fully support it because it
allows us to increase the number
of faculty positions in our
nursing program which in turn
allows us to increase enrollment
it also allows us to be creative
in increasing the number of
clinical sites available for
students thank you.
Thank you.
Any we have other any other
public testimony I don't think
so questions from the committee
will start senator Neville.
Motion for a do pass.
Seconded by Senator McKenna of
Senator Hickey I if there's
discussion I don't want to stop
discussion so.
This is another fundamental bill
thank you for bringing it thank
you Sir any any discussion or
questions.
If not then if you'll please
call the roll Senator Brandt
Senator Candelaria Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator McKenna yes Senator
bell yes Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes because you have a policy of
before we adjourn just couple of
very brief announcements members
of the committee thank you
couple very brief announcements
the New Mexico school board
association I know has sent out
an invitation to everyone for
their
Education Committee appreciation
breakfast for Friday February
fourth from seven to eight AM so
please mark your calendars it's
always a good opportunity to
interact with our local school
boards and and show them that
education is here and listening
and and dealing with education
issues also on Friday and there
will be probably a more specific
invitation but we are going to
be having a legislative meeting
actually
I want to go
I was gonna say something about
we did present a lot of bill so
we're having a joint meeting
with the house education of that
will start at eight thirty so we
can get back to our committee
after that there will be with
over in the house chambers at
eight thirty on Friday to get an
update on all of the budgets and
where they are for education we
will then take a short break to
come back over here to do work
on our business on Friday and
Saturday if you are in town
please join us in the Senate
chambers from ten to twelve for
the internet age eight
symposium talking about
prevention of child abuse and
how that interacts with schools
and all of these agencies that
we've been talking about and and
they're all very interconnected
so please mark your calendars
for all of that anything else
for Senate education this
morning.
And if not thank you to
everybody who was watching sorry
for a couple of the very minor
delays that we had you to zoom
