all of those kinds of things and
stuff. So if you'll all help me
in welcoming her
young.
Um
Senator Ramos, I know you've got
some people in the room that you
would like to recognize as well.
Yes, Mr. Chair, I, I thank you
very much for this time. I'd
like to recognize our students
from Silver High and I believe
Cliff Schools is here also. So
thank you so much for attending
and uh coming over to.
And, and although I'm sorry,
thank you so much. We, we've got
so, so many people from Grant
County here today. We also have
Dr. Wenzel that's on our panel
today here, so we appreciate you
for, for coming all the way up
from, from the, the furthest
corner of the state. So thank
you so much for being here, uh,
Superintendent, thank you so
much. God bless.
Uh, thank you, and you know,
provided nobody has any
objections, we, we do allow
cameras in this room as long as
they're not disruptive of our
process. And so, yeah, and he
was very polite, you know,
asked, is it OK if I take
pictures, you know, please, you
know that.
We as politicians, uh, publicity
is part of what we live on, I
think, and so it, it matters,
uh, Senator now that you have a
guest as well, please.
Thank you very much. Good
morning, everyone. Buenos Dias.
Uh, I am very proud to uh
welcome, uh, my shadow for the
day, Bree Cash, who is from UNM,
so enormous shout out to all my
lobos out there, uh, yeah, and a
big shout out to El Centro de la
Raza, uh, right in the back over
here as well. So just walk. It's
an honor to be here, an honor
to, uh, sit here as a fellow
lobo. Thank you, Mr. Charman.
Thank you. Any other
announcements or anything before
we get started in on the bills.
If not, uh, we're gonna start
and we're sort of gonna follow
down the line. The only thing
that might change depending on
which sponsors are in the room
or not, we may jump around a
little bit, but we're gonna be
starting with SB 8, the
veterinary medical loan
repayment Program with Senator
Woods, um, and then, uh, go to
Senator Pope if there are other
sponsors that come in because
he's a member of this committee,
we may roll that back. But at
this point, we're gonna be
looking at SB 8 and then SB 10,
uh, we do always try them for
people watching at home trying
to put it.
on the, the board down here so
people know which bill we're
talking about. Um, and with
that, Senator Woods, welcome
back. You were a
Member of education back when we
were just chatting when we first
started 12 years ago, uh, often
have some good bills and former
school board members.
Mr. May, may I have permission
to ask a question real quick. Do
you know, um, are we gonna start
getting the FIRs within 24 hours
and I know we're just starting,
but uh I just thought I'd bring
that up because some of these do
have financial impact before you
start, yes, thank you for
bringing that up. I'm very
frustrated as many other uh
chairs are, uh, there isn't a
rule for 24 hours. I did call
over to the finance committee
because we didn't have FIRs as
we're trying to do the analysis.
And so I think they got.
The kind of late yesterday
afternoon. I also made a call to
the public ed department because
we hadn't gotten their analysis
until this morning. We're on the
same page. I know their agencies
are all trying to get their
logistics and things figured
out, but for us to do our jobs,
we've got to have the analysis
and things from agencies and LSC
on time and so, you know,
hopefully, and I know other
chairs are pushing on it too
that we, we get all those in
more timely ways.
We have to have that so we can
do our jobs.
What was that center woods, if
you would please, veterinary
SBA.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank
you very much to, to let me lead
off with the first bill in
education.
Uh, it is always a pleasure to
be here. Many times the
education committee has looked
at as a public education
committee.
But this is a higher education
bill.
And uh it's, it's a little bit
unusual because veterinaries are
not trained in school in our
state we do not have a state
veterinary school.
So we have to get the education
from out of state.
And it's so important to bring
in.
A reoccurring
Group of veterinaries at all
time.
We're, we're deficient.
We're trying to bring a find a
way to get more veterinarians
back to our state and this is
one of the ways we're trying to
do this.
And this is very simply uh a
bill to try to help repay some
loans for their service in our
state.
And, and the very areas that are
are very deficient in
veterinars.
So, I'm not gonna go a whole
lot.
Explanation I would like my
expert witnesses to introduce
yourselves, Mister Chair.
And so you will know who you're
talking to.
And uh I can go through any
amount of explanation that you
would like to hear. I've got it
broke down into 13 categories on
this bill, uh, that we can talk
about that that's in your
analysis also, uh, the last
piece that you most important
piece is a $5 million
appropriation at the end of this
bill.
And this is to create a fund.
To to pay.
For this service pay for service
that stuff loan for service, a
loans for service. So with that,
if I could introduce my guest,
my, my, my helpers, so to speak.
Mr. Chairman and
Oh senators, I wanna thank you
for allow, allow me to be here.
I've not been here so forgive me
for any mistakes that I make. My
name is John Wenzel. I'm the
extension veterinarian with New
Mexico State University. I'm a
New Mexico native. I spent 26
years in private veterinary
practice. That's the lens that I
look through.
Because I had a mixed animal
practice in southwest New Mexico
and I can address why I think
this bill is so important for us
and I appreciate the opportunity
to be here.
Hamish share this. He is with
the extension education part of
NMSU.
This is the guy that that looks
at our, make sure our people in
the extension service or
Doing their part on that.
Good morning. My name is Heather
Omero. I'm the director of
financial aid at the New Mexico
Higher Education department that
will be overseeing this
particular um program.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Samantha Hollick. I am
currently the state veterinarian
with the New Mexico Livestock
Board like Doctor Wenzel, I'm a
native of of New Mexico. I was
in private practice in Carlsbad
area for 17 years and uh
predominantly served the food
animal industry and other uh
aspects of the livestock
industry.
So, Mr. Chairman, I
I feel pretty.
Low ranked here.
No initials behind my name
except.
Things that are called behind my
back.
So, I just want you to know that
we, we are happy to stand for
any questions. I'm sure that
someone would like a further
explanation of what this bill
is, so I'm, I'm, we're here to
stand for questions sir.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, at this
point is where we go out for
public comment, um, first, kind
of just a quick show how many in
support of this bill in the
room?
Anyone in opposition.
If a couple of the supporters or
anyone who would like want to
come up to the microphone in
support, uh, we do limit public
testimony to 2 minutes each, and
I will cut you off at 2 minutes.
Uh, so, but if you would please
identify and give your name, you
know, who you represent, and
then you have 2 minutes, Mr.
Chairman, committee members. My
name is Tom Patterson. I'm
McCatchen County cattle rancher.
I serve as president-elect of
the New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
We support SBA. It is a way
forward to
solve what has become a
hemorrhaging problem in many
areas of rural New Mexico at the
ranch level, we want to produce
our beef safely and humanely.
You and other consumers have
told us. You've made it clear,
you expect nothing less.
To do that, we have to have
access to large food animal
veterinarians who can help us
provide responsible prompt care
for our livestock. That's when
they're sick, when they're
injured, when they're calving,
or when we need health papers,
preventative screening, or
evaluation.
During our mid-year meeting our
members emphasized the delays
they routinely experience. We
need these veterinarians because
we have a dire shortage of them
in rural New Mexico.
The veterinary loan repayment
program is part of the answer.
It works. It works in other
states. It can work here. New
Mexico cattle growers
Association is committed to a
healthy, safe food supply for
New Mexico. We urge your
support. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, please.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Howard
Hutchinson, executive director
with the Coalition of Arizona
and Mexico Counties, we are in
support of this bill because.
It's a significant part of
economic development for rural
counties.
Without veterinary services.
Uh, we have to look for long
transport of animals, which is
not beneficial to the animals.
Oh, is that in?
I thought I was being cut off
real soon.
Not so much to say, but Mister
Chairman, uh, this, this is, uh,
something that we uh look
forward to and, and having uh
the legislature passed, uh, the
$5 million investment, uh, can
be paid back uh readily by
having these services available
for the public. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Kelly Fajardo
on here on behalf of the Farm
Bureau. I don't want to repeat
what's, what's already been
said, but I am going to still a
quote from Senator Azel, if you
eat, you're involved in the ag
industry. And this is why this
bill is so important to New
Mexico. This goes beyond just
the ag it's a workforce issue.
It's an economic issue, and it's
a public health issue, as SB 8
is a strategic investment in our
state agricultural future,
ensuring that veterinarians can
afford and to serve in the rural
area
areas of our state, and thank
you, uh, members of the
committee.
Is that on? Good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
Clayton Abbey in New Mexico
State University, and I just
want to thank the sponsor, uh,
Proud Aggie, and say we're in
full support of this bill.
Thank you. Any others in
support?
Again, let me ask anybody in
opposition to this bill.
We have anyone online?
OK.
If not, then we are open for
questions from the committee.
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senators and.
Aim for bringing this bill
forward. This is so critical.
Um, you see, I have my white
coat on today. Today is white
coat today. I'm a physician and
one of the things I'm definitely
trying to do is to get uh
tuition repayment significantly
enhanced. Uh, I believe tuition
for veterinary school is
somewhere around $200,000 or
more, um, this, this goes a long
way to start, but I encourage
you to come back next year for
more.
Because this is America and we
have to compete for talent and
other states. I, I can't tell
you veterinary, but other states
I know were way behind for uh
medicine, uh scholarships for
tuition and we just don't
compete.
So I hope in the future.
start, but I hope in the future
you come back and do more and be
realistic, uh, uh, have us all
get realistic about the economy
and uh and heaven knows that I,
I hear, um.
From several people, not that I
do farm, uh, but there is a
shortage and we've got to do
everything we can to close that.
Um
You know, animals, I mean people
are people that are a lot of
people, farm animals, others,
you know, they're like people to
them. So thank you so much.
Thank you Senator, anyone else?
Senator Thornton
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I
I guess, what is the current
situation in New Mexico with
regards to the shortage of
veterinarians.
across the entire state.
Thank you for the question. So,
uh, it's hard to find statistics
in New Mexico. I can tell you a
little bit about the country.
But then I'll tell you some
things that are not
statistically kept about New
Mexico, so across the nation
right now, there's 3.6% of all
veterinarians in the United
States are involved in food
animal medicine to some degree.
OK, that means there's 8100.
Total veterinarians in the
United States that'll touch a a
food animal.
Now in New Mexico, just to give
you some idea.
The, the number of
veterinarians, mostly solo
practitioners, rural solo
practitioners. I have we are
starting a program with Texas
Tech University to receive 4th
year veterinary students.
The initial offering I made out
there, I have 26 veterinary
practices that are asking to be
a part of that program.
Because they cannot find help. I
know a veterinarian that has
advertised for 12 years in
Deming.
Uh, I'm looking for help 12
years, never got a single
response.
Question is, why does that
occur? The reason is is because
of debt.
And right now the debt for the
average veterinary student is
$179,000. That's what they
graduate with it ranges up to
$436,000 in debt that's which
includes living expenses.
And the problem is the average
salary for a food animal
veterinarian across the nation,
they started about $100,000. Now
in New Mexico it's less than
that. It's about $85,000 that
they are able to pay.
In the companion animal world,
the average starting salary is
$133,000.
And so when you look at that
debt.
And look at what they're going
to get paid.
These kids are smart, they're
gonna go where they can pay
their bills and so the
opportunity for rural
veterinarians is not there. They
cannot compete.
And so what we have to do is
look at ways that they can
entice people to come and and
consider their job offerings as
if we provide another mechanism
that helps them financially
because from a salary standpoint
it ain't gonna happen.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I had a second question, so, so
179K in debt. So sounds like
this bill would support like
over a four-year period, up to
80,000 in terms of paying off
their loan. Is that correct?
I want to make sure I understand
that.
Um
I noticed that there was a
fairly high penalty associated
with that if they were to, I
guess, renege on the contract.
Yeah
Are we trying to incentivize
them? I understand the reason
why is because you're gonna be
paying out a certain amount of
money each year and then you
want to make sure that they
stay, uh, but that seems like
the penalty seems very high.
When I explain that?
Sure.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, that's a
wonderful question so our um
loan repayment programs and loan
for service programs, that's a
very standard penalty across all
of our financial programs that
we offer at the higher education
department, um, this particular
penalty really entices
individuals that they are really
committed to those underserved
areas within New Mexico, so
these professionals know the
commitment that they're getting
into, um, and, and to elaborate
on that, we don't necessarily
assess that 3 times the
principal balance at 18%
interest.
If an individual were to not be
able to um serve in an
underserved area, most of them
have mitigating circumstances
that we would allow um to reduce
the penalties for repayment, so
we currently have about a 1%
overall are over of all of our
loan repayment programs and loan
for service in terms of um the
service obligation completion.
So it is a very successful
program.
Thank you for that. Uh, Mr. X,
one last question. So how many
students are we trying to, uh,
each year, how many are you
trying to recruit?
With the spill 10.
Thank you. 10 students, yes.
So, uh,
That
How many do we need overall in
the state of New Mexico?
Well, like I said right now,
just.
of practices that I know of that
are actively seeking to do
something, uh, there's about 27
with this program it'll fund or
hopefully fund about 10. We
currently place 18 to 22
students in veterinary school
each year now through various
programs. The, the Western
Interstate Commission on Higher
Education Professional student
exchange program in the Texas
Tech universities uh partnership
program that we have so we get
20 it's trying to.
And we serve a lot that come
back to urban areas. What we're
trying to do is make sure we
shift them into a more rural
setting.
Thank you, thank you, chair.
That's all. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Boone.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I thought I'd give
a little bit of perspective on
the
From the side of a of a.
Beef producer
Um, this is a very critical
need.
We do have a shortage of large
animal or food animal vets if
you if you call them uh.
And this is a very
Well designed program I think uh
I'm, I'm well familiar with the
people that designed it. I know
they do good work and.
And uh I believe that uh.
It's something that we really
need here in the state of New
Mexico.
So I stand in full support of
it.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Any other?
Center is out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I do appreciate this bill.
I was a pre-vet major whenever I
was going to New Mexico State.
That's it.
That's it.
Oh, and there is a shortage. I
too am a.
I raised cattle for a living,
and it does go, they do go into
the food chain, their calves do,
and it's really, really hard. I
got to spend a week in two can
carry 1 year.
Uh, learning all about AI and
that's not artificial
intelligence, OK? It is hands-on
experience.
But I, I'm concerned here
because I just saw something I
underlined it and I'm rereading
the bill and I can't find any.
Any reference to it on the FIR
on the 2nd page.
Under eligibility criteria
number 4 is his employed full
time in a private practice.
Wait, no, no, no, that's not it.
I put it, circled it someplace
else.
They were talking about, now I
can't find it.
I have a circle, that's where I
do.
Here it is. This is under the uh
analysis from the New Mexico
Livestock Board.
And I don't know if anybody from
the livestock board is here. I
don't see anybody I recognize.
Oh.
OK. Thank you.
I, I see you now.
It says the word shall be
evidenced by a contract between
the recipient and the department
acting on behalf of the state.
The contract will provide a
stated sum to the veterinarians
or veterinary technician
debtors, and I'm not seeing that
anywhere in the building and I
was just kind of concerned.
But the
Livestock Board put that in
there because there's a big
difference between a
veterinarian and a veterinary
technician.
Should we just disregard that at
all, should I not have even
brought it up, just wipe it out,
folks.
Don't listen to it. Don't listen
to it.
Another question I have, I'm
just gonna skip over that y'all
didn't hear it, remember, OK?
Rewind the tape a little bit.
Whenever you're talking about.
The veterinarian that we are
needing in our state the food
animal veterinarian. Why isn't
it stated as large animal
veterinarian.
Because one of the things that
specifically, we are asking for
as veterinarians that will work
on livestock.
Large animal veterinarians, we
have equine only.
Veterinarians that aren't, they
are still a shortage but not as
severe as the food down. We want
to make sure this is really
designed to help mixed animal
practitioners. That's really
what it's about. We don't have
the ability in New Mexico to be
primarily or only an equine
veterinarian because we don't
have enough numbers or like for
instance dairy practitioners,
they're large animal, but we're
and and food animal but
specifically trying to to target
is those that are that are
willing to do.
Large animal that includes food
animal and or yeah, food animal
practice.
I appreciate your response here.
We do have a huge the chair if
you I'm sorry I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman of habit.
I'm sorry. Thank you,
it is very important that we do
maintain the health of our.
farm animals that are going into
the food chain. I, I won't
disagree with that a bit.
Whenever
These selections are made by the
Department of Higher Ed Mr.
Chairman.
And Senator
Qualifications, I'm sure are
gonna be pretty rigorous.
So the selection committee on
awarding these.
scholarships if you wanna call
them that they do have to have
completed their 4 years of
school prior to going on to
further their education and any
of these veterinarian schools,
and they are few and far
between, obviously, the Mexico
does have one.
Is there any preference giving
given to any of these schools
that might be closer than
further away.
No.
We, we have, we have, uh.
We have the interstate agreement
we call the icy
agreement.
And that goes all the way up to
Washington state.
Washington, Colorado.
Kansas, Texas Oregon.
I'm, I'm one of New Mexico's
witchy commissioners. It, it is
not Kansas, it's uh mostly up
through the north and it's
Montana, Idaho, Colorado,
Arizona, Nevada, California,
Oregon, Washington, I think.
New Mexico.
Hm
So Mister Chairman and Senator,
if there is a.
A young person that's or not not
necessarily young person cause
it does take a lot of years, 8
years.
Oh
If they decide to go to Texas
A&M or even down to.
Texas Tech.
Or Kansas
With their
Consideration of that particular
school.
The grounds for not being able
to qualify for one of these
scholarships.
The way the bill is written, it
says the preference is given to
those state veterinary schools
that
have a preference for New Mexico
students, but I might add that
the Texas Tech school right now.
Well, I might just bring this
forward. Ben's all hires in
here.
In Texas, Mr. Chair in Texas
these higher education, the high
degrees parts of their deal, 90%
of the students.
Or Texas.
Resident
They give a preference of 90% of
the people that go into those of
Texas, 10% can come from out of
state right now Texas Tech has
granted us that 10%.
So I would say that's a
preference to New Mexico
students.
That's where I was trying to
lead you. Thank you very much.
I support this fully, and I wish
every one of these students that
gets a scholarship does come
back to New Mexico to practice
veterinary medicine.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Nova.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
bill forward. I definitely see
the need. I do have some
clarification questions, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, pertaining to the
qualifications on
section and it's.
Section 3.
Uh, actually, yeah, so on page
4, it says, uh, the
qualifications for a loan
repayment right, should be a
citizen or lawful permanent
resident, resident of New
Mexico, licensed as veterinary
in New Mexican veterinarian in
New Mexico and employed full
time in private practice.
Um, so then,
I'm gonna take you back to the
definition of loan as stated in
the bill, and it says, uh, it's
defined as federal government or
commercial lender.
And where I'm going with this is
in the qualifications.
There is no addition of a
potential DACA recipient who
could perhaps have received.
A commercial lender alone
because DACA recipients won't be
able to qualify for federal
loans, but they could qualify
for commercial lenders, so this
would not apply to them as a
resource, so that's a bit
concerning to me. Um, so I
wanted to ask you if you have an
explanation of why they're not
included, even though they could
receive those types of funds.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, Senator Nova,
thank you for that question. So
it's not necessarily um the loan
aspect or the debt of the the
loan um educational lender, um,
based on state procurement, um,
the higher education department
doesn't pay private entities, so
it does have to be some form of
a federally funded um student
loan in order for us to repay
those student loans back.
Hopefully that answers, Mr.
Chairman, thank you very much.
That's great, uh, and I
appreciate the clarification.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Figeroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you for the bill. I'm
gonna jump right in top of page
3.
Um
Round line 3, I think.
Yeah, if, if I'm reading this
correctly, Mr. Chair, HED is.
Going to implement the criteria
to determine what areas are
underserved.
And I assume they do the same
thing, Mr. Chair, for our
medical provider loan repayment
programs.
Mr. Chairman members of the
committee, yes, um, that is
correct, so, um, New Mexico's
geographic landscape and
underserved areas will include
15 counties. Uh, we certainly
will expand on that, so it's
gonna be Bernalillo Catron, um,
Chavisibola Donana Grant,
Hidalgo, Lee, Luna McKinley, Ria
Reba, Sandoval, San Juan, San
Miguel in northern Santa Fe, and
this is based on the USDA on
they consider what is a role
within the state of New Mexico,
and we certainly will expand on
that, um, if we can get some.
al you know, knowing what the
statistics are and where the
needs are within the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that answer. So you're
already well down that road of
determining where the need is.
My question then, I think
relates to information in the
fiscal impact report.
our Board of Veterinary Medicine
estimates it'll take 400,000 for
them to run a database to keep
track of.
Where are these
Veterinary needs are, can you
explain that and how it might be
funded.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, Senator, um, so
the this particular legislation
is gonna be administered under
the New Mexico Higher Education
Department, the New Mexico
Higher Department already has
these type of systems in place,
um, so we have the systems for
tracking mechanisms, ensuring
that these individuals are
successful and in rural areas
within the state of New Mexico.
OK, thank you for that
clarification.
My last question, Mr. Tay, is
about timing toward the end of
the bill, it suggests that all
the funds have to be expended by
2031, and I think you might need
more time.
If, if
You calculate 80,000.
And 10 a year.
You can go for 6 years.
And then you need 4 more years
to pay out that last little bit,
so Mr. Tay would.
Ask if, if you don't think you
might need to.
2036 to expand it all out.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, so once an
individual selected on the 10
individuals, um, they were
always going to be required to
complete a 4-year service
commitment, um, upon completion
of the four-year service
commitment, they will be um
eligible to renew for an
additional 4 years, but you are
correct in the sense that we are
going to fund a 1010 individuals
if we continue to fund the 10
individuals, it's true that the
preparation will sunset, um, we
will have to come back and ask
for additional funding or
reoccurring funding.
To ensure that we are following
these individuals through their
commitment and of course
retaining them in underserved
areas within the state.
And Mr. Chair, if I might add.
We have to remember
That we need to find programs
that work.
And how do we, how do we judge
those programs if we don't have
a sunset so that we're directly
having to look at it again.
And see if it's successful, see
if we need to add money, see if
we need to expand the cost part
of it uh the reward part of it
what we have to do, but until we
know it's working.
That we, we need to be good
stewards of the people's money.
And all of this money is
taxpayers' money.
So how we spend that money is
very important. This is a very
Needy program, no doubt about
it.
But it, no matter how needy the
program is I'm a big believer in
sunsets.
Because we need to relook at
them.
We need to know what's working
and what's not working.
And we need a whole new set of
legislators to look at it again,
right? Because what I think is
important may not be what you
think is important 5 years from
now.
So that's my thought on it.
Um, you know, if I had my
preference, I'd pay every damn
loan off the first day.
But we need
But make these people
A reliable citizen also.
To show that they are providing
a service to the state, and
we're going to reward them.
After the fact, they were a
service.
And so uh it it's, it's part of
human nature that we're we're
incentivizing also.
Mr. Jack
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. I absolutely agree
with the concept of sunsets and
that we need to ensure it works
and one aspect in this
particular bill toward that end
we have to see if these
veterinarians will choose to
stay even after the 4 years, or
is this an ongoing cycle that we
would fund need to fund.
Indefinitely. So I appreciate
those comments. Thank you, Mr.
You know, Mister Chair, uh.
This brings me to the fact that
uh Doctor Hickey.
Doctor Senator Hickey is here
today with his white coat and
I've talked to a lot of doctors
in my life, and they say that
even.
Even when I try to incentivize a
physicians to come into a
community.
A lot has to do with mama.
A wife
And whether she's happy there.
You know, if momma ain't happy,
nobody's happy.
We're trying our best to make.
Their life better
quality of life better.
And some people can thrive and
rule New Mexico and some people
can't.
And, and the people that can
thrive there have a wonderful
way of life. So,
I agree with you on every point
that you made, but.
I, I want to tell it, if you're
oh you're not through. I'm
sorry.
And I just, I was gonna make a
couple of comments, uh, most of
our veterinarians come out of
Colorado State, I believe is
where most of them go, uh,
through the witchy program, uh,
wonderful program for all of the
professional schools that we
don't have in New Mexico and
that work with those and
certainly the, the vets coming
there, we do have good
agreements, my understanding
with the Texas schools, uh, that
feel some bond with New Mexico,
particularly the east side of
New Mexico, uh, very much
support this program. I think
it's a great way and we know if
we can get
That's to save for 23 years,
they put down roots and they
stay for a much longer period of
time. Uh, my only concern is
with this and with docs and
others is it may not be enough.
We ought to, you know, if we
really want lots of vets and
they're building the structure
and fabric of New Mexico, we
ought to be.
Covering their full cost when
they get out, provided they make
that full commitment to stay
here, but I very much appreciate
this bill. Um, and with that,
I'm open unless somebody else
has a question, I'm open for a
motion.
A motion for a due pass,
seconded by uh Senator Ramos,
um, and Marianne, if you'll call
the roll, please.
In her boot.
Yeah. Senator Horton.
Senator Pope. Yes.
Yes.
You have a due pass.
Thank, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and, and just one
thing I want you to carry your
next commission meeting, uh,
Colorado State has changed their
requirement for entry into the
red school they say anatomy and
physio.
Physiology have to be split.
They have to be two different
courses and right now New Mexico
State doesn't have their
curriculum set up that way we
need.
Some relief, and the only reason
I know that full disclosure,
guys.
My granddaughter was accepted
into vet school.
This year
and that's how come I know that.
That and thank you and I, I will
mention that in our next wiy
meeting as well as work with New
Mexico State about whether we
are able to separate those uh
prerequisite courses and that
the pre-vet pre-med programs are
aware of those changes, and they
usually try and keep up with
those so that they're not
hindering our students'
abilities to get in.
And I want to thank the expert
witnesses they went out of their
way to come here today, so thank
you being here today.
Um
With that, uh, and we're gonna
move to Senator Padilla, and so
we're gonna jump around a little
bit, everyone, um.
went down, I think it's the last
one on our list today is the
high school water management
pilot program, so SB 60.
will be our next bill today. Um,
I'm kind of keeping a watch for
what other legislators I saw
Sheo was around, but I don't
know that he stayed.
And so, uh, we'll, we'll do SB
60 and then SBT will go back to
try and go in order unless we
have other legislators coming in
and out because they've got
other responsibilities as well.
So uhenator Padilla, please, if
you'll take us to SB 60.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Vice Chair
and ranking member and members
of the committee. I'm Senator
Michael Pavia. Thank you very
much for allowing me to be here
with you this morning and taking
me as I came in and it's so I
just want to keep your agenda
moving forward, um, essentially
this is my 2nd attempt at this
particular idea, Mr. Chairman.
And uh essentially what it does
is it creates a water management
and conservation 2 unit pilot
project in our high schools, uh,
what we do is we, we ask the
public education department to
administer, develop curricula on
management and conservation of
water. I think we all know that
uh the Rio Grande and the the
various um water sources that we
have are anticipated to reduce
by about 25% over about the next
30 years and uh even more severe
results beyond that.
And so I did attempt this a
couple of years ago, but of
course I asked to do this, Mr.
Chairman, in a year where we had
no money whatsoever and we were
taking money from the school
district. So the last thing I
wanted to do that year was, and
I was a member of this committee
for 9 years, by the way, and um
was to ask them to do something
else without giving them any
money to do it. So that that
bill got run over, backed over,
and then run over again to make
sure that it was, it was dead
and so coming forward this one
actually, we do have the money
to do this now. This is a 6-year
pilot that again requires the
PED to manage this program,
develop the curriculum.
Uh, identify 5 school districts
in uh and and it it prescribes,
you know, rural, um, um, more
urban, if you could call uh our
state any urban at all, um, and
then, you know, various size of
school districts, etc. So we
have a lot of variety that we're
going to deal with here. These 5
districts would run these
pilots, um, they would have a 22
unit requirement to graduate or
to to get the the the uh
certification there and it would
happen over a six-year period.
Those results would be recorded
back
to the legislative education
study committee every year and
then we would ideally go down
the road of, of making this
something that would be more um
are prevalent in our public
schools.
I think what we find is that a
lot of our children, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee is they believe
they're going to go turn on the
faucet and the water's always
going to be there or they're
going to walk across the Asea or
near the Aseka in their
neighborhood and that water's
always gonna be there. I would
love nothing more than for this
legislation to turn into
something that produces um you
know, young people graduating
from high school with some
understanding of how to manage
water in their life and how to
conserve it and that's exactly
what it does. Uh, the pros, if
we decide to do this, or that it
enhances our environmental.
education which the legislation,
you know, seeks to have PED work
with the Environment Department
to put all of this curriculum
together, skill development,
regional representation, as I
mentioned to make sure that the
entire states included in this
resource allocation, uh,
data-driven insights, so we're
making decisions with data and
then a collaborative approach to
it. So that's what Senate Bill
60 does, Mr. Chairman, and just
wanted to to say that oh, and
then we also, I'm asking for an
appropriation or recurring
appropriation of 1.25 million a
year to manage this program.
Over that 6-year period to make
sure that it's fully funded and
the department has the resources
they need in order to provide
these services.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
Time to go out to the audience,
a quick show of hands, those in
support of this program.
Those in opposition.
Then you stand alone right now.
Uh, but if, if you'd like to
come up and and talk on this
bill.
Introduce yourself to the other
people who may not know you.
I'm the executive director of
the school superintendents
Association is something called
the coalition of Educational
Leaders just for the committee.
I only do this once, Mr.
Chairman. That's everybody who
administers anything in public
schools.
Oh, that's the voice.
You're hearing.
Uh, we don't have a position on
this bill. However, I would like
to suggest we support it.
I, it checks all the necessary
boxes.
We have a dilemma in New Mexico
as far as our future water
conservation, our walls are
management even more
importantly.
This does recognize the
differences across New Mexico.
It invokes different size
districts.
And the only reservation we have
is you as a legislature don't
often do six-year funds.
You tend to shy away from that
the best you have right now are
grow money that goes 3 years. We
would love to see this.
Oh
Uh, looked at 6 years is a good
idea, so this term we stand in
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Stan. Anyone else in
support?
Anyone online?
This go? No, uh, anyone in
opposition again, let me ask.
Seeing none and questions from
the committee.
If you have no questions, is
there a motion.
Senator.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman and
senator Spence,
um, do you preference still? Do
you prefer,
OK, thank you,
thank you, um.
Mr. Chairman and and Senator
Ezel, um, so essentially the
department will be provided with
dollars to develop the
curricula, working with the
Department of Environment and
others to put this together,
higher education, collaborators
in this area. Once that's done,
and there will be grants to the
districts that are selected to
provide these, these courses and
um and those grants will be
utilized to fund the teaching
positions to actually provide
this actual teaching delivery.
So Mr. Chairman Senator Padilla,
what I'm hearing it's gonna be
geared more towards the
conservation aspect of it is
that correct? Mr. Chairman and
Senator Ezel, I, you know, I
call it management and
conservation. I think both go
hand in hand and that would be
developed through the curriculum
development uh portion of this
exercise. I, I don't want to
You know, legislation, I almost
never just completely prescribe
how this would go. I want to
give the department the ability
to put that together with the
various collaborators. OK. Mr.
Chairman and Senator Padilla, I
do see an analysis in here from
the New Mexico Environment
Department.
But
I finally got it, I finally
found.
The analysis from the state
engineer.
I don't know if Valdez is in the
room or not.
But I, I was real curious about
what the Office of the State
Engineers' role and the
interstate stream commission's
role. It's got to be in as far
as them being able to offer any
sort of.
Uh, practical use to go along
with the conservation efforts,
so it's gonna be up to each
administration.
At these different institution
at different schools.
To get the information from them
that's gonna best fit the
solution
and Senator, yeah, that, that's
where I go with the whole
collaborative.
You know, um, folks that will
come in to develop the
curricula. I would imagine.
Environment, state engineer, um,
You know, Em there, there's
going to be a number of agencies
that will be a part of putting
this together. That's why it's a
it's a pilot. I would envision
the pilot starting out, not
necessarily even in year one, it
might be in year 2 as they have
year 1 to put everything
together and the reason I asked
for 6 years was because I
thought it was important that
they'd be able to retool it like
anything else but not be held
with getting something done
within 1 or 2 years and I just
think we would trip over
ourselves if we try to do it so
quickly.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator
Padilla, I, I do think that
there needs to be some
continuity between.
All the schools that might be
participating in this.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator
Padilla, whenever you would do
whenever you were giving you
opening statements, you said in
the urban areas, I think it's
very important that we not
forget our rural areas because
the rural areas, especially
with.
Irrigation purposes.
That type of
venture out there.
Plus the conservation aspect of
it in our rural areas is very
important.
So
who is going to make the
decision, I'm sorry.
And so Mr. Chairman and and
senator, if you go to page 2 at
the bottom, item number item
number 2 under new material, uh,
the the the department would be
accountable for select at least
5 school districts to
participate in the project and
make reasonable efforts to
select districts from different
regions of the state and from
rural communities. I want to
make sure the word rural was in
there, uh, small cities and
large cities and then uh so I
think that encapsulates kind of
what you're, what you're looking
at there. Yes, sir, and Mr.
Chairman and Senator.
de
Will these schools have to make
applications to be a part of
this uh.
Program, the startup program,
Mr. Chairman and Senator, yes.
OK. And there will be a date
that they have up until.
That they have to get their
request submitted. Is that
correct? And where will that be
found? Will it be on the PED
website?
If this bill passes Mr. Chairman
and Senator, I couldn't actually
tell you that. I'm assuming that
that's how they would, that's
how I would do it.
I think you and I are on the
same page there. Um, I, I would
envision like many other things
that we try to do creatively
like this and innovatively,
that's how that will be
collected. I know that if, if,
uh, if we didn't do it that way,
I think you and I would have a
whole lot to talk about with,
with uh PD.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator, Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
had one question, Senator asked
my previous question with how
would the districts be selected,
so I appreciate that.
Uh, centers of Patilia, uh, the
question I also had was with
there's a focus on water
management and conservation. And
I know that our governor is
interested in in going after
strategic water plan and so is
there gonna be any discussion on
technology, things like
desalination.
In this particular water
project, in other words, water
production, we have an ocean of
water underneath the New Mexico.
It's just brackish.
And we need to desalinate it and
make it available. So it's that
technology going to be discussed
in this particular curriculum.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator, I,
I would anticipate that. I will
say that this legislation has uh
it's swimming in its own,
no.
It's very early for us to be
doing this, OK
Excuse me, uh, yeah, this, this
has nothing to do with the
governor's legislation at all.
I, I, I have, uh, I, I would
have a, I'd be completely
surprised if technology didn't
wind up in this effort, um, and
so to answer your question, yes.
Thank you, thank you for that
question.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I just
want to make a comment that uh
I, I, I, I'm actually good at
with that uh we're going to be
presenting and bringing in
children and teaching them about
our different water projects.
That's definitely important, but
I, I hope that somewhere within
um we can make sure that they
learn about irrigation ditches
uh because we have a lot of
ditches and sekis through
southwest New Mexico in my
district and I, I, I think that
really has to be uh part of the
curriculum.
and, and I just thank you for
bringing this this bill
together. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator. I would
envision everything that was
talked about here this morning,
being wrapped in there. I don't
think we could have thought of
every.
And I didn't want to put it all
in. I just wanted to put that
that that it be developed and I
would imagine that'll last there
as well, so thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. The Pope
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
Bill 6. We have a motion for a
pass.
Senate Bill 60.
Seed by Senator Hickey. I just
wanted to make a comment before
we go to the vote that the
curriculum is going to be
designed by PE, as I understand.
I hope it's designed broad
enough that local regional water
issues can be addressed because
rural water issues are very
different from urban water
issues, yet they're both
important and that the
curriculum cover both of those,
but be able to be more focused
for where the actual school
district would be located and my
guests knowing Ped and
responsible people we have
there.
that that is most likely I'm
looking at Juan Denise, but, but
most likely how they would
envision it also is not too
prescriptive to where it doesn't
fit for different, different
areas.
Oh
OK, OK, I'm sorry. Snova
seconded instead of Senator
Hickey so the Re will reflect,
if you'll call the role, please,
Marianne.
boom. Yes.
Yes.
Ciner Figueroa.
Senator Hickey.
Senator No.
Into Ramos, yes. Thornton.
Senator Poke. Yes.
Yes.
You have a due pass. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and members.
Um,
For people watching, uh, we are
next gonna go to Senate Bill 10
with Senator Pope, uh, followed
by Senate Bill 11, uh, Senator
Brantly, I saw come in in the
back or was kind of watching to
see where we were with different
things, uh, and then the SB 13,
the compacts.
Senator Pope
Um, the anti-hazing Act.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
believe
Um, everyone should be getting a
committee substitute.
No.
Uh, for this bill.
And just want to let everyone
know the changes from the bill
that was pre-filed in the
committee substitute is um at
the end of the bill, we just
make sure to match the language,
uh, with the federal law that
was signed at the end of
December on the reporting
requirements and then at the
beginning of the bill, we wanted
to make sure that the definition
of hazing matched the federal
law as well, so that's really
the changes in this bill.
And I, if I could, uh, Mr.
Cameraman, you kind of stay back
a little bit, please. That would
be better. That's a little bit
distracting there, but thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
You know, we all know hazing is
a dangerous and often deadly
practice that fosters a culture
of abuse.
Coercion and psychological harm.
Incidents of hazing have led to
serious injuries, mental trauma,
and in some extreme cases,
fatalities.
By enforcing penalties,
mandatory education and
institutional accountability.
The anti-hazing Act prioritizes
student safety and well-being.
It ensures that no student is
subject to harmful initiation
practices under the guise of
tradition.
Schools must be environments
where students feel secure and
supported.
Rather than pressured into
degrading or life-threatening
activities.
This legislation represents a
critical step towards fostering
a campus culture of respect,
inclusion.
And accountability.
Uh, one of the differences
between this bill and the one
from last year.
bill does include K through 12.
Uh, public and private schools
as well as our public and
private post-secondary
institutions, otherwise known as
higher education.
Key provisions of the bill.
Um, it defines hazing. Hazing is
defined as an intention as
intentionally knowing our
reckless act that occurs as part
of an initiation, affiliation or
membership in a group,
regardless of consent.
These are activities that pose a
physical or mental harm or or
degradation.
And these are strictly
prohibited.
Those
Who
Commit hazing.
Um, and who are found guilty.
Um, it would be classified them
as uh receiving a misdemeanor
offense.
We talk about accountability.
Individuals.
Found guilty of hazing, Maylo
state funding scholarship,
grants or awards?
And organizations that permit
hazing are strictly liable for
damages and may lose
institutions.
recognition.
For example, if they were in a
fraternity or a student group,
uh, they can become unchartered
on the campus.
Administrators, faculty, and
staff who failed to report
hazing incidents may also be
charged. Um, they would be
charged with a misdemeanor for
failure to this bill also has
responsibilities.
To higher education. Now these
responsibilities are only for
our, our higher education
institutions and not K through
12.
Um, the schools must include an
anti-hazing policy in their code
of conduct.
That applies to both on and off
campus.
They must establish a ha hazing
prevention committee made up of
students, faculty, and parent
representation.
And there must be mandatory
training.
Uh, which would be annual hazing
prevention education for
students, staff, and faculty.
Finally, um, there needs, there
will be a mandatory reporting
and transparency.
Once again, this requirement is
only for higher education and
not K through 12.
Schools must publicly report
verified hazing violations by
student organizations.
Athletic teams and fraternities
and sororities.
The reports must also include
details on violations,
penalties, and investigations
and timelines.
There's also requirements for
fraternities and sororities as
well.
Greek organizations must notify
schools before opening or
reopening chapters.
If investigated for hazing
organizations must share
findings with school officials.
And their chapter websites must
display violations for the past
5 years.
Failure to comply
Uh, could mean loss of
recognition on campus.
You know, I don't want to go.
Into all the history and I'm
sure we might get some on public
comment.
We've seen what's happened in
our state, not only in higher
education, but K through 12,
some of the horrific acts. And
so that's why we have to step
forward and do something.
Um, while this bill doesn't have
the penalties that some folks
want.
Um, my thought is, is about
holding folks accountable and
really changing the culture.
Of this idea that folks have to
submit themselves to hazing to
be part of an athletic team or
an organization.
And so, um, with that, Mr.
Chair, I'll turn it back to you
for public comment and Senator,
if you would please help in that
uh we're all a little rusty on
our processes because it's a
committee sub, uh, if you would
like to make a motion for the do
not pass.
On the original bill and the due
pass for discussion on the sub,
and we can go through that
process so we get it formally
introduced.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
apologies for that. I move a do
not pass on Senate Bill 10.
And I move a do pass on.
committee
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 10
for discussion purposes.
Thank you. Yeah, those are some
of just the formal processes for
the audience that we have to go
through when there's a change
like that so that it's formally
introduced and we're discussing
the proper bill that's in front
of us.
Um, and with that, that was in
the presentation, uh, burst out
of the audience, those in
support of Senate Bill 10.
And in opposition on Senate Bill
10.
OK, um, if the supporters like
to come up and speak to you and
you don't have to, if you would
like to come up and speak on
this bill, please come up to the
microphone.
Do we have any
I.
Anybody know?
OK, um, in opposition, well, and
there's no one online in
support, is that correct? OK.
So in opposition stand.
Mr. Chairman, again stand rounds
for the superintendents
Association, and I'll use the
acronym NMCEL, the coalition,
uh, we're in opposition to bills
that's currently drafted. I've
talked to the uh to the sponsor
we weren't able to review in
depth the committee of
substitute if I refer back to to
uh Senate 10 originally on page
2 line 17, page 3 line 7, you
include public schools, uh, it
says any public school.
Or private school and then it
brings in the post-secondary is
the second option.
Hear the salient issues and it's
the policy issue of how you deal
with juveniles.
In juvenile conduct.
That hasn't been studied
sufficiently for this bill. We
believe the bill uh can't be
sufficient or efficient in its
current form, so we have to
stand in opposition. We support
the concept. We believe that a
best next step would be to pair
out, to carve out public
schools.
And then to produce a memorial
to take this to the legislative
education Study Committee, which
is your legislative committee
for those kinds of deep studies.
We need to get the juvenile
code. We need to get the, uh,
the, the, the children's code
and we need to get your
decisions about how you enforce
that code on youth, and that's
different than adults. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Stan. Anyone else in
opposition? If not questions
from the committee.
No one has que, I have a
question.
Uh, you know, unless there's
anyone else.
OK, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator Pope for bringing
this bill. I just wanted to ask
a couple of questions in terms
of clarifications, uh, again,
maybe it's appropriate that I
have my white coat on today. Um,
Back in the days of the iron
people, we worked 120 hours a
week.
And um,
It was, it's very common on
rounds to be asked questions.
Particularly, uh, I professor of
medicine and to ask those
questions and ones that are very
difficult and uh, and part of it
is to stimulate the student or
the resident to do some research
on the issue and come back so it
can be perceived as embarrassing
or
picking on me, um, I, I have
wounds from
Uh, professor we called the
Velvet harpoon, um, at least he
was nice in his delivery, but
when I looked down, I was
bleeding.
Uh, because I didn't know the
answer. So, um, you know, we
have pasted national rules that
have lowered the hours and
residency programs, um, but I
want to be sure that we don't
create a blurred line where uh a
medical student or resident, uh,
particularly when a mistake is
made in that individual is
appropriately criticized for
that uh mistake that's that that
would be termed hazing.
Um, I've heard some of my
colleagues say the reason we
don't have physicians in the
state, is that there's hazing at
UNM residency programs, and
that's why no one wants to stay
here. um.
Bad news, folks.
There is not hazing, but the the
Socratic method, um, and
particularly when you've been up
for 24 hours, you can feel like
it's, you're being picked on,
um, could lead to some
inappropriate accusations and I
don't know if you need to
clarify in this bill that in
medical training, I know we have
a a paragraph on that. The
normal give and take of
learning, which is again a
Socratic method that is in.
interactive iterative, uh,
unless it is uh abusive.
to the individual.
Um, is not constitute a hazing.
And I'm, I'm not asking you to
amend the bill, but I certainly
want this to be on the record
that we have discussed it, and I
want to disabuse those who think
that the reason we don't have
physicians staying in the state
is because of hazing wherever
you go for postgraduate
training, you will be involved
in this rigorous Socratic, uh,
iterative method, so I don't
know if you'd like to offer any
comment or observations.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Um.
We didn't specifically touch on
that as far as residencies, but
we did touch on the fact that,
you know, if you're on athletic
team and you got to run laps or
do push-ups, you know, those
things aren't considered hazing,
um, you know, I'd be willing to
talk with you a little more to
see, you know, to make sure, um,
we're kind of covering that to
where it's more of the
educational.
standards that are happening
that are not considered hazing,
but that is not the intent here,
but I, I think you're bringing
up a good point.
Mr. Chair and Senator Pope,
thank you for that answer. I,
uh, you know, if, if, uh, you've
watched the paper chase or
you've been to law school, I
believe there is a similar
methodology, the Socratic
method, uh, that sometimes can
be kind of uh.
Um sarcastic is often involved
there and it's.
The second is just part of the
historical learning environment,
but again, personally abusive,
there is no room for. And Mr.
Chair and Senator Pope when when
other clarification, uh, is
there protection in here for new
legislators and senators from
leadership.
Mr. Chair, Senator, there is
not, and that's probably why we
haven't had this for a while,
cause, you know, folks, folks
consider probably what we did in
this building is hazing, so
thank, thank you again for
bringing. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Maybe it's just an initial of
semantics, but Senator Pope, can
you
Explain the difference between
gazing and bullying, you know,
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I can't
I don't have the, the
defining definitions here. Um, I
know there's a bullying
definition and even in federal
law. I, I don't have them here
right now, um, but there
definitely is, um.
difference, um, and so what we
did here is kind of take the
hazy in the federal law that was
just passed. Um, I can't tell
you the differences offhand. I
don't have it here. Um, but
there is a legal difference.
Mr. Chair, the reason I'm
asking. I was just concerned
that, you know, child to
children and
One's being bullied, pushed on a
merry go round or something to
that effect.
I don't know if I would call
that hazy. And so we know those
things occur on a regular basis
and so I would hate to have to
go through this sort of process,
uh.
Secondly, my, my question, Mr.
Chair, is, uh, with regards to
Um
Institutions, do they not
already have codes of conduct
relative to behaviors of of
their institution and would that
not be sufficient to guard
against most of these things
without having to go through
full legislation, um, I, I think
just to go back to your, your
previous question as well. I, I
think the difference is, you
know, the bullying, intimidation
to really intimidate that person
and get something out of it
where um this is more dealing
with the hazing to actually join
a group or be part of a group or
be.
a team, and I think that's part
of the difference as far as code
of conduct, you're right, higher
education in our schools have
that, um, but in some cases,
there isn't um definite.
And so that's what this would
do. So in some cases where
there's the reporting
requirements, higher education
might already be doing annual
reports dealing with other
issues on campus, sexual
harassment, things like that.
Um, and maybe it could be part
of that annual reporting.
Because they might be doing
something and this would be in
addition, um.
Um, without having to really
start something from scratch.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Ramos, Mr.
Chair, thank you, uh, thank you,
Senator, for bringing this bill
in front of us. I, I, I also
think that was a great question
about the code of conduct. I
think each, each school has
their own policy and I think I'm
always for local control. So I,
I really like to see um each
board develop their policies to
meet their needs of their
school. Of course, hazing is,
the local and uh again I thank
you for bringing in this bill.
Thank you Mr. Sir. Thank you.
And
And, uh, Senator, uh.
My concern with this, and it's
very similar to Stan is the
children's code in public
schools is very different than
secondary and higher education.
Um,
This seems like a great topic
and I think I'm going to be
chairing the LESC for the next 2
years.
To have LESC and those interim
processes go through and really
talk about what kinds of things
need to be in the public school
area as opposed to the
secondary. This feels like it's
two separate bills that are kind
of pushed together awkwardly,
uh, if you will. Would you be
amenable to
Take out the public school
portion of it to send it to LESC
over the next year to, to look
at, I always remember the thing
we should never be in a hurry to
make bad legislation, um, and
not that I think this has very
good intent, but we want to make
sure we do it right and well.
No, and, um, you know, after
talking with Stan and other
folks, um, you know, I'm hearing
the concerns. I really wanted to
put something together with the
incidents that have happened
recently, um, talking with
victims, talking with families
and the need.
But we also have to get this
right, and I don't want to have
unintended consequences and when
we're talking about misdemeanors
and including.
You know, our kids in K through
12.
That's something that scares me
as well. So, um, I think for me,
I would be willing and I've
already kind of marked up on
this bill to really amend, mend
this and take out.
K through 12, which would be our
public and private schools of
verbiage in here. Um,
And um
I, I, I know working with you,
we'd be able to work on this at
LESC and come up with the right
type of legislation, um, to deal
with some of the concerns that
Stan's talking about, um, but
also with the Children's code on
how we would implement this and
and what differences we could
have a separate from a
misdemeanor. So I would be
willing to. Thank you, Senator,
and, and so I guess what I'm
proposing for committee and I,
we, we might have a markup
around, but it's in the sections
of 12, and.
3.
And I, and I have a mark. I
could, I could read them, read
it off to you.
And yeah, and I can go too
quickly, the what I'm proposing
is that we amend this to remove
the public-private school.
The 3 or 4 places it's on the
first several pages, uh, the
first one is on page 2 line 21.
Is the strike public or private
schools.
It's the, the grammar that goes
along with that.
Page 3, line 2.
Same strikes.
Page 3, line 16.
And page 3, line 22, and I think
those are the only places that
that is in there.
Mr. Chair, page 4 page 432 and
I'm sorry, page 4, lines 2 and
3.
So I would make that motion and
Second one.
We have a, a 2 and now we're
we're discussing on the motion.
Center
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
see something done on this
because it could be a problem,
but I agree that the
Public and private school.
Aspect of it do come out of
there, but I'd like to see a
cleaner bill. Would there be a
possibility of temporarily
labeling this until this bill
you uh.
Substitute bill for Senate Bill
10.
Comes back
At our next meeting in a
corrected form. I think it would
be easier for our audience to be
able to see it in that aspect.
And Senator
Senator in general, I don't like
doing amendments on the fly.
This one was fairly short. This
is about the extent, you know,
that I would like as far as
doing in the committee, but it,
uh, Senator, it's up to you and
the committee to to send you and
bring you back on Friday with
those changes, Mr. Chair, if I
could do that and we could come
with the new committee
substitute with these changes
and come back next Friday would
be, I'm fine with that.
OK, and Mr. any other committee
members is that
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, the reason I'd
like to do that, I want, because
here's another one over here on
page 6 that needs to be.
He moved, I think, uh.
I know that.
We don't want the the two
overlapping because one is
totally different than the
other, the first PED and higher
ed part of it.
And I know that uh Mr. Rounds
has some.
Questions too, but I think a a
clean bill coming back might be
more palatable to me. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator. No problem. I would
say, Mr. Chair, the K through 12
was only in sections 1 through
3, but I, I take your
suggestion. We'll come with a
clean bill that way everyone
feels comfortable.
Thank you. And with that, then
we'll, we'll just roll this over
to Friday, we'll put it on first
thing at 9 o'clock on, well,
we've got a presentation at 9
o'clock, but as soon as we get
the bills on on Friday.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you committee
members.
And my list here.
So
Next up, uh, we're gonna be SB.
11, uh, Senator Brantley, are
you, you're still here with us?
Good. And a distraction policy
in schools.
Mhm
For those watching after this,
uh, we'll get to Senator
Shindo's bill SB 13, the state
tribal Education compacts.
members of the committee before
we get started, I'd like to have
my guest introduce himself. I
think he's a familiar face.
We're all familiar with. And Mr.
Chair, members of the
committees, my name is Simon
Suzuki. I'm a staff attorney
with Legislative counsel Service
and as always, um, um, as an
employee of Legislative council
service, I'm here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
this committee, and I do not
appear in support of or
opposition to the matter before
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Simon's
here in case we bill drafting
questions that we could do that.
I want to begin. This is a
phone-free anti-distraction
policy. So I want to begin this
conversation with some
statistics. Alarmingly, NEA
reports that 90% of our teachers
are advocating for restricting
cell phone use during
instructional time with a 97%
rate of students who are using
their phones during school
hours.
The average teen spending over 5
hours a day distracted by cell
phones, the evidence seems clear
that they have a significant
impact not just on proficiency
rates in the classroom that teen
mental health.
To provide some background
according to Pew Research
Center, most K through 12
schools do have a phone, uh free
policy. That is also the case in
New Mexico. But because they are
difficult to enforce, they're
often just not effective.
So since 2023, legislation to
regulate cell phone use has been
introduced in at least 27 states
in 2024, at least 4 states
introduced legislation
encouraging the use of magnetic
pouches. So like this bill
before USB 11, most legislation
leaves the details on regulating
those devices up to their local
school boards.
To address parent concerns in
this bill.
Parents often worry about being
able to get in touch with their
children, especially in case of
an emergency, but Taos municipal
schools, which rolled out the
magnetic pouches during the 2425
school year, notes that parents
can still contact students by
email. Teachers have the ability
to unlock the pouches in case of
an emergency, and to note that
on many of these devices,
whatever it may be that schools
have adopted, they can be
permanently destroyed to get
into in the case of an
emergency, they are.
accessible in the case of heaven
forbid, such a case of an
emergency as, let's say an
active shooter in which cell
phones could be uh very very key
to.
I want to be clear on this
specific bill. This is not a
mandate.
All this is is an incentive for
PED.
To encourage our local school
boards to do what is right by
students, which is focus during
classroom hours, and the state
that is desperately seeking
improvements to proficiency
scores where teachers are
prioritizing cellphone addiction
as their number one distractor
in the classroom, and his teen
mental health crisis rolls on
rates of depression, anxiety,
and self-harm continued to rise,
to be clear that we are not
helpless in addressing those
issues. I come before this
committee.
Of experts in education and make
this point. I am willing to
address any concerns that may be
in the in the bill. I am also
aware that Senator Mo Maestas,
who I believe may be joining us,
has a similar bill. I've invited
him to come to this, so that
this is a collaborative between
the legislator. I want to thank
the unions, teachers unions from
coming to the table, I wanna
thank PED for having a role in
this, so that collectively we as
this New Mexico legislator can
work with all stakeholders in in
addressing and adopting some
sort.
sort of incentive policy that
meets everybody's needs and
quite frankly just gets these
kids off their phones, and with
that, Mister, uh, Chairman, I'll
stand for any questions.
Thank you, Senator, um, and
first we'll go out to the
audience, uh, anyone in support
of this legislation.
OK. Anyway, those in opposition,
OK, um, if we'll have those in
support, if you'd like to come
up to the microphone to speak on
this particular piece, please
come up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Joe Guiha with
the New Mexico School Boards
Association. We stand in support
of this bill and thank the
senator for bringing it forward.
I think it addresses a very
serious problem we have in our
school districts, but we
generally oppose.
Unfunded mandates and this is
not number one, a mandate, and
it is funded. So again, we
support it, we appreciate the
manner in which the legislation
reads and and the approach to
allow local school board
decisions on this. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today representing the
Gallup McKinley County School
District, which supports this
legislation and also the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
The chamber advocates for
policies that support teachers,
raise a student academic
performance and supports healthy
social development of our
students and the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
supports this bill because it
aligns with all those policies
and believes it'll improve our
education system, specifically
this bill will help teachers
perform one of their main.
duties, which is to help
students focus academically and
socially. A recent survey showed
that 97% of 11 to 17 year olds
use their phone in some way
during the school hours and the
chamber urges you to support
this legislation. Thank you.
Hello, um, my name is Serena
Morio. I am a level 3 teacher at
Aldo Leopold Charter School. Um,
I support this bill, uh, this
past year, I had someone donate
a locker to keep cell phones in
and it has decreased the
distractions and the power
struggle of taking the phones
away.
Significantly, uh, there's a lot
of research out there that shows
the negative impact, social
media is having on our, our
children in regards to anxiety
and depression, and I fully
support this bill. One,
Question or clarification I
would like is we allow our
students to take their phones
out during lunchtime and perhaps
um instead of saying the school
day during instructional time.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Whitney Holland,
president of the American
Federation of Teachers New
Mexico.
As an education union, our top
priority is fostered an
environment where students can
learn and educators can teach.
The overuse of cell phones in
schools has become a significant
barrier to this goal. A recent
survey of our members across the
state showed that excessive
phone use distracts students,
disrupts classroom engagement,
and contributes to anxiety and
bullying. By supporting a ban on
cell phones during instructional
time we're advocating for focus,
distraction free learning that
benefits everyone. This isn't
about limiting access to
technology, it's about ensuring
technology.
courts rather than hinders the
learning environment. We believe
in creating policies that
balance the need for
communication and safety with
the imperative goal of quality
education, a thoughtful ban on
cell phones aligns with our
mission to empower educators,
protect students, and help
schools, our schools thrive.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mister Chair
members of the committee. Amanda
Aragon executive director of New
Mexico Kids can, and for all the
reasons that you've heard, we
stand in strong support of this
bill, but additionally, I think
it is meaningful for the
legislature and the public
education department to stand
together, to say that this is
the direction we want to move
in, when individual principles
or schools have tried to do this
in the past, the amount of
pushback that they get from a
small group of parents saying, I
want my child to have their cell
phone, really makes it hard.
for a policy to be enforced,
especially because oftentimes
does come with threats of
lawsuits. And so this really
needs to be a statewide or a
community-wide plan that we all
stack hands and say this is what
we want for our children. And
without that community adoption
of a cell phone free policy. It
makes it really, really
impossible for educators to do
the right thing, which is limit
cell phone use in the classroom
and have students focusing on
instruction. So, thank you for
your work on this.
OK. Stand rounds for the
superintendents and the
educational leaders.
So we pulled our
superintendents.
60 of 89 responded to our poll
on this specifically, 75% of the
superintendents are in favor of
this bill.
25% objected to it, but when we
dug deeper, the reason they
objected, you fixed. Thank you,
senator on line 25 where you say
voluntary.
That really is the essence of
this. You're allowing local
districts to make a decision
locally designed locally and
then incentivizing how you might
get there financially. We think
that's good policy. We think
that's where it goes, so we
stand in full support. Thank
you.
I'm Iris Cunningham. I'm a
student at Alo Charter School,
and I'm for this bill, so I
think it'll definitely help with
the learning, but I would
definitely.
Like if
It's during instructional hours
and not lunch because 10th
graders and above are allowed to
leave for lunch, and so I think
it's important to have a way to
like contact people.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Matt Paul from
Public Charter Schools of New
Mexico. Uh, we support the bill
from uh from Senator Brantly,
for many of the reasons that Mr.
Rounds noted, we have many
schools that already banned the
use of cell phones during uh
instructional hours and we have
others who have found ways to
create um parameters that, that
make for purposeful use of cell
phones during instructional
times and only allow for that.
Um, both sides of that equation,
we have high performing schools,
so we like the
idea of providing an incentive
and allowing the localities to
opt into it. Thank you.
Anyone else in support? Do you
have any online?
You
OK.
If you would please, you're on.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Hope Morales and I'm the
executive director for Teach
Plus New Mexico, and I'm in
support of SB 11. I have the
honor of working with hundreds
of excellent educators across 3
of our programs. Mr. Chairman,
technology has become an
essential tool in teaching and
learning, because technology is
now a vital part of everyday
learning. It is the
responsibility of our local
schools and districts to ensure
that students have access to
these resources. While cell
phones can be used as a resource
in many cases.
Utilizing computers,
Chromebooks, and other devices
provided by our schools, better
support equity, ensuring all
students have access to
comparable resources while also
providing support and safety
that oftentimes is missing with
personal cell phone usage during
the classroom. Mr. Chairman, we
have a lot of work to do in
education and teachers must be
supported by limiting
distractions and ensuring
student safety and equity are
priorities. This legislation
still allows for local districts
to develop their own policies.
Which can be tailored to meet
their specific needs. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Hope. Um, those in
opposition, if you'd like to
come up and, and speak.
OK.
Please give your name and who
you are, where you're from.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you committee. My name is
Brennan Schock. I'm from Cliff
High School. Now, down by Silver
City, um, one thing that I
opposed in this bill is in our
school, we use uh shoeholder
pockets for our phones and our
teachers and admin have set
parameters and expectations for
us to be respectful and
responsible and use our phone
wisely and not use them during
instructional time. Um, one
question I have is how does this
teach us down the road?
To be responsible and manage our
own time if we are being, if we
have to put our phones up and
not be responsible.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
UN opposition online.
Thank you.
And we're questions from the
committee.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much,
uh.
Uh, senator for bringing this
bill to us today. I, I truly
love that the local option is
always, always something
important to me, so, uh, each,
each school voluntarily is uh.
Is, is really, I think one of
the most important things in
this bill, um.
Looking through, we're looking
for a $10 million appropriation.
Uh, where do we come up with
that number, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Ramos, uh, this is why
we have Simon here today, but
when we were the original stages
of the bill draft of this, the
average pouch should every
School District for every
student, so that's an average of
300, let's see, the time was
323,000 students, multiplied by
the average cost of $30 per unit
for a for a for a a pouch, the
adver security is where we got
this. I understand. I just
recently moved from the Senate
Finance Committee, how this
works, and so that would be if
the legislator chose to move
with an aggressive campaign that
provide lock pouches for every
school. That's where it is. I
think the reality of this is is
the next.
that this bill goes to is Senate
Finance. And so that's where the
discussion would come in to the
capacity of the budget, the
reality, and what the size of
that pilot program would look
like. Uh, the reality is, is we
could start anywhere from 1
million, 2 million and have a
very successful uh launch and
and launching these policies.
Great. No further questions Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Other senate
questions. Senator Hickey.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Brownley, thank you for bringing
this bill. Um, with the
Particularly since COVID, the
decline in in mental health of
young people has been
Documented, it's real and a lot
of it.
Is is due to the
cell phone, um.
I, if I'm not incorrect, uh, did
Australia ban?
cell phones or just social media
across the board.
Or school-aged people.
Mr. Chairman Senator Hickey, I
had not heard a specifically on
Australia, but there were many
European countries that have
banned complete use of cell
phones you may not enter a
building with one, we're
certainly not gonna go that
direction and and my hope is
that we still allow this to be
local option, there could be
really uh many cases in which
the classroom instructor for use
of, you know, instructional use
needs a cell phone, whatever
that may be, and allows that,
and we should have the
flexibility and allow those
districts to make that call.
What we're trying to do is just.
in this case, um, to one
implement a policy and should
those policies go far enough in
which we need to have devices
that actually contain those
those phones, which is what our
teachers are asking for. They're
simply saying, saying, put your
phones away is not enough. These
kids don't have the, the
capability to just simply stay
off their phone. We actually
need them in a locked pouch,
some device that we are
providing the financial
resources in order for them to
take that next step. It's really
a basic appropriate
Bill to encourage them to do
that.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman, one other question
just about logistics. Um, so
this pouch has a key.
And is unlocked
And um,
Is it, is it up to the school
district as to whether or not
It can be opened at lunch or not
opened at lunch.
Um
So, and just
he's getting we thought through
all the logistics of the things
we're gonna learn, but try and
learn some of them before they
actually happen, the strength
and the ability to have this not
become so.
Potentially chaotic because
we're losing keys and things and
so forth. I'm just wondering if
those things are going to be
worked out so that's a pretty
uniform, uh, application of this
in the case and um.
Uh
Certain schools that do it well
can teach other schools to what
it is they've learned in the
process. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and Senator Hickey, of course
it'll be left over, uh, left up
to the individual school
district, what kind of devices
that they want to purchase. Uh,
the most popular is and we're
not going to specify that in
statute, but the most popular
bags that are called yonder
bags, and they're mesh bags that
are sealed with a magnetic lock
at each teacher's desk they have
a release magnet. Those magnets
could be if your policy allows.
up to the district in any
hallway in a commons area in the
cafeteria near any exit, so that
children can access their pouch
at any time, most importantly,
in the case of an emergency, the
bags can be permanently
destroyed to access the phone.
Thank you very much. That helps
a lot. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this
bill forward. Um, just one quick
question, is this in the budget
right now or is this something
that you're gonna have to try to
work and find. Well, uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, uh, Pope,
there's obviously capacity and
every time for Senate and so I,
I can assure you that I don't
have expectations to get $10
million in the budget, but
there's clearly capacity for us
if you lobby Senate Finance and
bring this world and it's the
wish and the will of the
legislator to fund a pilot
program uh to what capacity they
choose to do.
That is up to the Senate Finance
Committee members. All right.
Thank you.
Thank you. uh, Senator Auvi.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator for bringing this
forward. I have a clarification
question. Um, how would you, Mr.
Chairman, how would you, uh, and
Senator, how would you address
students who have individualized
education plans that require
cell phone usage in the
classroom.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Nava. That's up to the
school district, that wouldn't
relate, that would not be in
statute, and that's not up for
us, but I think that it's very
clear and we should send a
message to those districts when
adopting policy that those uh
considerations are taken in, but
that's an individual district
policy.
Oh.
Thank you very much.
though.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I do like this bill uh
senator.
Is it possible for students to
bully cyberbully using their
phones.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I
think that that what this bill
is really tackling at the heart
of it, and we know that we have
some.
Proficiency challenges in the
state and education to address.
We know that our teachers are
saying this is a problem, please
come help us.
The reality is we are not just
facing a problem with education
standards. It's the mental
health.
Capacity and as a mother of teen
girls, I can, I can tell you
that I agree with Senator
Hickey, the statistics speak
volume in which specifically
social media has exacerbated
those problems.
And I think that we, we as
legislators need to come in and,
and probably address this as a
crisis, and quite frankly, an
addiction to these cell phones.
And Mr. Chairman and uh Sinri
agree fully with you on that. I
know that I've had teachers
explain to me that there is
cheating going on with students
using their cell phones that
they are a distraction to other
students in the classroom
because of the use of cell
phones in the classroom.
Um
And
I know that uh one.
Mother came to me because there
was an explicit photo of her
daughter that was being passed,
that was taken during a PE
class, I think what was going
on. So, Mister Chairman and uh
Senator Brantley.
I, I think that what you've got
going here is a good thing. I
think that we need to have more
face to face contact.
To our younger generation
instead of.
This is their contact with
another human being. I think it
needs to be face to face
contact.
So I appreciate you bringing
this bill forward, Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much.
Thank you. Other questions
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, first
of all, thank you Senator
Brantley.
Or bringing this forward. I
think this is something that's
definitely needed
I think distractions and we have
enough distractions in schools
as well, so we might as well
somehow prevent them from uh
having access to their phones
unless they actually absolutely
need them.
I, I understand that there's
been a, you mentioned New York,
said I, I've got some analysis
here that said that Norway
analyzed 477 middle schools.
Between 2010 and 2018 and what
they found when they banned
smartphones, and I know you're
not banning them, but when they
banned them, they found that the
counseling visits reduced by 2
to 3 visits per year.
Uh, bullying was reduced and
that their GPAs in math and
science increased as a result of
taking away the phones.
That's the kind of performance
results we would like to see as
a result of this policy, and I
guess my question to you is, how
would we baseline the effect of
this policy, assuming it gets
passed through this committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Thornton, that isn't, that is an
excellent question.
I think that what this is
allowing is it's allowing a data
collection for also PED, right?
PED is not gonna mandate the
specifics of a phone-free
policy, but what they will know
is that based on the
reimbursement request, how, uh,
the strength of, of that policy.
If the lockboxes are, are being
used and PED would like to know
about that. I think that it's,
it's a pretty clear indication
that once a policy is put in
place, do we see proficiency
rates increase, and so that
would be an interesting
statistic. We've seen.
Many success rates we've seen in
California had a pretty strict
cellphone policy, uh, phone-free
ban. Arkansas, Ohio, a number of
states who have had staggering
successful statistics when it
comes to proficiency.
Not only that, but I think it
would be more difficult, but I
would guess that it certainly
wouldn't be a setback would be
the impacts to mental health.
To bullying, to hazing problems,
is how would we measure those,
uh, success, I do want to on
that point, uh, Senator Thornton
and Mr. Chairman point out a
very significant finding that I
had actually seen in the LE LFC
recommendation on page 3.
And I will point this out with
PED as well. They mentioned that
in 2023, House Bill 405 renamed
the technology for Education Act
is the digital, uh.
Equity and Education Act, and
it's requiring schools to
develop an education equity plan
re-established a council on
Technology and Education, the
council could possibly be a
supportive entity in helping
school districts and charter
schools create these
anti-distraction policies to
your point, Mr. Chairman, and
follow the data. But I think
that was an excellent finding
that I was unaware of, uh, that
could probably provide support
to PED when monitoring and also
providing guidance with the
policies.
Thank you.
Thank you. Other questions?
Mr. Chairman, I moved to pass.
Thank you, Senator. I, I, I have
a couple of questions I'd like
to ask, you know, but well, we
have the motion on the floor and
then Senatorel as a second, um.
Does this require districts to
do anything?
Mr. Chairman, uh, members of the
committee, it doesn't. And, and
I stand pretty firm on not
wanting to require. I, I would
have to believe that local
control is best, and the
difference between a umato
school board or a Magdalena
school board and a Las Cruces
public school board is very
different and so uh it doesn't
require them to do anything
because I certainly wouldn't be
the expert on what that
individual school district would
need.
Thank you. Um, some of the
testimony of those in support
said, yeah, we would have a
difficult time getting our local
community to agree to this. You
have the legislature would do
it, you know, then that helps.
It doesn't require
them to do anything. What, what
is different or what changes as
a result of this, as far as for
local districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some of
the pushbacks that we have in
coming up with a, a heavier
handed policy is that there's,
they don't have the money, they
don't have the resources and
allocation set aside to pay for
the lock boxes. The reality is,
is that many, and it's listed in
some of these FIRs and LESC
analysts is that many school
districts already do have a
policy in place. It's difficult
to enforce because they don't
have locked devices.
So the policies already exist if
they choose to to strengthen
those policies by mandating that
their phones are in locked up
locked devices, whatever time of
day that district deems fit, we
will pay for those devices.
And, and Senator Brantley, uh,
you had indicated, I think you
said to that already is doing
this and has them.
Uh, would they get reimbursed
for the money they have already
spent in the past or is this
only for districts moving
forward who haven't chosen to
use part of their SEG to do this
that we're now supporting that
where we didn't others who had
done it in the past.
Mr. Chairman, I would leave the
details of that up to PED, I
would assume that this pays for
after adoption of this and
shouldn't move forward from
schools that adopt.
Purchase or purchase bags from
that point forward I think we
should commend Ta School
District for making the
investment on their own without
having to be incentivized to do
that. I also do want to point
out the difference that this is
a one time appropriation, not,
it would not be included with an
SEG which would be above the
line funding. This is below the
line. We're asking for one time
appropriation to launch these
school districts with their
policies.
And Senator, uh the SCG above
the line are districts able to
use that money now to do this?
Mr. Chairman it's a priority for
that district, Mr. Chairman, a
district, if they chose to put
just like Chaos implement and
pay for the program. I think
what I hear from many of my
schools is that they are
underfunded, they're underfunded
and over mandated and that the
money just doesn't exist to
implement these policies, we're
trying to take the uh the money
matters out of their delay in
implementing stricter phone
policies.
So, Senator, if we put this
money below the line, could we
put it in the SCG and then allow
districts who want to use that
money to use it.
You know, as their discretionary
money, why would we not put it
in the SCG and then let
districts decide what their
priority was, whether it's a
lockbox or whether it's hiring
another teacher, um, if we was
in the SCG the same amount of
money, wouldn't that give the
districts more control rather
than us dictating what they have
to spend the money on.
Mr. Chairman, I will tell you
that while I advocate for an
increase in SCG for recurring
expenses that would be separate
than a one time funding to
launch a program because there
doesn't need to be recurring
revenues for this program. Watch
the program is launched, so that
would fall below the line with
one time appropriation for
particular program regardless
and this is a different issue,
SEG above the line for
operational or continued use
could pay for, you know,
extensive any any.
education needs for uh for
recurring revenues.
Senator, kind of in a different
area. The bill says that the pen
shall encourage.
What's that mean?
We use the word encourage in
there and, and our bill director
Simon is here to help with that.
It's a nonprescriptive word.
It's used interchangeably in
drafting legislations with
either encouraged or recommended
either of those two. We don't
want to mandate and use the word
shall, and so, uh, counsel
sometimes alternates between
encouraged or recommended as we
chatted yesterday, some of where
I'm getting is Pen's got to
follow this requirement. How
much do they have to do to meet
the
of encourage. Send out a
one-time memo, contact districts
every week, um,
Yeah we're passing law up here.
Words matter.
So because of that to meet the
requirements for encourage.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It's a
nonprescriptive word, and, and
I'm open to changing that with
often use the word recommended
in legislation if we should
change that out. Most important
word on there is voluntary, the
end of that. What I would say is
I don't believe that it's the
legislators, uh, mission to
create statute that dictates
exactly how PED should oversee
this. I also think there's an
argument that says that
dependent upon the amount of
money that's allocated.
Would, uh, have a great impact
on how PED is able to go out
with this, if they, if they gave
a full $10 million it would take
a lot of resources from PED to
get off school boards on on this
on board. I think the important
part of this too is that for any
remaining money, so after they,
after they announced this, after
we launched this, anytime I've
spent money on a general fund,
I'm pretty active in making sure
that every bit has been
allocated. After this program is
in place. If there is, and I
doubt there is, but.
If there is any remaining money
in that, it's important to say
that we have made very clear
that that should revert back to
the general funds, shared the
funds not be spent.
Senator, yeah, I understand all
the stuff about the money. He's
got a, this is law.
So, this isn't uh.
A, a policy memo or a, you know,
hope to do this type of thing.
It's written into law.
That they have to comply with.
How do you comply with
encourage?
That's my concern that that is
not clear, and even if it said
recommend.
Does that mean one time they put
out a policy memo. They say
please watch this video where
they talked about it here, we
want you to do that. Maybe
that's a question for Ped is how
do you comply with or with
Uh, encourage.
Is that
Greg, I'm kind of putting you on
the spot, but what does that
mean to you all in order to
comply with this law.
If this were to pass. OK.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, um, that is
up.
Good morning. I'm Greg Frosted.
I'm assistant secretary of
Education over Policy and
technology for the department.
Um, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, we have had some
discussions around what
encourage uh might mean, um.
And as, as per the discussion,
it would likely be um
A policy memo or guidance to the
LEAs that would say we encourage
you to do this.
Uh, to institute a policy.
This is getting kind of
circular, but then for a
district.
What does that mean that they're
they're supposed to do that, you
know, we kind of want you to do
it, but you know, do whatever
you want. That's not very clear
or good law, you know, and I'll
get off at that point, but, you
know, that's one of my biggest
concerns is, you know, that's,
that's hard to deal with. Um.
In the back. Thank you, Greg.
And you back on the, the money
side, is it indicates that the
schools will be reimbursed.
But they go out and get lock
boxes made out of silver?
How much do they get reimbursed
for if they spent the money, it
doesn't say that they can't get
gilded lockboxes, you know, ones
that cost 40 to $500 and they
get their money in first or they
get reimbursed and somebody else
only gets ones that are $15
ones. What is the maximum a
district can spend, it doesn't
say. It says they'll get
reimbursed. That's pretty
open-ended checkbook, it sounds
like.
It is Mr. Chairman, I would say
that we'd have to have faith in
our PED department to say that,
uh, one that they are shall
conduct outreach that PD is
familiar with doing that is
encouraged, they shall conduct
outreach with the districts and
2 is to re reimburse at a
reasonable uh rate, and that can
also be relayed from PED to the
district. The alternative of
removing encourage or recommend
would be to say mandate.
And that's not where I'm, I'm at
with this bill. I think it's
important that we have local
control. We allow individual
districts to adopt the policies
they still fit and then we trust
in our public education
department to correspond with
our individual school districts
as to how they would be
reimbursed into, and to assist
with the process in doing so.
Thank you, Senator, uh.
Again, we're talking about
specific law, and it says the
districts will be reimbursed. It
doesn't say for a particular
amount. It doesn't say they need
to check with Pen first as to
whether this is something that's
an appropriate expense for these
particular lockboxes, so.
districts can go out and you
know, buy a whole set of lockers
to do this, you know, at huge
expense because they want it for
something else too.
They will be reimbursed.
Uh, I'm concerned about that,
that
You know, it ought to, if we're
going to do this, something more
you put in a proposal to the pet
for this amount.
And then are reimbursed for it.
in and so they're not getting
costs all over. Um, I've been in
education a long while and as
soon as there's any kind of a
hot topic like this, there are
vendors out there that are going
to come with their perfect
lockboxes and I guarantee
they'll be ones that are $200
per student and somebody will
have one that's $15 per student.
We've got no guardrails. It says
they will be reimbursed.
I'm concerned about that, Mr.
Chairman, I, I wouldn't want to
put guardrails in statute
because of that, I think that
PED has a long history of
implementing uh many programs
very similar to this by
communicating directly with
districts, allowing that
communication and, and
flexibility, uh, I, I, I trust
that our PED department can
communicate with districts on
individuals and the reality is
we are reimbursing it costs,
should they have that proposal
to them first before they
purchase it, PED can ask for
that upfront. I would
assume most districts, uh, would
be happy to abide by that.
And Senator, I don't disagree. I
think what you just said is more
what I would be looking for
because this doesn't say that
the PED has to be involved until
afterwards, and just that they
will pay whatever was was spent,
um, and that there ought to be
some sort of guidelines ahead of
time as to what range or kinds
of products or things of that
sort. That's not in here. And so
those are things that that I've
got concerns. It's probably
clear I'm probably going to vote
against this. I can read the
room fairly well. I suspect most
people are in favor. I think
this is not.
Well-written legislation that
makes law, not just, you know,
a, a recommendation type of
thing. So, I'll leave it with
that. Uh, we do have a motion on
the floor in a second. Uh, any
other discussion, Mr. Chair,
just a point of order.
Um
Just have a question so I asked
about this being in the budget.
It looks like there's capacity,
but it sounds like it's not. I
know in the past,
On bills like this done in a
wreck.
Is that something do this
session or?
I see the bills.
Just want to get your sense.
On a bill like this.
That really is up to the
committee. And so you could make
a motion for a substitute.
No wreck, which I believe takes
precedent over a due past and or
a table takes precedent over
that.
Um
Mr. Chair, I move with no red on
Senator Bill Lo.
have a motion for a no wreck. Is
there a second on the no wreck?
And I would second that.
So if you'll call the the roll
on a no rec vote, uh, and for
those watching and no wreck, all
it means is this will move
forward to the next committee. I
believe it's Finance Committee,
um, they'll discuss whether to
put it in the bill, but it, if
this were to pass, it would not
come with a favorable from this
committee. It's not a negative
from this committee. It's a
We're handing it on to you guys
to deal with. I might be some of
the best way depending on which
bills they are, but it, it's
just, you know, it moves the
bill on without recommendation.
Oh
And you'll call the roll,
please.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes
The no wreck vote did not pass,
and so we were back on a
favorable recommendation for a
do pass vote, if you will call
the roll, please.
Yeah
Yes.
No.
No
But you do have a do pass on to
finance committee and thank you
all for a very good discussion
about things and for the
engagement of lots of people. Do
appreciate that and that's uh
how legislation and processes
should work.
What time are we on the floor?
for
With 11:30?
We're, we're checking to see
when we're due on the floor, you
know, this committee, I have an
obligation that we will make
sure our members can get there
on time and provided it's not 11
o'clock with everyone's
permission, we would continue on
to another bill,
uh, so if
it's at 11, so we're gonna close
down for today, the floor
session does start at 11 this
committee. We do not continue
past our, our deadline time. You
will be first up maybe after
Senator Pope, but on Friday.
And Senator Steinborn then also,
uh, on Friday, 9 o'clock we do
have about a 20 minute
presentation before we get into
to bills. So apologize, senator,
but we'll get you in on this
next round.
And with that, we are adjourned.
