Wednesday as well is we've only
got a couple coming over from
the house this you can see most
of the bills today our house
bill's so we're we're trying to
make sure so up Mr
Minority leader welcomed at the
education but please make sure
that the the house knows that
and
chairman yeah that was that we
are here in lots of yearolds
bills.
I'll just go up to the Senate
bill three eighty seven and
schools to restraint and
isolation Senator Lopez.
Morning Mr chairman.
Happy Monday to everybody.
Make sure my phone is.
Mr chair members of the
committee we are here in front
of you with Senate bill three
eighty seven and what this bill
is proposing Mr chair members of
the committee
is to require less restrictive
interventions on a student
before the use of restraint or
seclusion
and of course there's a
requirement that restraints or
seclusion is to be used only by
teachers who are trained in less
restrictive interventions.
Mr chair members of the
committee back in twenty
seventeen
we did have a bill that went
through the legislative session
and was adopted and signed
And there were super yeah we we
had some discussion with several
different parties several
different interests about where
we would be going with regards
to restraints and seclusion as
to how they used in our public
school system
with regards to students who may
have a behavioral issue acting
out whatever the case may be
they may have the I. P. which to
behavioral improvement plan
etcetera maybe having just a bad
day not knowing what may be
going on at home other stressors
as such a Mr chair members of
the committee.
But I think some of you may be
aware of not even two years
after we pass that that
legislation there is a report
that was brought out by
searchlight New Mexico and that
particular report
I think brought to the to light
that even though we had passed
to revise your advisement if you
want to use that word on how we
approach working with the a
student a child who is acting
out in some manner of schools
are still doing the same stuff.
And when I say that the way that
the approach
A student
Is is very hurtful.
the training that schools are
supposed to be including working
on with staff is not happening
my particular school district
that I represent Mr chair
members of the committee still
has a lot of issues.
reporting doesn't happen.
Public education department is
not collecting data being Mr
chair there's so many issues
that come forward with regards
to how we
Work with our our children
students who
are having some behavioral
issues in our schools and I do
know Mr Chairman speaking with
some teachers any of occur keep
public schools who deal with
these students on a daily basis
are looking for help.
they're looking for guidance and
trying to figure out how this
works.
The other part to Mr chair
members of the committee we have
S. R. owes school resource
officers who have no training I
have students at two of my high
schools in my district when
there's an issue an SRO is
called and the response that is
given is pretty detrimental for
that child the students even if
they're in high school to me
that is still a child within our
school system and once you get a
child who is quote unquote
written up and placed within
some form of custody as things
sometimes progress then that's
where I also comments teacher
this also leads in the school to
prison pipeline because once you
get into the system is very hard
to get out.
Mr chair members of the
committee I know we've had many
a discussion as to what we do
for mental health training
within our school system I know
we're trying to work on it but
it's it's just this whole I
called a mosaic of.
A movie this in the wrong
direction.
I'm so Mister chair I do have an
expert witness here with me I
know who will be who's gonna say
some words about what we're
proposing to do here with this
bill and her name is Alice McCoy
and al mismo quite fishy has
wonderful titles issued please
share she's experienced a works
works very much with the
disabled community and I'm not
saying that are negative word
but I always say able bodied
persons but she's she's here to
say a few words if I could Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chair.
I want to give a really quick
background on how this bill came
about it's going to look very
different from some of the past
restraints inclusion bills you
may have seen the past few
years.
In the summer of twenty twenty
Representative Liz Thomson and
that the governor Mets and
wanted to prioritize special
education and all the issues
happening special education in
the state The forms what we call
these special education
transformation team and this
particular group included
abroad.
A broad group of stakeholders
and out of this group there was
a work group that that was
established to look specifically
at restraint and seclusion and
we did this because we realize
that there was a problem and
that there we needed to make
some next steps I'm as Senator
Lopez mentioned the first step
we took out in the state to move
restraints inclusion the right
direction was back in twenty
seventeen I believe that's six
years ago and so we've made that
first step and haven't made any
progress since in the last six
years with the workgroup
included.
folks from PED at public
education department as well as
my agency a developmental
disabilities council which
included chairs at arch are
chair current chair Joel Davis
who you'll hear from in a minute
are.
A previous immediate past chair
generating go and
others on the DDC as well
from PED we had safe and healthy
schools because we realize that
we had to be very careful about
how we move forward restraint
seclusion we wanted to protect
our students with disabilities
but we also want to protect the
the general population of the
schools we know that violence in
schools I was very concerning
and has been more concerning
Every year that goes by and so
we wanted to make sure that
those perspectives were brought
in as well as the special a
division and PED we also had at
the table CYFD children youth
and families department I U. N.
M. center for development and
disability at the alright
protection and advocacy agency
disability rights New Mexico
their education attorney.
And other Education attorneys we
had several that were pretty
smart and the rooms helping us
out so through this workgroup
which looked at restraints
inclusion over a number of years
this is a multi year process it
the bulk of the work happened
out.
In in the space of one year but
you know we did have multiple
conversations and we depended on
our
our advocacy partners at PED to
have conversations as well on
the school side.
Through this process we came at
we came for but this bill which
is a pretty limited bill if you
take a look at it but it makes
some very important changes that
we need to see in the state so
the first thing that it does is
it's out defines what's
restraint is some of the
problems that we see our lack of
clarity and what is a restraint
that is prohibited and what is
not ever straight
that is prohibited under the
loss of this particular bill
does to provide restraint to
make that more clear.
What another thing that it does
is it requires policies around
training because of the lack of
clarity around restraint
and the lack of prioritization
of training in.
Positive behavioral supports
upstream from the incidence rate
the moment of the deciding
whether restraint should happen.
Because of this you know we are
training we are providing the
right training so having these
conversations with PED about how
do we ensure that the right
trainings are put into place
what resources are we going to
get for the schools to make sure
this happens of all of this
begins with leadership at the
top meaning the legislature
having a bill in places as we
are going to prioritize this
we're going to make a policy
statement that says we're going
to do this first because by the
time we get to the point where
we're trying to decide should
restrain this child or not
that's too late the by that
point by the time we get to the
point where we're wondering
about who should we get here in
this moment to put these the
excavation techniques and the
place it's too late we what we
really need to do is look at
Dealing with this upstream so
that we're reducing the
incidence that we're talking
about now they're never going to
be laminated they're going to
happen and so we need to make
sure that we talk about
reducing them upstream so that
when we get to where we are we
also have the right people
trained to deal with the
situation.
Another thing that the still
billed as which is really
important is provide notice to
parents if someone for whatever
reason puts hands on your child
you should know about and not
only that but it requires that
the parent get notice if it's
possible or practical the same
day that the restraint happens
and then.
It within two days we are
scheduling
Meetings to review the situation
the incidents that we don't have
repeats situations do we need to
address this child individual
edges individualized education
program do we need to adjust
this child's you know behavioral
functional deal plan do we have
to do all of these different
things.
To make sure that this isn't
happening and we have to have to
do a manifestation termination
review what are we looking at
here why did this happen and how
can we to the best of our
ability prevent this from
happening again so these are the
main things that this build as
it is a pretty limited bill but
it is an important one to bring
forth because it's taking that
next step here in New Mexico to
ensure that we're really making
a difference in person reducing
the restraints inclusion
incidents I'm and with that I am
going to Mr chair at allow our
at chair of the DC to speak he's
also pair.
Good morning chairman members
the committee.
my name's Joel Davis on the
chair of the developmental
disability council I'm also vice
president elevate the spectrum
and all volunteer autism
advocacy network across the
state I have a child in special
ed receiving that special
education services he also has a
behavior improve prove that plan
and I. P. and that's been
developed over the years
we have a very strong VIP but
what we find in the schools and
and I can talk to you about some
of the issues that that was
kinda highlighted directly
The BJP's only work if the staff
or trained and the people are
implemented we're trained and
they follow it generally ours if
there's the instance and they
follow the B. I. P. there's no
need for any type of
intervention other than given
couple choices given our time
out or not a time out but a
break given our time to process
the situation initial transition
on.
What happens often though in
schools is there's not enough
staff or the people are not
trained or you have a
substitute.
And those folks don't understand
how the P. I. P. works and
they're trying to get the
students to do something
but that one student may not be
following in line so that they
force the issue.
And they force the issue and
then that because they could get
restrained the because the kid
to have a meltdown in front of
other classmates
and it causes great emotional
damage down the road after one
of those incidents happen
they're completely unavoidable
you know you have to integrate
the student you have to have
counseling you have to talk to
the staff sometimes a student as
well go back to school because
they're embarrassed because of
the situation and again all the
could have been avoided if the
right people were following the
B. I. T. and and just going
through the training.
another
issue that
What was the other issue.
Data collection the data
collection
projects for their bear with me
the other issue we have with
that is I I in twenty twenty we
were testifying on the LESC
floor about restraint seclusion
and my daughter was strange well
as in the middle of testimony
similar instance they didn't
have any behaviorists in the
school she was forced into a
situation that was against the
BJP Jenelle down
they held her in front of our
classmates
that report reported it's not
reported to the schools last
year we had the same instance we
can tell you that the zero
instances of restraint are
completely
a fabrication or if the schools
are just not reporting them
because I've had it happen to my
house twice that have not been
captured our into our
organizations had over has had
several instances amongst their
families that are reported so we
know the data collection is a is
a major problem and of course
that was highlighted in the
searchlight New Mexico article
so that
I'll turn it back to
responsible.
Thank you Mr chairman with that
will stand for questions.
Thank you first up to the
audience those in support of
this bill you raise your hand.
The anyone in opposition.
Okay
up in online searches of homes I
think you.
Okay
we'll go first to the supporters
in the room if you'd like to
come up these use the hand
microphone you have two minutes
and then I'll take probably
three for of the online support
ones.
Testing testing yes
Representative all the buttons
yes.
Just.
Yes can you hear me yes.
chairman members of the
committee thank you for all your
service to the state my name is
Valentin and I I'm from Sapporo
on the treasure for the DC
council I also sit on the
executive board for elevate to
spectrum and I have a son that's
gonna finally graduate this
year.
Had a very rough road
But the percent because.
The people that.
We're supposed to teach it and
didn't do a very good job a
couple of examples in sixth
grade.
Well All even go for the back
real quick.
I I help to invite teachers to
go to prince of coral to go to
summer institute at UNM was put
in on to train them we were
there for three days we did all
kinds of training seven of us
came back and I invited them to
meet talk about what I do is
we're going to implement the
state we just go to those things
together see you so we can
continue to teach and not one
not one thing was supposed
implemented something as simple
as peer mediation media student
working with a student that with
a cost to the school not that.
We get to seventh grade my son's
with the brand you teacher that
had previously retired she was
in her seventies she didn't have
much training concerning this
issue
I go to school in the I. E. PO's
stated we have a passionate
sensory a place in his classroom
we can go and sit put on a
weighted blanket that we
provided fifteen seconds please
okay to to calm him down they
didn't use that that continued
through high school there was a
case at G. P. P. O. that was
reported by the one of the other
teachers that we never knew
about thank you so take thank
you thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning chairman it can't
produce sorry you just yep yep
to hold the button down thank
you good morning chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Deborah pool in and I am from
the CYFD office of children's
rights and I'm here on behalf of
secretary Barbara Miss Vigil and
she wanted me to convey to the
committee that CYFD stands in
support of the bill because
there are increased number of
foster students who are
identified as eligible for
special education and because
restraint and seclusion
disproportionately is impacting
students with disabilities and
our schools we feel that this is
an important bill to support
thank you thank you.
Anyone else in the room and
support.
If not we'll go online with your
first Scindia.
Okay then Jim Jackson and
Christina Martinez.
city at yes.
Good morning Mr chair on members
of the committee my name is
Lydia parking I am research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children was this for
your children strongly supports
Senate bill three eighty seven.
Restrains inclusion are
interventions are overused and
misapplied their
disproportionately used on
students with disabilities
students of color and points and
research provides no evidence
that restraint and seclusion are
effective behavioral
interventions we support Senate
bill three eighty seven point
limitations according
requirements on interventions
are can cause physical injury
and our tremendous to students
this will create a more
responsive and productive
educational environment we ask
for it to pass thank you for.
Thank you.
Jim Jackson please.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico and
Mr chair is you know a children
with disabilities are
disproportionally affected by
the use of seclusion and
restraint in our public school
they are the primary target
unfortunately for these kinds of
interventions.
The anecdotal evidence certainly
see indicates that the incidence
of seclusion and restraint as
far greater than the reported
data from schools would suggest
we believe that it's time for
this greater clarity on
restrictions on the use of
seclusion and restraint
reporting of these incidents to
parents of these children.
And making sure that there is
good planning for better ways of
dealing with the behaviors that
might be triggering a uses
seclusion and restraint
we recognize that our public
schools may not be comfortable
with this additional oversight
and requirement but we certainly
urge the committee not to put
this off until later but to take
action today to address this
issue thank you Mr chair thank
you Jim and Christina Martinez.
Good morning and thank you my
name is Christina Martinez I am
president of elevate the
spectrum.
And more importantly a mom my
son is fifteen and has profound
autism.
When he was smaller he was
restricted many times I
apologize I probably can even
say this if we were in person.
One time my husband was called
to the school to pick my son up
early and he walked in and my
son was being held to the
ground.
A teacher on each lamb and he
was screaming.
The lead up he was a little guy
he was just an elementary
school.
He suffered severe trauma
because of the restraint when
all it would've taken with some
additional training.
So I fully support this bill the
trauma spreads beyond the child
it affects the family and it
affects the tax the staff as
well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
and there are let me read the
names of the others but we will
not be hearing Chris leroy Jody
Myers Katey stone Michelle that
came up in both.
Are all in support online those
in opposition.
Thank.
Secretary I'm sorry.
Mr on to the concept here today
I apologize stand around some to
be the voice the practitioner
side these are the folks in the
schools that have to put this on
the ground.
Mr chairman one of the things we
did in two thousand sixteen
which is where this would began
some very deliberative
discussions is we found that
when we put all of us at the
table.
Not just the the the the parents
and others which are important
voices we also put the
practitioner the time we come up
with pretty good solutions we
work hard in two thousand
seventeen is the Senator said we
passed a law we think was very
important and set the right
threshold.
This now goes beyond that
significantly more money the
committee it doesn't just
include sped students but also
includes all students and that
is part of the convolution in
this as you heard from the
Senator we have behavioral and
intervention plans and things
like that that part of the idea
of the requirements of federal
law we follow those and in cases
of Mr chairman we believe as we
did in two thousand sixteen we
need to sit down again with all
the parties.
Respecting each other and have
an opportunity to talk about
where the laws that are in place
they don't work I've not seen
any data except in a discussion
with Jim Jackson last Friday
about the reporting side of this
that was a concern that he has I
pledge to him that we would work
on that issue with the Public
Education Department others if
that's an issue certainly we
want to follow what's in law
today Mr chairman I urge the
committee to oppose this at this
point.
A voice of the table the you
must have or those that are
practitioners let me give you
who those are superintendents
principals assistant principals
guidance in second place
guidance counselors Mr chairman
the New Mexico the council of
administrators of special
education who all oppose this
bill at this point Mr chairman
thank you.
Chris.
Good morning Mr chairman.
Crystals on with Rio Rancho
public schools Mr chairman we
are standing in opposition off
SB three eighty seven for
following reasons first of all
terminology we have problems
with the term imminent danger
service physical harm less
restrictive.
The definitions in the bill all
right and properly and we also
have problems with being on
funded the Monday eight for the
school district is that as well
you heard three in on all school
districts have ask no more in
front of them Monday it's and
this this bill because that also
imposes short deadlines and
additional reporting for the
school districts.
Many of you have work in a
school board and schools
districts you know that that
this season now we are human
beings and we are there has to
be made in a split of a second.
How do we define those things on
a piece of legislation I think a
few years ago I standing here in
opposition by myself alone.
And I think I had about twelve
people support and I it was kind
of funny you know but everybody
made an agreement and here we
are again.
When it did I stature and
creating a board and for the
school districts we understand
what this is coming from but we
ask you please to.
I think the correct process off
putting together all
stakeholders and work working on
this legislation that's perhaps
stable and calm during the
interim and actually have all
stakeholders to get in and
figure out how we can find a
solution for this not only for
the students that you know we
are trying to protect here to
discus of legislation but also
for the employees of the school
districts for the all the
students are in a classroom the
expert mentioned that yes the
the way we came about was my hat
into the governor's office and
have a conversation with them
but that's not the way we do
legislation right we come to you
know we come into the
legislative location study
committee we put an agenda and
we work together please put this
aside for now and that's working
a solution thank thank you very
much.
So.
Mr chairman members of the
committee jokey and with the New
Mexico school board association
first of all I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward the intent of.
This legislation is outstanding
however it is a an unfunded
mandate the requirements for a
school board school districts
include training policy
development other mandates and
we we again urge you to
collaborate a little further on
this with with all of the
stakeholders in the interim and
thank you.
Thank you there was no one.
Okay.
And for we go to questions in
the committee Senator comments
were Mr chair will stand for
questions okay questions from
the committee.
Separate though thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
and thank you Senator Lopez for
being in this sport because my
understanding with Google to
districts they don't want to
come forward and update these
policies and procedures
especially when we talk about
twenty sixteen and we're in
twenty twenty three which I
think is long overdue for and
over look over these policies
and procedures knowing that will
course in the media that we have
seen students
Really restrained in a really
hand cuffs I mean this is
something that they should have
already reviewed in my opinion
especially when we talk about
the teachers that are involved
and I know these teachers care
very much for the students that
at the elementary level I don't
think there is any call for the
students to be thrown on the
ground or on the floor and I
think there is an under
reporting of data within a lot
of the schools on what is
happening with our students and
their disciplinary policies so
thank you Senator for bringing
this for thank you Mr chair
thank you other questions.
Their master's.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez thank you for The
presentation kind of going over
the line for the bill and if a
lot
H. three that the definition of
mechanical restraint.
if.
How do you propose to restrain
someone without me does this
include.
Zip ties or.
Or handcuffs or.
How do you propose to restrict
somebody without using that
device.
Mr chair.
Chair Senator my S..
The purpose is not to completely
eliminate restraint altogether
but to
Limit them to.
Real emergencies so you know
when imminent danger is
happening
So the use of I think are you
speaking of at the definition on
in on page eight of the bill yes
we've further define yes but and
I'll repeat my question if I may
how do you restrain a person
without using some type of
device yes this so in three that
we've only added it
additional language and what
we've added is to include some
mechanical restraint does not
include devices right
implemented by trained
professionals
or that happened prescribes so
we're saying that you can use.
Approved devices for that
students understand no thank you
just just up you mentioned up
this is this is like a policy
statement I totally respect
that.
And this is where we need to go
over but statutes can't be
policy statements they have to
be written incredibly clear that
there's no confusion amongst all
the readers so for example you
say school shall not use
mechanical restraints and then
on page eight you define
mechanical restraints and then
you say but a mechanical strain
is not.
And choose a device implemented
by train school personnel so I
could use that exact same
restraint that exact same device
and it's it's unlawful but if I
were a train school personnel
whatever that means I could use
that same device it it just
doesn't work from the statutory
framework standpoint
And then also up.
The point to me is to is to talk
about the things I like the fact
that you're notifying the
parents but on page five there's
something peculiar it says on
page five on line fourteen you
save those school employees
shall provide the students
parents regarding a written
documentation that includes
information and then you suggest
you say that with the student's
name redacted.
Why would the student's name
need to be redacted if the if
the if the information is going
to the parent and I mean so
stuff like that and then also
on page six to me.
You talk about a review
currently the law Mr chairman
Senator Lopez currently the laws
that the.
After a the student is
restrained they shall review
strategies used to address the
students dangerousness and
behavior so the focus is on like
how do we deal with this I like
the where the where the bill is
going where the review is on
each use of restraint on its use
of seclusion techniques so that
they're examining themselves as
opposed to necessarily the
students behavior.
And it says the school shop
provide a written summary of the
review.
And and the details shall be
provided a lot of the the
current law however is that
there shall be a review and then
a meeting.
and you're you're rejecting that
for the statute that there
should be a meeting of the
student's individualized
education program in other words
I think what should happen maybe
is up is that the parents should
have the right to have a meeting
that would be good to put in
statute
but folks need to talk about
these things I'd rather folks be
talking about him with the
parents and maybe even the
student or circumstances as
opposed to just writing a report
due two days down the road stop
so
So it's a difficult bill to
write and to capture a cruciate
that
But the language up.
Many times we we kind of.
go into these wonderful policy
statements at times as opposed
to just moving forward with
these with the statutory
frameworks for.
For the educators because
frankly the educators have to be
able to do this.
And I'd rather than move forward
rather than.
Then
That it be either unclear or for
frankly too much for these
institutions to sadly too much
for these institutions to pull
off thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr.
Once Mr chair please thank you
Mr chair Senator my SS to
respond very specifically to
your concerns thank you for
bringing this concerns the first
one about student names redacted
often please tell us which page
that we can kind of follow along
yes Mr chair around a little bit
on that so so let's start on
page five line fourteen Senator
myiasis raise the issue of
student names being redacted the
reason we put that in there is
because in some situations
multiple students will be
involved in the incidents and we
are trying to respect the
privacy and of course under the
law we have to respect the
privacy of the various students
involved so yes the parents can
know with the name of their own
child's but they are you know
they don't are not entitled to
the names of other children we
have to protect this so that's
why that particular provision
was included and then moving on
to page seven line for.
Center myiasis brought up the
rejecting the meeting we do
still do include the meeting
were just very specific about
what kinds of meetings and I
think this is important again in
the law you want to be very
particular about what your
requiring schools to do what
you're crying families to do so
in the in the new on the bill we
are proposing that we have
meetings with the student's
individualized education program
team behavior intervention plan
team and if there are up they
have a I for plan because their
student disabilities that we
have that kind of
that we have that kind of the
meeting and of course you would
save it five oh four plan is I
know but not necessarily
everyone on the committee of the
audience knows what a five oh
four is how that's different
from an I. E. P. thank you Mr
chair so under the federal
rehabilitation act you can have
what's called the five oh four
plan it's essentially a plan
that puts an accommodations for
students with disabilities so if
your student with disabilities
there are certain rights that
you have under the
IDA but there are certain
accommodations that you may need
that fall outside of the IDA and
so schools can put into place
what we call five oh four
planned to serve the students
and make sure those
accommodations are put into
place and so you know we're
trying to capture all the
different kinds of meetings I
hope boards are often acute
problems that are not long term
where they have an I. E. P. M.
the ones I remember that are
kind of the simple ones but
they're things like it has a
broken leg in their forties
allowed use the elevator to get
up in the upper stairs would be
things that are in a five oh
four for instance but not
necessarily limited just to
those kinds of things but
they're not full IEP plans yes
Sir it is Mr chair that's
correct interrupted yeah that's
an area a lot of people get very
confused about what's the
difference thank you and Mr
chair is right that it's.
At the purpose of it really is
to address acute issues
But we also see them used in the
schools for you no longer term
issues that may not be captured
under the IDA under under the
federal IDA
what we also have a New Mexico
is a new as we call the multi
layered system of supports so
you know it works with the
students at different levels of
support intervention that they
may need which may not rise
again to IDA so we're really
looking at all of the different
ways that we are going to need
to support our students and
having those meetings in the
context of those supports that
they might need what again the
purpose of course is identify
you know what let up how did
yeah what are the circumstances
leading up to that infants what
can everybody involved you to
better support the students that
we don't get there and if we do
get their you know who needs to
be you know at the end so who do
we need to get there to make
sure we're dealing with this
incident in the least dramatic
way possible
in this and then finally on page
eight.
Line at twenty two we were
speaking of mechanical
restraints and etcetera myiasis
you brought up
you know whether who can use
these devices it is very very
important that we we talk about
any kind of restraint whether
we're using mechanical restraint
or any restraint that we are
dealing with trained
professionals and this is a this
is really important probably the
most important part of what
we're talking about
When restraint does have to
happen
it is crucial that these are
done by people who know how to
do restraint in a way that is
affected and is the least
harmful to children and so
whether you're talking about
mechanical restraint there any
other kind of restraint it can't
be anybody using a device it
does need to be a trained
professional weather I have yeah
and again schools can identify
who those are we at in the at H.
B. two eighty five special
education ball we're asking that
you know our whole brought you
know swath of folks be trained
in this kind of situation
because you know who knows who's
going to be available at that
very moment we have to be able
to access somebody right away
and in that and H. B. two eighty
five we also have a significant
I'm appropriations ask of the
legislature to provide these
kinds of trainings it's so
important and so I believe the
executive asked for over thirty
three million to do.
Various things in the bill but
the training is a big portion of
it we recognize the importance
of it and we recognize it does
need to be resource we want to
support the schools in doing
this work we are not trying to
come up with unfunded mandates
but instead have a comprehensive
system where we all work
together as partners to make
sure this happens thank you Mr
chair Senator myself hello and
then actual has a quick I just
want to respond to two things
you for real quick generally the
restraints when you're in the
environment like we're talking
about are not mechanical
mechanical would be if there's
an active shooter situation it's
obvious there's danger you can
restrain and.
Right so just to clarify that
and you talked about two days
chairman members the committee
maybe go up if you would please
use the microphone or make sure
you're talking to the
microphones and I mentioned that
there was mention of a two day
reporting period currently in
our district or Rio Rancho
before you know recently PED
pastoral where it's a two day
requirement to get that written
notice in our district it was
five days before that so after
five days after we have an
incident you don't still don't
know what happened so you can't
fix it until you get that the
actual situation that that that
on the situation so that's for
the two day period comes is to
make that codified where it's
gone through the full process
everybody's had input on that
statewide in the PED.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator percent
explanations that that makes a
lot of sense I think
I think you know ideally
everyone's at the table and
working you know every bill
should have a six hour.
Accession with what the deal
with this is not the way it
works we do have highly trained
skilled people in opposition of
this bill that have every
opportunity to amend the bill as
it goes on so.
that's just the way it works we
meet every once every two years
we do the best we can so ideas
like this
Should move forward but at the
same time you gotta listen to
what folks are saying and adjust
the rigid with regards to
friendly and friendly amendments
thank you Mr thank you senator
Neville.
Thank you Mr.
My professional experience and
education is higher it so I
don't really know how the rules
work at that and so I'm a
little.
Confused we've all seen the kids
out of control that are the
Walmart store and I'm sure it
happens and school.
There's a lot of reasons for it
could be
You know just.
You will a lot of reasons and
But there's got to be sometimes
the schools have a lot of kids
they're going to have to do
something this looks like a
totally ties the hands of the
school and it doesn't allow much
of anything when there is a kid
that's out of control and needs
to be restrained for their own
safety not so much for the
protection someone else
certainly is active shooters a
whole different deal but if
we're talking about a small the
young kids it's
Having what we used to call a
temper tantrum that's extreme
then something needs to happen
and I am a little concerned that
this might go too far and I
don't have Senators Maestas
said.
I don't I don't know how you
enforce this or have you can
even use it without some.
Clarification on some of
concerned about that I don't
know if you have any comments
all along those lines to make
money.
Find more comfortable but I just
have a lot of heart burn on the
operation of this bill which
right and how you can actually
accomplish anything.
When you do have a childhood
needs help obviously but it may
be temporary or maybe long term
but I see some problems with the
way this bill is.
Rafted I guess to operate thank
you Mr thank you.
Think of the comments though the
chair members of the committee
and Senator.
And senator Neville.
As I was teaching you know we
went to different schools
basically we did not really
receive that much training as
quickly as possible at the
public school level as we did at
the B. IT level.
To do crisis intervention but in
that sense I think that was the
school's provocative to make
sure that the teachers we're
very well aware and we're
trained if they wish because he
could tap out to say well I
don't want to be part of that
intervention team.
But if you have the physical
ability to sit there be patient
enough to hold a child through a
tantrum I mean I'm not even
saying like five minutes you're
not throwing the kid on the
floor here just holding the
child
whether it be in the library or
some other room that's what are
the kids with to the library
That you'll receive that
training but you had to be
mentally capable and you could
ask somebody else to take over
if you became exhausted or if
you felt he did not have the
ability to restrain that child
but all the years I've been in
now it's only in for six years
but we never had to put our
hands on any of the students.
I heard at the elementary level.
Of young children having a
tantrum yes
and what the other teachers did.
But.
I think that was the prerogative
of the administration of the
school but now in this case it
seems like the more I hear
parents coming into my office
and telling me you know that
nobody's listening to help their
child get some help
that something has to be done
because they are not coming to
the table to actually address
and really sit down and come up
with a plan for those students
to keep them in school.
Choir they turn in the back I
don't know is it because they
don't want to deal with it are
they don't there there has to be
something else that.
So that that we're at this
level.
Why does it have to be an issue
now to date it shouldn't be
basically there should not be
someone coming before us to do
something statutorily that
should have come up the line if
they were actually addressing
this at the local level we
should not be sitting here right
now trying to address this but
we are so who's going to
actually listen are we going to
stop this and say okay yeah the
local level that is up to them
to do it but yet that is not
what's happening here still
thank you senator thank you Mr
chair.
Other comments questions.
A couple of things I've got
Who was consulted in working on
this and it yet if this comes
from yeah we've got a whole lot
of the education professionals
that are dealing with all of the
students and having been in that
realm and work with them they
are good hearted people want to
do right by kids all the the
time where the consulted in
working through all of this and
what the requirements are rather
than is this something that is
legislators we're gonna have to
amend so you must be who was
consulted please.
Mr chair I believe that
Interim secretary money on a
Padilla could answer that
question the best because the
PED was taking the lead on the
consultation with the up
practitioners.
I think she's in a school
funding committee.
Sure that cold call here of
member graduate school in the.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee so there has been
some conversations with the
various organizations
professional organizations that
we work with some of which you
have heard from today so I won't
repeat that we do
believe that it would be
supportive of both students with
disabilities and all students to
consider the language in this
bill we do acknowledge that it
would be helpful for the
practitioners to get an
opportunity perhaps city there's
some amendments or
additional conversation it's an
important topic
and we have try to be in
conversation with stakeholders.
Thank you because I think it is
important superintendents
principals of special ed
director's job they have to
implement things on the ground
and having been in in several of
those situations I am someone
who is.
Several times had to be in the
Senator Pinto indicated for half
an hour very gently hold the kid
it totally calm down while being
very common it's very it's hard
to mostly on the person doing it
as well and and exhausted but
frankly I kids have amazing
stamina when two of and it's not
easy and it leaves me
emotionally exhausted afterwards
when I had to do that but to
protect the kids from himself
and from harming others
and it's not something that at
least and I've been trying to to
do so.
Who
would do the training on this
doesn't do they get a
certificate or a plaque to hang
on the wall low budget they
where who does the training and
how do you know whether they
have been properly trained.
Sir so as I think Mr Chairman
those are on was your city
you're you're good then talking
forward yes Mr chair thank you
for the question
so I think this is one of the
biggest reasons why we need a
bill like this is because in
general the system sort of kick
the can down the road in the
comes to how who gets a training
how much training what kind of
training you know what is it all
look like and without some kind
of leadership where you know we
say we we had a state of New
Mexico are prioritizing these
this issue we have to figure
these things out I think the can
will continue to be kicked down
the road as Reese has seen in
the last six years where we made
initial step and then we haven't
taken another step since I I
hope that answers your question
the answer is right now there's
not a standardized answer to
your question.
That is what it says it requires
training but we need to know
who's going to be doing the
training and how do you know
who's been trained or when
there's an incident as part of
the report do they indicate more
certification number for having
been trained you know how do we
how do we know it is somebody
just say well I watched a young
I'm I've been trying.
Mr chair
if you'll refers to page four of
the bill.
Bill requires the process of
developing policies for this
training so there's going to be
an opportunity for you know PED
the state and of course all of
our districts across the state
to work together on identifying
those trainings and figuring out
what all that looks like to the
bill really only requires that
process to begin
you know let's let's make those
policies is put those into place
and so there's going to be a you
know eight eight a run up to
where where you are now as far
as what you're.
Okay yes I look at those on two
and three policies for restraint
seclusion shall requiring
describer perpetrating for
school personnel on the
appropriate use.
But that's talking about the
policies have to be in the
policies are usually by the
school board that still doesn't
seem real where those are is it
standardized for all school
boards across is that gonna be
PED's that sits with those
policies are or is that an
individual school board can say
well we've got policies on this.
Mr chair that was my
misunderstanding something.
Mr chair right now we do have a
PED rule that already exists
you know requiring policies and
procedures for use of restraint
seclusion I think this just
clarifies that and it also says
at school districts and charter
schools shall provide training
it under that policy section
you anyway I'm not going to read
the whole thing to you
but I think what we're trying to
do with this bill is prioritized
making sure that.
What we've already identified
something that we need to do is
actually going to happen and so
Do you is is there anybody else
you'd like to speak we'll keep
coming up to.
I can address per that mentor
Center members of the committee
and it really actually is a
program called CPI and CPI you
know the end goal is to.
In that you know the last part
of the the the training is
restraint but the personal parts
of that that that training our
DS collation techniques and how
to avoid it.
The problem is a lot of times
people jump the gun and go
straight to the escalation that
are the to to the restraint
instead of using de escalation
techniques and what this is
trying to do and what we're
working on and through the rule
process and now through
legislation to ensure that
there's more focus on the de
escalation because you know
ninety percent of time the
restraint could be avoided if
the antecedent behaviors were
paid attention to the V. I. P.
was followed child was given
time to de escalate before it
you know got to that level of of
a severe communication which
would require restraint so right
now it's CPI there's national
programs that do it it's
included in the rule now where
it leaves it up to the districts
to do it and then this just will
make it so that we have another
rulemaking where the it's
clarified so it's not just train
staff but all staff interact
with the child who would
potentially have to restrain
that child or trained.
So but and some of what you're
saying Joe is there is training
CPR training.
But.
It's insufficient because the
people are following the
training that are not following
all of the process so is there a
training different than CPI if
that is not an effective
training that's being used how
do you force people to to learn
the new training or what
training would that be if CPI is
not working and Mr chair just
very quickly what this bill also
does is it starts with the
assumption that we don't
restraint except when we need to
right and so instead of us
starting with the section that
here are the ways you can
restraint we start with the
section that the status quo that
you don't restraint what this
does is it really prioritizes
the need to even before these
the escalation I'm really
prioritizes the need for schools
to to reduce these infants as
much as possible and the really
the most effective way to do
that is positive behavioral
supports and all of these things
that happened way before even
the escalation happens and so
we're really refocusing what the
what the parties need to be at
schools don't want to end up in
situations where they're having
to report restraints all the
time they don't want to end up
in situations where they're
having to call meetings you know
constantly throughout the year
because these incidents keep
happening and so when we stopped
these incidents from happening
and we say we're prioritizing
all of interventions that need
to happen before and that's what
this bill does then at you know
we are going to be looking for
and I I believe you know there
are so many
evidence based trainings out
there available that we would
certainly be able to find
something that would work for
New Mexico very quick background
about this special education
transformation team one of the
folks that we brought in or but
we I mean PED wasn't me PED
right and what was this group
called empower at and these
folks were you know really smart
people PHCs who are also worked
to begin their careers in the
schools and so they have to.
Of the you know a whole spectrum
of what it's like to work in
education and they had a lot of
expertise in behavior a lot of
expertise in you know reducing
and even eliminating more mostly
eliminating restraints inclusion
schools and so I do think the
resources are out there it is
really just refocusing our
systems
priorities and I think this bill
does that.
Let it play out Senator serve on
this a little bit of and Senator
Lopez goes well.
So what happens if they don't
yeah what's the penalty.
Mr chair that's a right really
great at the otherwise this is
just a well we really mean it
this time type of thing.
Right in that a serve on this
kind of a question Senator.
Mr chair yes.
Thank you Mr chair and out when
we put it into the law the it
becomes a legal violation and
There are no I'm not going to
put any ideas of people that
been legal violations then there
were legal
that relief that you can see to
make sure that folks are doing
what they need to do.
And I'm not a lawyer but usually
those require that it was
purposeful and intentional not
that you know the situation I
made the best judgment I could
at the time and so it's very
difficult to prove those if
there was not purposeful
intentional they were trained
and and chose not to do anything
they were trying but.
And Mister chair I really think
that the biggest
the biggest
motivator to follow the law is
or or you know to reduce these
restraints is going to be that
the laws requiring these
additional
required notice requirements of
the families tell them the same
day do that meetings you know
schedule within a couple days
you know they don't have to
happen within a couple days but
you know we have to have had
that process started and so all
of this is going to become very
very burdensome to schools at
some point if they don't do what
they need to do as far as you
know upstream interventions and
again PED has committed to
supporting schools and making
sure all this happens we all
want to do the right thing and I
think
I think we will realize as we
work through this.
Where are I guess implement this
bill if and when it passes
because I'm very optimistic
that.
We need to change the way that
we approach restraint seclusion
in the school system and we'll
do it together and make sure it
happens that certainly and and
having been middle school and
and elementary principal lots of
times the incidents occur when
the teacher is out and there's a
substitute there was not been
fully trained.
Yeah and that has to do with the
shortage of teachers I mean so
much it's the consistency for
those students but teachers get
sick too one yeah and they have
to be gone and that's when at
least in my experience many of
the incidents happened and
occurred and I don't know how
you manage that with special ed
substitutes as well as the
concern that we have we that's
the biggest openings we have
within the lack of teachers is
in the special education area.
Which has to get fixed first
when you have people that are
long term subs but are not
trained in special education it
exacerbates problems and
certainly when that in the very
difficult classrooms the
behavioral EDD's special
education ones are the most this
proposed of all the special ed
wants to fill it which
exacerbates the problems as well
I I guess my feelings at this
point is this certainly is an
area we need to work on but I
think we need to work on
together with the practitioners
with the special ed area and try
to come up with something
everybody can live with this is
most of this is just some shift
in the policies now I don't see
actually that there's all that
much good for new or different a
little bit more on the the
reporting but it's making a
little bit finer
Definitions on a couple of the
things of but certainly I'm I'm
concerned that the practitioners
have been part of developing all
of this on what will function
and work with them Phil.
Other questions from.
From anyone.
Will the committee please.
to table motion to table that is
non debatable if you'll call the
roll please Senator Brandt yes
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes no.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto no.
Senator pope no.
Senator souls yes.
And so I so we're we're stuck
three.
The other alternative motion
anyone.
A motion for a no recommendation
moving forward.
The second for the.
Thank you Mr pope.
Your call the roll and where
does this go next to the
judiciary here.
Ready yes.
Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Center my SS.
Yes.
There Neville.
Senator Pinto yeah Senator pope
yes Senator souls no.
So we're still stuck I think
we're gonna be stuck here at
least for the time being it
appears.
Mr chair I me make a comment yes
ma'am I'm I appreciate the
dialogue that we've had today
but some of us have been through
this journey before.
And.
We were talking about restraint
and seclusion I have a child
that's been through the system
that has an I EP that is
actually had accommodations with
the five oh four plan we haven't
had a B. I. P. behavioral
improvement plan because as a
parent I worked with him this is
when he was in elementary
school.
But what I did see Mr chair with
some personal.
Incidents that happened not with
my child but with other
children.
And how there was a lack of.
proper intervention that was
taken.
And my child was not quote
unquote
of and you know when that had
super duper outbursts but I did
see some that did happen.
I'm our school systems I know
are taxed in many different ways
but that's where our children
go.
And the as I mentioned the
searchlight report some of you
haven't read it go back and read
it twenty nineteen twenty
nineteen two years after we
passed and I remember and you
Senate Judiciary we had a huge
discussion with many of the
folks who were here trying to
you know make some amends to
make some movements with that of
a restraint bill that we had at
that point in time Mr chair.
When we have the same persons
institutions that come forward
and say will be what worked with
we're not doing this there has
been an opportunity Mr chair we
already have statute there's
something in the in in the law
and it was already stated of
what's in the in the rules and
for those who administrators
they do know how to read the
rules.
And that also goes not just from
head but that also goes down to
the superintendents and that
goes down to the school boards.
I would like to say Mr chair is
part of the statement is that
those persons need to take some
ownership of what's happening in
the school systems.
Because we cannot continue to
have reports that I received
from my constituents from
families who have a child who
when you see them define school
aggravates there's other things
that happen in schools and for
those of you who've been
teachers you know it you live
that every day.
But we can't continue to say
everything is we're going to
work with you and then nothing
happens Mr chair we can't
continue to wait another two
years we have another
opportunity to come forward with
the bill.
Maybe the governor if we work on
something maybe the governor
will put it on her call for next
year.
What I would like to ask Mister
chairs at the persons who
student against this particular
bill and who have stood against
another bill let's work together
to make sure this is right
because this affects many of
those were on that lawsuit on
Martinez versus the state of New
Mexico I met with many of those
families who had some issues.
Those kids have already moved on
but we still have other children
within the system who are
suffering today.
Mr chair we also need to find a
way as to how we work with
families.
Especially families were
bilingual.
I have two neighbors a child
children who are on the spectrum
who do act out but when you
don't have a communication
ability between those parents
who speak Spanish we have an
English only interventionist big
issue.
Are you trying get somebody else
who doesn't know how to explain
and work with the parents we
have issues Mr chair talked
about being bilingual I don't
know if it works in other
communities but I can talk about
what works and money and does
not work.
So I would ask Mr chair since
you are serving as a co chair
chair depending what year for
the LUFC that this be one of our
conversations with an outcome
this coming the interim because
we can't wait another.
Two years we have to make this
happen but not giving away the
baby the bathwater the bass open
the tell we can't do that
anymore Mr chair thank you and
and that the incoming chair of
L. E. S. C. is here and hearing
this so Mr on Mr chair you're
also service the co chair and
vice chair of maybe but you know
we need to have this discussion
because we cannot wait anymore
thank you thank you.
the next bill house bill one
twenty six as amended school
graduation requirements.
Is the.
Thank you Mr chairman if they
give us a moment.
Representative lane and I will
serve on house education and
spent the morning and Senate
education which is nice to see
but the sacrifice of our own
committee
Are you ready Mr Chairman all
right thank you Mr chairman so
we have house bill one twenty
six and house bill one twenty
six for those of you that are
returning members of Senate
education probably remember my
high school graduation bill from
two years ago it was something
that was tabled in this
committee as needing further
study well over the past two
years with the help of our
legislative education study
committee staff we have house
bill one twenty six so it's been
since two thousand nine for two
thousand seven I believe is when
the statute was actually updated
and then in two thousand nine
when students.
Implemented what is our current
high school standards.
So it's been awhile we need to
update them and we have a couple
key features that I think is a
walk through some of this that
myself and my co sponsor leader
lane will talk through if we go
to perhaps I think the best walk
through is the legislative
education study committee
analysis on page two
and it's down at the bottom is a
walk through of the differences
in credits so for English you
would stay at four however three
need to be sequential so that
means English nine English ten
English eleven but that fourth
one could be anything so even
though I should say that we're
dropping the amount of electives
in for perspective high school
graduates is that they're in
bedded in each of these
requirements so for that fourth
English credit for example could
take anything why a journalism
class creative writing things
like that to make that up so
we're trying to and that student
choice throughout all of these
different subject areas so math
would remain at four we would
drop the algebra two requirement
there's no set statistical
evidence is in our bill that we
discussed last year to indicate
the inclusion of algebra two is
a determination of further
student achievement
So there must be a sequence to
those but also student choice
invented in math science to
laboratory classes however the
third may be up to the students
social studies would be bumped
to four
and so again that's where
student choice could come in for
their set forth
Choice I just had a discussion
with
Senator Lopez now who's been
talking about for example and
make studies incorporating that
I think that for space in social
studies would be most
appropriate for students to be
able to take a full credit of
ethnic studies for example in
that it into their social
studies requirement physical
education would be half and half
one half for physical education
one half for health part of the
idea here is to start in adding
physical education with the
health requirements so not only
it being about physical fitness
to be able to monitor health
what happens to your body as you
engage in physical activity in
different sorts of ways
electives I mentioned down to
four there would be pathways for
students in here we would
provide world languages fine
arts health
C. programming things like that
and then local discretion and I
think this is a new no other key
theme of house bill one twenty
six is that there would be two
credits specifically for local
school districts and it wouldn't
be limit to this I should say as
well so we heard from a lot of
superintendents that would
increase the amount of
requirements to something like
in Hobbs the superintendent
mentioned they have twenty six
they plan on keeping something
similar to twenty six these
twenty two requirements would be
a minimum in the subject matters
students would take but school
districts would have a local
economy to.
Mandate for lack of a better
term or increase the
amount of requirements for
students one thing I should
speak of as well as on the house
floor we had a couple of
amendments and it was to amend
back current language in our
statute about.
Districts still requiring
languages other than English
financial literacy was another
one and to amend the language
around economics because as
we've been saying financial
literacy is already a key
feature of the economics class
so much so that the public
education department in renaming
the classes term day economics
and personal financial literacy
it's a class that I teach that I
know very well and will be
teaching coming up here in the
fall so
it's a key feature of that class
already so the language reflects
those requirements but with that
Mr chairman I'll turn it over to
my co sponsor our leader line
thank you Mr chair good morning
to the committee was recommence
in present on the Senate side so
good morning project you have us
I think chairman Mero outlined
the what the bill does
beautifully I just want to
highlight just a couple of
things to supplement one is I
would just want to dress that
this is taking the credits on
from twenty four to twenty two
just mixes any heartburn with
the committee on that if you
look at across our nation the
top ten performing states out of
those only one requires twenty
four the averages twenty one and
a half which were still above
there's no studies showing a
connection between positive
student outcomes and and twenty
four so what this actually does
is it frees up to our our
students to be able to to take
A career
pathway that is more relevant to
them and their academic career
so they don't have to now so
check the box on these
artificial
electives instead they can
choose classes that matter them
in this also present up to do
things like workplace
friendships as well so I think
that's a positive change with
regard to other to.
we're taking that from
requirement to simply having to
be offered by local districts
that was a change made on the
house floor so there's some
concerns about whether districts
would drop under two feet and
make a requirement so that is
still going to require to be
offered a New Mexico is
currently only one of twelve
states that requires a need to
as a graduation requirement and
I think it's something around
fourteen percent of careers
require us to read too so again
it's the idea I think if I if I
could share with you the theme
behind this bill is from my
perspective it's trying to give
students more ownership over
their academic careers and so if
a student wants to pursue
college than the other two is
still gonna be there if they
want to do a CTE heavy.
Retracting they can they can
replace that with C. T. type
math and so I think this is it a
good bill in the sense that it
will encourage students to again
have more ownership of academic
careers which I which I would
submit will in turn lead to
students being in the classroom
more being engage more and lead
to better student outcomes so
thank you Mr chair
that Mr Chairman will stand for
questions we do have just gonna
have claimed senior policy
analyst at the legislative study
committee as well as our
director director planning one
moment on the following receive.
Thank you and we do that.
If you want to move on to your
amendment talk about it or when
I talk about.
Okay the committee okay the
representative.
My conversation okay.
To the audience those in support
of.
Those in opposition.
You're from the opposition's.
There is some.
Tweet high school standards in
New Mexico are higher education
requirements we recognise the
house floor amendment at least
require schools to offer classes
required for college entry it's
that we can do.
However we remain opposed to
this bill because we believe our
graduation standards must
contain a financial literacy
requirement not an optional
questions or not just part of
some other social studies type
standard but a firm requirement
it's a necessary skill for
students on a college track it's
a necessary skill for someone
learning a trade you might one
day manage or run a business
that can stifle in a young
person's life.
And basic sound investing can
produce intergenerational wealth
where there had been done
previously.
We simply cannot be a state.
Where we say we take our
property seriously.
And then we don't require.
Our young people to understand.
Or be taught financial literacy
at an early age how to manage
money and set themselves in
their from families up for
financial stability is a must
need in our state.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you
but we do have one of the
opposition online.
Thank you Mr chair and members
members of the committee my name
is Eileen van we and I'm
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
and I want to thank you for
listening to diverse points of
view about the important
educational issues that you're
addressing.
The strengths of HB one twenty
six and then clearly describe
New Mexico students need to be
prepared for post secondary
education and careers the
minimum number of units for
graduation should be maintained
at twenty four credits and not
be reduced to twenty two schools
that would probably require only
twenty two units are likely
rural schools and schools were
resources are harder to find.
I understand that Los crucis
requires twenty seven credits
significantly more than twenty
two press and I've heard from a
reliable source that students
who are at the capitol from the
high performing test in school
district what twenty four
credits they ask questions why
would you increased time and
reduce credits they want the
credits for for their
accomplishments to show on their
transcripts twenty four credits
would allow for courses that are
missing or insufficient from the
identified requirements it could
include languages other than
English and more physical
education and health with all
the violence and illness in our
society health is very important
and families workplaces and
communities students change a
great deal from ninth grade to
twelfth grade and would benefit
from more health education
during those years.
So it's important to maintain
the twenty four credits and to
increase some of the
requirements that are missing
with a few changes all the would
support the bill.
Thank you.
supporters now.
The.
For
for.
Mr chairman thank you Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents in the coalition
educational leaders Mr chairman
this bill is one of the went
through the process in fact we
spent all summer on this thank
you for inviting superintendents
principals others who will put
this on the ground into the
conversation that makes best
decisions in our statues Mr
chairman of the debate here is
when you reduce credits do you
reduce quality of practice the
answer is chairman is no those
are conclusion many districts in
fact Mr chairman you heard
already from the sponsor
intended contending with twenty
six or twenty seven credit hours
for graduation regardless of
what the state minimums are
finding Mr chairman when you
start dealing with what is in
curriculum we have to remember
that we have cross curricular
offer offerings also as an
example you heard Mr McCorkle
talk about financial literacy in
this plan that goes through
economics and other classes
throughout not only high school
middle school I instruction Mr
chairman we don't disagree with
the point often as a
practitioner view of how do you
best deliberate the matter so Mr
chairman again we want to thank
the sponsors you Mr chairman and
the alley as C. for allowing us
our voice opportunity to discuss
this in depth thank you.
Thank you.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee of jokey and
executive director of the New
Mexico New Mexico school board
association we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward it is an L. E. S. C.
bill that was discussed during
the interim in detail we were
all legislative opportunity to
comment in the product is
outstanding it provides for
flexibility and school at the
school board level at the school
district level provides options
for us to consider as we move
forward and it also allows for
local decision making as many
many many level so again thank
you and we look forward to the
passage of this legislation
thank you Joe superintendent
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on Larry Chavis
superintendent Santa Fe public
schools are we stand in full
support I want to thank both of
our sponsors this morning and
LFC staff as we've been a
superintendent involved during
the intro with this bill and
also a listening to
superintendents as to what we
need this will help us.
Really allocate resources where
is needed also developing new
classes such as a a teacher
education class to build a
pipeline of educators this pull
up provides that flexibility and
provides us the opportunity to
read look at what we're offering
the graduation requirements
again still continuing to offer
algebra two as an option for
educator out for students and
also financial literacy I think
this is a great bill as it reads
and we stand in full support I
do thank you thank you.
There we go hello Mr chairman
hello Mr chairman members the
committee Kerry robin Bruder
with public charter schools New
Mexico we applaud all of the
work that has happened on this
bill throughout the interim we
think it's really important that
students have more choice and
feel more in control of their
schooling we think it's really
critical to making sure we have
creating gauge mint we also
think it's important that there
is still local control in the
bill were districts and charter
schools can go up above and
beyond the recommendations that
are set forth for graduation
requirements and we hope that
the bill passes today thanks so
much.
Thank you Revenue one online.
In support.
I will hear of the first one.
Good morning chairman sold
members of the committee thank
you for hearing me today my name
is Kevin summers and the
superintendent of the Aztec
municipal school district I too
would like to thank the sponsors
Representative Romero
Representative lane as well as
the L. E. S. C. preparing this
bill asked municipal school
district as well as myself are
in full support of house bill
one twenty six contrary to some
beliefs this bill does not water
down the high school diploma of
New Mexico and in fact it
expands the opportunities
available for students in a way
never imagined until now by
lessening the requirements from
twenty four credits twenty two
credits in providing that
flexibility with regard to
language in English language
arts mathematics science and
social studies students across
the state can now pursue dual
credit courses through our
various higher ed partners not
only in order to meet graduation
requirements but also those
requirements were two and four
year degrees if passed a bill
like house bill one twenty six
would allow for engineering
pathway student asked a high
school to obtain between
eighteen and thirty six college
credits and potentially graduate
high school with an associates
degree from our partner
university San Juan college I I
strongly urge the committee to
do passed house bill one twenty
six and I would.
Be more than happy to provide
any additional information
regarding academic proficiency
graduation requirements with the
committee thank you thank you.
For we go to questions in the
committee any comments.
Mmhm Mr Chairman just other than
that thank you for your
leadership on the LFC to get us
to this point with the high
school graduation bill
investments from the committee.
Senate Bill.
But oppose the bill just
curious.
How many credits is a typical
high school have in their in
their four year program twenty
four some like that Mr chairman
senator Neville the current
minimum the state requirements
is twenty four hours a budget
was like somebody mention Los
crucis as more that's what do
they have that so this would be
Would they would have how many
electives I guess I wanted to do
vocational something or other
how many electives what I have
available.
chairman souls and and senator
Neville you would be able to
integrate C. T. E. into your
required classes as well as
included within a pathway for
your elective so therefore
electives it could be one of
your pathways in your elective
but you could also take as as
leader lane mentioned CTE
courses certify CTE courses
embedded within your required
classes as well Mr for electors
and the school district allows a
couple more hours in the twenty
two that might have six hours
potentially of electives that I
could be in the Wagner or
financial literacy or any any.
Anything that would fit my
personal life
Mister chairman Senator yes
thank you Mr.
Thank you Center my Estes thank
you Senators thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative metal
Representative lane and just of.
I just can't commend you enough
for the work and thought going
into this is just tremendous and
supported.
and look forward to to moving it
forward I just want to learn
more about it and
And before I
Let me answer a few questions
and I'll talk about some
concerns I have with with as it
relates to the comments that Mr
McCorkle maybe
regarding the the the importance
of financial literacy but first
seems like the crux of the bill
is on page twelve and thirteen
and this is the the new
requirements.
And it goes to up from twenty
four to twenty two units I'm
really happy that we've we've.
That we're harnessing the
political will to do that it
twenty four
Require six six credits a year
kind has no flexibility for the
seniors and it and many times
students take seven classes in a
single semester.
And I think they're shrinking
right when I took a class was
fifty five minutes long and now
the classes are like forty six
minutes long as there is that
can you comment on that what
will this add more robustness to
the it to the class so that
students are taking chairman and
and senator Maestas yes and
that's part of the goal of this
is that we're not looking at
just how many classes students
can take what my students take
seventh and have seven losses
this would allow for school
districts to move back to six
classes like I had when I was in
high school but we're really
focusing on mastery can our
students that are taking the
courses that are required or
their electives Development
street in that subject which may
take more time and that's ram
exception I guess Mr chairman
some of the comments that were
made also from the audiences
that
it's it's not just about
acquiring these credits and more
more credits but mastery of and
do I have time with my students
to really go through the civics
requirements the economics
requirements of the U. S.
history requirements in death in
perhaps a longer class period
with my students yes thank you
Mr thank you Sandra Miller the
no I agree wholeheartedly I'm
really happy about that the
plus if you say it.
So you have homework half the
time you know you're gonna have
or save get homework two thirds
of the time having homework from
five classes at night as opposed
to three you know you're going
to maybe I lost a couple of
those classes you're just not
going to really dive into that
subject matter site I hope we
stick with that with that
recommendation then also
Just in terms of reading it the
the health requirements on page
eight yes.
For students entering the eighth
grade.
and then you have a.
The health class mandated on
page fourteen.
Does the health requirement in
the ninth grade kind of trump
that eighth grade requirement or
where is that still is that
still gonna remain good law for
a for a for the potential have
the eighth grade health class.
And Mr chairman and senator
my associates putting health
into high school because part of
the discussion we had two years
ago was whether or not to keep
that in and we heard from a lot
of advocates that health class
would be most age appropriate in
the high school level would
prefer to see health if the high
school level rather than as an
option for eighth graders that
currently is now in middle
school thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative role
metal so I'm on page eight.
Just to refresh your memory with
regard to current law to
students entering eighth grade
the course of health education
is required prior to graduation
in either middle school or high
school is that are we gonna
change that statute.
In a couple years or what is the
current language kind of
swallowed up that statute and
make it obsolete.
Mr Senator Mister chairman
Senator Maestas we would
potentially need to change it
however it's continuing to exist
in state statute because this
won't go into effect until the
ninth grade students the first
cohort not next year but the
year there after so for this
incoming group of eighth graders
they still will have the ability
to actually take health in
eighth grade so we need to
retain current statutes
similarly this the statue that
exists to support current
graduation requirements needs to
exist to support those students
who are now in high school so we
always protect the cohort of
students who are currently in
their cohort and once they start
in their ninth grade year we
don't change on them absolutely
thank you Mr chairman thank you
gently the
Yes I will is the anticipation
to to eliminate health in middle
schools are will the will just
have that conversation in the
next two years I think you can
Mr chairman and and senator
Maestas that's the work of the
upcoming wages legislative
education study committee is
working kind of down the ladder
so to speak so from we're doing
high school redesign it and then
moving on to middle school
middle school redesign in the
interim.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
represent the
and then that's I think that
answer my next question on page
six.
It online's nine ten eleven it
says for graduation for students
entering ninth grade beginning
in two thousand nine.
Those will remain in place
for current eighth graders but
the seventh graders will have
the new statutory frame.
Mister chairman Senator Maestas
yes that's correct and then
hopefully we can
Commence eight council that
after a certain amount of time
you can take out those those
years in statute
But that's a whole other whole
nother story the and then Mr
chairman that resentment oh
thank you for the
There's been up.
From my knowledge of financial
literacy there's been kind of a
struggle between a standalone
semester course of potential
Garcia and I'm a strong advocate
for that one appreciate that the
chamber for advocating for that
and then a up and in those who.
I think it's best to roll in but
personal finance or financial
literacy curriculum into an
economics course of.
On that note I think economic
surprise standalone as well so
it and disappointed that we did
get a chance to have that
conversation in this committee
earlier this the session and we
did get a chance to hear Senate
bill three forty one that was up
that that bill calls for a
standalone personal finance
class semester course to
required to graduate there was a
bill introduced in the last year
that we get a chance to hear the
house either
What is the logic of.
Essentially I need to be assured
that financial literacy percent
finance of curriculum will will
be invented I think it's
credibly important and hope we
all agree that basic principles
of managing money is a
fundamental skill set that
students need to have in the
modern world and should be
required to graduate what is the
logic for for putting personal
finance or financial literacy
subject matter into the
economics course and will that
for fill up those concerns of
the chamber and concerns have
expressed in the past.
Mr chairman and and senator
Maestas I'm not sure satisfying
the chamber is necessarily
something we necessarily do as
far as education policy wise is
certainly there welcome to the
table when we have these
discussions by a study that
compared and it's in all our L.
E. S. C. analysis the study
between Georgia which has a
standalone personal finance
course standalone like what
you're advocating for in Texas
which in budget like we in New
Mexico have embedded on personal
finance into our economic
standards found comparable
results and so me being an
economics teacher is where I try
to take my students from the
fairy how personal finance is
important to their life but also
expanded to economic principles
that affect their personal
finance choices so they have a
broader more holistic view of
how economics can affect their
personal finance in their
personal financial decisions
impact the economy at large so I
think those are the two reasons
why we've left it you get it
into the standards plus this is
been a bit of a two year process
we're we've heard and worked
with a lot of different
stakeholders as you've heard and
education and and have decided
to keep it as embedded into the
standards and public education
department has worked
diligently to make sure that the
standards are in there I think
as far as
assurances as well is that
chairman.
Senator Maestas is that me as a
teacher my evaluation I am
beholden to the standards that I
am teaching my class I have to
present evidence when I'm being
evaluated of the standards that
I'm teaching to standards that
I've brought and have taught
students in the past and where
I'm going with my lessons in the
future for students and I think
through our of that teacher
evaluation process our valuation
process in general the fact that
they're in the standards is why
is going to guide and also keep
teachers accountable for what
they're teaching in the
classroom as far as these
principles I was being unfairly
outline thank you Mr chairman so
I just a corollary Mister chair
I want to.
Offer on this topic financial
see that I don't know anybody
that disagrees that this is an
important topic I think we all
can agree on that piece what I
think is is important that the
public understands and the
committee understands now that
the the PED is re designed the
sole studies standards really
for the first time personal
financial literacy is going to
start being taught from
kindergarten first second third
all the way through high school
and there's a study that shows
that that that is a more
effective way to teach your
child how to how to handle and
and spend money appropriately
than a standalone course in of
itself and so the fact that we
are now doing that a state as a
state I think is incredibly
important and that's part of
also what I think we we made
those changes on the house floor
to just emphasize that this is
part of the creek and now for
every New Mexico student thank
you so much Mr thank you
Representative lane thank you
Representative I don't know I
Really grateful to
To that amendment but keep in
mind the.
The LFC conversations.
And the bill that was introduced
as a result of those
conversations did not include
financial literacy up as as a
required elective at under
current law so so in my opinion
I was a step back and so just
raise concerns as to why we're
taking a step back when the
class already exists the
curriculum already exists the
teacher already exists it's in
every single high school in the
state in the original bill.
purposefully as a result of
dialogue or burning did not.
To get out of statute proposed
to take it out statute so I'm
really happy that that that that
language remained in it's it's
nothing new it's maintaining
current law.
but I I just
Don't we all checked the.
I'll check the the interim
committee schedules but I don't
know if that.
Debate was had
but that's the beauty of the
citizen legislature and it
really appreciate that the
leadership of Representative
medically does for a living he
does it every day and so I think
it's awesome that that you bring
that personal perspective and I
and I will defer to your
professional opinion on on that
perspective the and just lastly
so so you don't believe so the
concerns that I'm hearing from
the folks who advocate for the
stand alone class you they're
concerned that the fight
financial literacy curriculum
will kind of get swallowed up in
the econ curriculum you don't
believe that would happen.
Thank you expressed it I think
you expressed it just a moment
ago why that wouldn't happen
chairman souls and and in center
Maestas I don't think so but
that's the beauty of having
flexibility in this because the
school districts did want to
required for students they may.
so it may be in addition to
these requirements we've heard
I I'm gonna superintendents
called weekly and I've heard
from some superintendents saying
yes we would look to require
personal financial literacy
and some saying that we wouldn't
but that's the beauty of the
bill is that students are going
to get it no matter what and
they'll be getting it through
the different grade levels with
a particular emphasis when they
reach their economics and
personal financial literacy
course in high school thank you
so much and then just in terms
of the language Mr chairman and
page thirteen line to.
So this is the social studies
It says it includes a US history
and geography.
Which of course contains New
Mexico history.
so Michael in government and
economics comma is government
economics one course or its two
courses.
chairman and senator my assisted
B. one course.
So government economics together
as a requirement so almost like
half credit each.
Okay first that then Mister
chairman Senator Representative
a little more than the amendment
reads correctly
The government is one course in
economics is another course.
it would reading correctly but
since it's the same course now
it reads government and
economics and personal financial
literacy.
So that would be one course.
Mr chairman and senator my
associates okay okay.
And then so I don't know if that
was if there was a comma after
government but that that answers
that question
Senator if I might yeah we're at
ten forty five we've got two
other bills I think we'll go
quick but okay usually have a
stop at the I if you've got more
questions I don't think you I'm
I'm not I'm done with the
question the I thought this bill
contained up K. through eight
there was a phenomenal I wanted
a proper with regard to the case
through a curriculum I did as
you know that the financial
receive bill back in the day and
then a couple years later did
media literacy the meet other C.
bill was was better written and
it put the magic words media
literacy in in the K. through
eight curriculum as a may so I
have a an amendment up that I
should consider that puts
financial literacy in the K.
through eight as a may.
Did you receive that that
amendment you get a chance to
look at it chairman and senator
Maestas I did and as I mentioned
earlier is that the middle
school redesign will happen this
interim so certainly you're
invited and everybody's invited
to participate in those
discussions.
Okay so this on from at this
time to put that in
chairman and senator Maestas yes
because it's outside the scope
of over twenty with high school
redesign and we're gonna come
back to to middle school to give
the same sort of treatment that
we gave high school in order to
do our middle school okay thank
you Mr thank you for the moment
that I want I will propose that
amendment this time thank you
chairman thank you thank you
Senator Pinto.
Thank you members of the
committee what's gonna happen
with the students that fulfill
their credits and decide not to
go to class or don't want to
fill that that extra hour.
Mister chairman Senator would
you mind clarifying your
question let's say they finish
all their credit hours because
you're reducing right.
So what will happen to those
students that don't want to.
This not that class.
Mr chair Senator Pinto.
two things around that the first
is the importance of local
control and really determining
schedules and tracking students
working with counselors high
school counselors and parents to
ensure that each an individual
student as meeting all of their
needs
and or the requirement the
connections to post secondary so
that's the first thing is really
you you've probably it's a lot
it's very much in the space of
local control the second is it
there is nothing to say that all
of the school districts and or
charter schools in the state are
actually gonna go to twenty two
more often than not we're
hearing that many of the school
districts are actually going to
be at twenty four or state
twenty six so.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee to the we back in
the day I think there was only
so many credits that you it was
reduced back to back in the day
so there was quite a few
students that we're just
No currently very at the school
because they couldn't get home
especially the rural schools so
they fulfilled their obligation
just went to two or three
glasses stand by lunch time they
did the rest of the day didn't
have anything to do.
Senator.
Ninety four that this bill
allows for and really I think
highlights is the critical need
to value work based learning for
high school students so ensuring
that
more credits are valued in
internship support and work in
the workplace so if students are
leaving losses earlier that they
have the ability to have a
meaningful internship not just
at
something that's less meaningful
right so that connects to.
Mr chair foes that student I I
don't think I would want to go
to class the rest of the day of
school
thank you Mr chair thank you
senator and.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
just a couple of things.
I guess I'm a little concerned
about I to believe in the
financial literacy and intact
and carrying a bill that
I met you won't go too far with
regard to that requirement but I
do think it's very important I
think it's probably one of the
best things we can do for kids
and having an embedded you know
what I think we all kind of
understand how that works and
then you've got a lot embedded
in all the standards you get to
some you don't so I really am
concerned about that secondarily
the doubts for two you know it
says an FIR that it becomes a
barrier to graduation and I
think rather than just removing
it let's find out why it's very
and I think if you look back to
how we teach math in the early
grades and whether our teachers
are really the prepared to teach
math in a meaningful way so that
by the time you get to out for
one and now it's pretty you have
teachers and one that can
teacher and number two you've
got students that have been
prepared to take those courses I
worry about the students that
get to high school maybe they
decide well I'm not going to do
how to get to and then they
become seniors and because of
the opportunity scholarship in
the lottery scholarship and
everybody can go to college now
but they're not prepared so
these are these are concerns I
have about this bill and I
remember in two thousand three
under the direction of
Representative Mira and we
shifted to high school redesign
at that point.
Raising the standards making it
something that we should all
apply for in in and do that and
then we we kind of went too far
and I agree with that that we
need to make room for what is
happening now with our career
technical schools the desire to
go with occasional pathway I
think all of those things are
important but I do worry that
you know we are reducing the
and I think god like to know in
a couple years of what that's
going to mean for students with
remediation is that going to
college and they're not prepared
and I think it's going to be a
problem I have confidence in our
local school boards to some
extent but I also know that you
know there could be pressured by
their community in many jump
down to twenty two not because I
think it's best for kids but
maybe that's what the community
is saying and they're going to
do that
I am worried about this I think
I want to be supportive but on
the other hand I think of their
problems with it I have one
question it says in the F. I. R.
that you're limiting the
requirements for advanced
placement honor still for forces
we've kind of tried to do that
for a long time and it's never
really been successful it says
in the FIR that you're doing
that but I don't see that in the
bill on page seventeen it's
still it's a requirement in my
missing the missing something
you that it career technical and
That's in addition that is there
still a requirement to do one of
those four five things.
Mr chairman and Senator Kernan
it's a good question and it goes
back to a discussion about what
has to stay in the current law
for students that are currently
going to the system and then
that's when on page twelve
subsection P. would kick in that
would eliminate those
requirements so Mister chair
you're saying at a certain point
in time that that will go away
and that students will not be
required to do this.
Mr chairman and senator Kerman
yes beginning with this year's
not where our next year's ninth
grade class and also Mr chair
next steps is that going away as
well this chairman souls and
Senator Kernan noted that filled
the next set plans are still
going to be required the thing
we're adding on the front is a
credit graduation profile so
this is where the community
comes in you may have heard
superintendent summers in Aztec
mention these where the
community can come in and kind
of talk about and really refine
what some of these pathways
maybe and what communities want
to see out of a graduate.
Mr chair and representative will
that profile the one single
profile for the community or
will that batch up with each of
the next step plans.
And.
Chairman souls and Senator
Kernan it could be one but this
is where the department's going
to have to develop rural
centered around it so it could
be multiple so I know and I've
seen several from Aztec for
different pathways.
Okay thank you that's yes my
question I don't have any other
staff I do worry I think that
probably this is going to move
ahead and I wish everybody the
best and we need to track it at
some point we may need to come
back in and find someplace in
the middle because I think we've
gone from district to may be too
lenient and then we're gonna
listen kids going to college is
or not thank you thank you
senators are about.
Mr chair moved to pass.
Motion for you passes the
second.
Also seconded if you'll call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator my S. yes there
Neville Senator Pinto.
Senator post yes Senator souls
yes it would have to pass a new
path thank you Mr chairman thank
you committee thank you and I
went to check with our
Our ranking member we've got a
couple of minutes still until
we're supposed to be down on the
floor you want to continue on
that all right with the
committee the next to I think
both of them are relatively non
controversial so I would
encourage the Sanchez please
keep it very short don't think
that jeopardize your bill
getting rolled over by the along
of that.
That's fair enough to me.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning committee members thank
you for allowing us the time
will make a quick house bill one
forty eight amends the early
childhood education and care act
to authorize the early childhood
education and care department to
enter into an intergovernmental
agreements with tribes if
requested by a tribe.
For the purpose of funding and
administering tribal early
childhood education and care
programs this will allow the
tried to use its own culturally
and linguistically relevant
standards assessments and
evaluations with that Mr
Chairman we stand for questions
thank you those in the audience
and support.
Anyone in opposition.
See no one in opposition
learning opposition online.
Sure is it alright if we go
straight if there any questions
absolutely.
Questions from the committee.
I'm overdue pass muster
provision for do pass in the
second.
You'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey Senator Kernan
yes Senator my S. yes Senate
Bill yes Senator Pinto Senator
pope yes Sanders Sauls yes yes I
did check with the the secretary
of early childhood and she said
this is they're already doing it
just kinda codifies what's
already happened so thank you
all every day.
Thank you a representative
Sarinana.
That might indicate that was
similar.
Yes land unless there is a
visible opposition.
Thank you Mr chairman im
Representative Sarinana my
experts here is down to eighty
we are lost or your room are
you.
Thank you you know for another
couple minutes.
Thank you thank you.
I have one eight one is about
national board certification it
immense public school co to
remove their teacher and replace
it with license school employees
it allows license school
employees certified by the
national board for of
professional teaching standards
to generate program units in the
public school funding formula to
get in FY twenty four and bill
changes to things it allows
certified counselors to be also
receive a differential and
extend the differential to
educators serving in
administrative capacity who
currently hold a national board
certified teacher certification.
Can be difficult expert.
Mr chairman members the
committee I will be a technical
expertise that will not make a
statement thank you those in
support of this.
Is there anyone in opposition.
Thirty opposition online.
a motion for a new path thank
you Mr chair I can.
Your call the roll please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
Senator Kernan center Maestas
yes Sir novelle Center Pentaho
Center pope yes Senator souls
yes we have a do you have a.
