line, but we'll see as, you
know, people are at different
committees and how we're going
to manage, uh.
Any comments, announcements, uh,
the senator, if you want to
introduce your guest, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
good morning, everyone. I am
very happy to introduce my UNM
intern for this week. Uh, this
is Trinity Jimenez, and she's
from Fort Worth, Texas, and
she's a 2-year student at UNM.
She is double majoring in
psychology and political science
with the minor and sociology,
and she's hoping to attend law
school. Um, if we can please
help me welcome her.
So I'll turn the the meeting
over to Senator Pope, and I'll
come down and present Senate
Bill 437.
So for those uh in the audience
and those online, we are now
going to Senate Bill 437, no
school use of corporal
punishment.
Um
Being presented by Senator Soul,
Senator Souls, you have the
floor.
Thank you. Uh
This bill came about, I think I
was listening to NPR, but there
was some concern that in uh some
private religious schools, other
things that there was still
corporal punishment in New
Mexico for the um as well as in
early childhood centers. And so
all this does is would codify
that corporal punishment is
prohibited in early childhood,
primary and secondary education,
uh, by any group that gets any
of the state type of subsidies
funding or anything of that
sort, whether it's through uh
Public books, uh, whether it's
through subsidies for parents
for childcare or things of that
sort.
It's a fairly short bill, that's
what it does. I know there is an
amendment from
Senatore as I've looked at it,
it would be a friendly amendment
and so I
to Senator, if you'd like to
move your amendment.
Those, uh, senator so, Senator
Eel, if you'd like to, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman, I
propose, uh, amendment to Senate
bill, what's the number 437, the
number at the bottom is
231537.1. It is making two
changes, both of them on online,
uh, page 2 of the bill.
On line 3, it is.
Strike provides an in lieu
thereof is the business of
providing.
Skip on down to line 7 after
premises while the person is
engaged in such business. Thank
you, Senator. We've already
heard from Senator Souls that
this is friendly.
Pardon
Is there anyone in opposition of
this amendment?
The committee room or online?
Anyone in support
Committee room
With that, do we have any
discussion from the committee?
On the amendment for Senate Bill
437.
Mr. Chairman, I move a due pass
of Amendment 231537.1.
Do we have a
No discussion.
Do we have any opposition to
this amendment. We do not, so
amendment passes, you have an
amended bill, Senator.
Would you like to discuss
anything else on the bill or are
you ready for uh public comment
and questions Mr. Chair, I, I
think we're ready for public
comment. Uh, we, we didn't
really talk about what the
effect is of the, the amendment
and for the most part, what it
would do is it would allow
somebody who after work or
whatever with their children
getting in the car or whatever
that they would not be affected
by this at some other time
unless they are actually running
the center or something. Is that
accurate, Senator?
OK.
And so it, it
It it clarifies when it's off
hours that this does not affect
people.
With that, we're gonna go to
Public comment
Those in the committee room and
online, do we have anyone in
support of Senate Bill 4 to 37
amended.
A few hands up, if you could
line up.
Do we have any opposition in the
room or online.
All right.
We'll get a few public comments
and you have 2 minutes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We have any support online?
And we had no opposition or
anyone online in opposition.
Um, I think you're a good
senator. I don't believe that.
I'll give you the opportunity
any more comments?
Looks like you're good to go.
Only comment kind of a funny I
was discussing with someone and
I actually said capital
punishment one time instead of
corporal punishment. And I was
like, no, no, wait, wait, no,
we're not, yeah, we're talking
about corporal punishment.
was one of those uh uh
age-appropriate cognitive
decline moments. Right.
So with that, we'll now go to
questions and comments from the
committee.
Mr. Chair, I move to do pass as
amended. All right uh do pass
from Senator Boone.
And a second from Senator Ramos.
Like there's no other comments,
so Mary, if you could.
Take the rule.
Sender Boone.
Yes.
Sender Figueroa
Tinder Hickey
Senator Nova.
Into Ramos. Senator Thornton.
Pope. Yes. In souls. Yes.
Pass with
affirmative 2 excuse.
All right, Senator, you have a
due pass.
On Senate Bill 437 amended?
You have 7 yeses and 2 were
excused.
Thank you, Senator Pope for
filling in for me, and next we
go to Senate Bill 465
participation in school sports.
Senator Maestas.
There's gentleman's trying to
get on Zoom, so just keep an eye
on him.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let
them play.
Let them play, Mister Chairman,
athletics uh for uh teenagers,
high school students, provides
tremendous, tremendous benefits
and opportunities for our young
people, teaching, overcoming
adversity, uh, teamwork.
Uh, a drive to succeed and
compete and overcome it also
helps students deal with
depression, anxiety, or other,
uh.
Uh, health issues and the
overall wellness of the student
benefits from athletic
participation. Current law,
however, uh,
Deprives a lot of students of
this ability to participate.
Uh, and so this bill, uh,
remedies that. So it's the bill
is on page 2 and I'm gonna go be
through F and then jump to A at
the end, Mr. Chairman, but we're
asking you to let them play.
Paragraph B on page 2, if a
student athlete moves from town
to town.
Or transfer schools, say for
example, they're in a private
school, their folks can no
longer afford it, and they
enroll in the local neighborhood
school.
They have to sit out a year.
So I'm not suggesting they get
to play for any team they want.
They have to be a bona fide
resident of that school's
boundaries.
But I ask that you let them
play.
If a student transfers schools,
they should not have to sit out
a year.
Uh, you should let them play.
Paragraph C, if they participate
in another athletic team, uh, a
club ball or some other team,
they should not be docked the
ability to play for their local
high school team. It's my
understanding that if someone
were to place a 10 volleyball
games for a club ball team, they
have to sit out 10 volleyball
games at their local high school
team that, that makes no sense.
I ask that you let them play.
Paragraph D, if you go to an
athletic training camp to hone
your skills and get the
benefit of that opportunity.
Uh, and you go back to your,
your school, you have to sit out
a year.
That makes no sense. We should
be honoring people's abilities
and parents uh abilities to to
give every opportunity to their,
to their child. If every
opportunity of that community to
their student, and they should
not have to sit out a year. I
asked let them play, Mr.
Chairman. Also,
And if anything comes out of the
committee, it should be a
paragraph E.
In the state of New Mexico, it
is illegal. It is unlawful. It
is not allowed, that a private
school give a scholarship to a
student.
To play athletics.
Could you imagine, Mr. Chairman,
if, if the, if the tables were
turned and I came here today to
try to outlaw that.
People would think I was crazy
if I came in here and said
that's wrong. I want to outlaw
private schools giving athletic
scholarships to students.
I, I would probably be tar and
feathered in this building, but
that's the current law.
And so I asked that that that
that private schools be allowed
to offer scholarships to
students to participate.
In athletic activity and then
also, uh, there are some super
athletes, uh, the, the, the
cross country runner from I
think uh academy or El Dorado.
There's golfers, there's
wrestlers that are able to
compete at the varsity level,
even though they're 8th graders.
Um, going from 8 to 9, they get
locked into that school.
And if they change uh.
They move during their 8th and
9th grade year, they lose a year
of eligibility, that that's
wrong.
So I asked that if you play
varsity sports in the 8th grade,
you do not lose a year of
eligibility, and so we ask
ourselves why, why is this so?
Why is this so?
Um
And it's, and it's
And the motives are pure, the
motives are good, Mr. Chairman.
We have this wonderful notion of
fairness in New Mexico. We want
to be fair, we want, we want
everything to be fair. We don't
want it to be unfair. We don't
want to give someone an
advantage over another person in
Albuquerque, it was a
It was against the law for a
team to travel out of state
because not everybody could do
it, it's not fair.
But we, we can't legislate
fairness. You simply cannot
legislate fairness. What I would
hope is that we legislate uh uh
competition that we legislate uh
the opportunities that are
available to families and
students that we not prohibit
anyone from excelling in their
God-given talents or the or
because your dad moves from town
to town or or whatnot. The, the
unfairness that some folks may
feel that they suffer.
Uh
pale in comparison to the harm
that is caused by individual
students not being able to
participate in athletic
competition for an entire year.
And I don't know why this is,
but that brings me to paragraph
A, Mr. Chairman, and this is
something that I think we should
all agree on.
One person, one vote, one
person, one vote is fundamental.
premise of our foundational
democracy.
Uh, and so any board of
directors, any uh body that
governs.
High school athletics should be
one person, one vote.
Uh, the board of directors of
NMAA has 13 members.
As 13 members, Mr. Chairman, if
you, uh, look at the population
of the towns of those members.
Uh, and you add up the
population of the towns.
8 of those members, their
population is less than 100,000
people.
9 of those members, if you add
up those towns.
is less than I think 130,000
people. So you have 9 members
representing 100, let's just say
150,000 people and then you have
the other 4 members.
Representing the other.
1.95 million people.
So there is massive
underrepresentation, uh, I'm not
being facetious, Doctor King
marched and died for one person,
one vote. It was the foundation
of our voting rights Act of
1964, so I asked that, uh,
And the numbers are 7 of the
members, Mr. Chairman, represent
34,000 people, 8 members
represent 73,000 people and 9
members represent 119,000 people
and the other four represent the
other 1.95 or so million, so I
ask that you let them play, Mr.
Chairman. I, I asked that we put
aside our own individual kind of
wants and desires and and and
and perspectives and we put our
policy hat on and what is the
best public policy for all the
student athletes in the state of
New Mexico and that policy is to
let them play.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Um, up to
the
OK.
I, uh, to the audience, uh, show
of hands for those in support.
Hey, those in opposition.
OK, the supporters want to come
up, please.
And you have up to 2 minutes.
So.
We have a proponent on a on
phone call.
Uh, Diego Pavia.
One proponent, I, he was having
trouble getting on our uh Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
OK
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Yes, yes, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Marco
Gonzalez, and many of you know
me as a registered lobbyist for
a lot of different things, but
I'm not here today in any
capacity except as a loving, um,
you know, a godfather of my
goddaughter who was impacted by
this, um, and the thing I would
say is that parents from all
around the state who can't be
here today because of the fact
that they're probably working,
want their children to have the
best experience in high school
and and many times that involves
sports.
Unfortunately because of this
rule, many of them have to go
and spend money litigating and
they actually it's the only
course of action when they have
this negative decision passed
against him to litigate, and
most of the courts say let them
play.
Um, I, I want to bring, so
everything that the
representative, thank you for
bringing it forward and fighting
for young people said is
correct, but here's the other
thing that's an interesting, so
my granddaughter was at Santa Fe
Indian School, so she's a Native
American.
And so we have a sovereign to
sovereign relationship with our
Native American brothers and
sisters. She was denied access
to a Santa Fe public school
system transferring from a
Native American school system,
which on its face, I just don't
understand how we could do. How
could we have a simple sovereign
to sovereign relationship with
our Native American brothers and
sisters here and not allow
individual who wants to play in
the Santa Fe public school
system, access to that. They
said no, you can't play.
And you know what happened to
her afterwards? She didn't go on
to be and thank God there's New
Mexico is doing great in sports
and there are athletes who are
advancing, but she didn't go on
to be a big huge star somewhere
else, you know what she's at
UNM, she's getting school and
was your life, could it have
been better by playing in those
games that she was not allowed
to for that half of a whole
season, she had to get to court
and go do the thing. Yes, and so
it's impacting people in very
real ways, the families,
you know, need this and, and,
and so, um, I'll, I'll stand on
that.
And, and say that, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, please provide a
suit for families and and kids
who want to play.
Thank you. Uh, anyone else in
the room in support?
We got an Indians in support.
OK.
In support
But
Go ahead.
Hello? Yes, go ahead.
Hello, this is uh Javier Pavia,
brother of Diego Pavia. Um, good
morning, Mr. Chairman. Um,
First, so in Diego's particular
situation, um, Diego went from a
private school.
to a public school and um due to
financial hardship and during
that time, um,
The anime didn't allow him to
participate in his junior year
in athletics, um.
It was really rough time for
him.
He went through a lot of uh
anxiety and depression and stuff
like that throughout that time
and um it also really impacted
his recruitment, um, in
furthering his career in
athletics, and I believe that
Um
You should allow them to
participate if they are in
district, um, and transferring
from school to school. I mean,
there are many situations in New
Mexico that
Take place where.
Financial hardship is the case,
and then we move to a lower
income area or of sort and uh I
believe the kids shouldn't be
impacted by that.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support online? OK, in the room,
those in opposition like to come
up and, and say you have up to 2
minutes.
Miss Chairman, stand rounds for
the school superintendents, the
coalition of Educational
leaders, and I just want to
frame that for a minute. That's
over 230,000 students is just uh
89 superintendents, but it's uh
creeping up in 1000
administrators across all
administrative areas in the
state of New Mexico. I served in
the New Mexico Activities
Association Board for many years
as a large district
superintendent. One of the
things that is done is
they give 22 seats to the
largest districts in New Mexico,
so there is a large voice on
that committee to balance that
out, Mr. Chairman, we strong, we
stand strongly in opposition to
this bill. We understand the
concerns. We appreciate, uh,
Senator Myas' uh fervor on this.
He believes in what he's doing.
We've always appreciated that
that about him. However, we do
not believe this is the right
way to go. We stristand on
strong opposition. Thank you.
Thank you. Yes, sir.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Dusty Young, Executive
director with the New Mexico
Activities Association, and I am
here today on behalf of our
membership, speaking in
opposition of this bill. There
are a variety of elements listed
within the bill, each of which
would significantly impact the
NMAA and high school athletics
here in our state, in
particular, items B through F,
they would completely alter and
even eliminate the eligibility
guidelines we have listed in our
handbook. Those are rules and
regulations established by
members.
School administrators for and
because of education-based
athletics. Education-based
athletics are different. We, we,
we see what has happened at the
collegiate level, uh where it's
a free for all NCAA sport is now
completely different. Uh, these
rules are also in place or some
of our, our founding principles
striving to provide competitive
equity for our schools, a level
playing field, also looking to
protect students from
displacement, students
transferring in from one
community to another, not moving
in, transferring in.
And potentially taking a spot, a
roster spot or a starting role
from someone that grew up within
that community. And lastly to
touch base on, on our governance
board as Mr. Rounds reference,
we have 13 individuals, 11
superintendents representing our
membership, member schools
across the state, two of which
are already large school
members, the only two automatic
seats we have. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Yes, sir.
Good morning. My name is Angel
Castillo and I come to you as
the executive director of New
Mexico High School Coaches
Association. Um, so I'm here
representing over 2000 coaches
in the state of New Mexico from
all corners of the state, um,
and, and being here, um,
We believe that, you know, we
strongly believe that.
That this bill is harmful to
our, to our student athletes.
Um, I come from Silver City, New
Mexico. I coached in Mayfield in
Las Cruces. I, I am also a coach
at Rio Rancho Public schools,
um, so I'm, I'm in the thick of
it and I can tell you this bill,
um, will impact every corner of
the state.
And in Italy impact every corner
that I've that I've been a part
of, so, um, I'm here to strongly
oppose the bill on behalf of the
coaches Association.
Um, it's a enemy is a working um
organization and they
They work closely with coaches.
They work closely with
administrators, so, um, they've
got a good thing going on. It's,
it's not broke, and I think if
we pass this thing it'll it'll
create confusion even more
confusion for families,
administrators, and those
involved in high school
athletics. So education-based
athletics is, is, is at the
forefront of this and all
coaches across the state oppose
it.
Good morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Carri Romero,
many of you know me as a
registered lobbyist, but I am
also a public school track and
field coach, which is why I'm
never here in the afternoons,
um, and I'm also the mother of 3
public school athletes at
Moriarty Public Schools. This,
uh, this bill would have a
significant negative impact on
our athletic programs of our
public schools, especially
schools like Moriarty that are
rural, but are in close driving
proximity to larger districts,
urban districts like
Albuquerque.
To build a competitive athletic
program, a public school coach
needs to be able to count on
their talented athletes to
return to the program next
season. This bill does the
opposite. It incentivizes
students whose sports team is
losing to just jump ship and
change schools whenever they
want. It will funnel our small
school athletes into our larger
schools, larger school districts
tend to naturally be more
competitive in sports simply
because they have more students,
they have more depth, and they
have more talent.
Wearity already competes with
the private schools in our
proximity, Saint Pius and
Albuquerque Academy, allowing
private schools to offer
athletic scholarships to kids
who wouldn't otherwise be able
to afford private school is a
form of recruitment.
Public schools could never do
that. We could never afford to
do that. This creates an unfair
advantage in areas where public
schools are already struggling
with, with student retention.
Uh, I'm not sure exactly what
the overall intention of this
bill is, to me, it seems unfair,
as you've heard, there would be
neg
Lots of negative unintended
consequences. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Joe.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, Joe
Guihan, executive director of
the New Mexico School Boards
Association. We stand in
opposition to this bill. This
bill would completely alter
eligibility requirements, uh, of
our high school athletics, uh,
it would displace many kids that
live in those communities, uh,
with transfers coming in.
Uh, also in terms of the
governance, New Mexico School
Boards Association has an
automatic seat on the board of
directors that that that person
represents all school boards,
not the district that person
comes from similar to all of the
uh representatives, uh, they
represent a region or a uh.
Uh, their region or their with
the exception of Albuquerque and
Las Cruces, they do represent
their district, but they all
represent regions, not their
districts and again we stand in
opposition for all the reasons
stated.
Good morning. My name's Anthony
Casalos. I'm currently serving
as the superintendent of the
Chalma Valley Schools also was
the uh um you make TV
Association chairman, board
chairman.
Um, there's no need for me to
repeat everything that's been
said regarding the opposition to
the bill.
But I do want to uh bring to
light that these kids can still
play.
They've always been able to
play, but there's rules and
regulations that need to be
followed. I've been on the, on
the board for about 15 years
we've dealt with loopholes
having to to uh determine the
eligibility based on a loophole
or something like that, but
But there's rules out there. We
have different committees set
out there. We have hardship
committees, we have uh.
These committees listen to
hardships, so I, I heard earlier
someone referring to a financial
hardship going from a private
school.
To a public school, we have
mechanisms so we can listen to
that and determine whether that
is a legit transfer or not. So
the kids still can't play.
They can definitely play, but we
have rules to follow. Let's keep
those rules in place and keep
some form of order within the
interscholastic activities.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Gene Strickland.
Day job superintendent of Hobbs
Municipal schools.
I'm one of those 13 board
members that serve on the New
Mexico Activities Association.
However, I represent.
10 different communities.
As that board member.
Multiple high schools across
those. Each one of those board
seats represent a fair share
portion of high school
membership.
Those memberships are organized
based upon enrollment.
And classified into
classifications.
This piece of legislation, which
I stand in opposition to.
Legislates privilege. I would.
Question
The legislature to see if.
Running the NMA is something
that the legislature would like
to do.
However, the the NMAA formed in
1921.
It's a very successful track
record of providing
opportunities for the students.
And the student athletes.
Of New Mexico, not only do they
have athletics, they have
activities.
The, I believe in your analysis,
it does show the number of
individuals that on an annual
basis do file an appeal and the
percentage of those that are
over overturned through that due
process procedure.
This piece of legislation
undermines the very fabric of
what education but based
athletics is about.
We consistently hear from our
communities telling us we want
individuals that can function in
a team.
Identify common goals.
Pieces of legislation or the
articles identified in these
pieces of legislation.
Do exactly opposite of that.
It causes individuals to have
zero loyalty.
To jump ship when they're upset.
Thank you for your
consideration, appreciate you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, I'm
Martin Madrid, Superintendent
Santa Rosa Consolidated Schools.
I'm also currently the president
of the Superintendent
Association, and I'm also the
vice chair of the uh NMA board
of directors. Um, I think one
thing that wasn't mentioned here
that I'd like to, I, I stand in
support of all the things that
these people behind me said, so
I'm not gonna repeat those, but
the one thing that I do want to
reiterate or, or, or emphasize
is that uh I understand the
intent of Senator Maestas's bill
here, um, but I think it's
intended for metro area, the
metro area or larger schools,
and I think it's leaving out
rural districts, rural
communities that he said that
the majority of the board
represents, um, if this is
allowed to move forward or to
pass, it would make basically
schools like Santa Rosa and the
like, um, irrelevant.
Because all of a sudden you have
small schools in the metro area
who can stock up on 568 athletes
and come down and compete
against schools like Santa Rosa,
Fort Sumner, Melrose, and the
like. So I think that's
something to keep in mind is
that, uh, please protect the
rural schools.
Thank you.
Thank you. Last one in room,
please go ahead, sir. My name is
Fernie Sanchez. I'm the athletic
director at Hatch Valley High
School, um, just wanted to say,
kind of reiterate what you were
saying, taking away that ability
for us to have an influence and
be able to keep our kids at only
30 miles from Crus, we already
do see kids getting that choice,
and that's the thing we forget.
Kids already have a choice to
enroll in any school they want.
A kid gets that choice.
And we need to start having kids
at this age when they hit that
right before adulthood,
understand there's commitments
to that.
We want to teach that, we want
to teach kids to do the right
thing, changing these rules
allow kids to.
I hate to say it, but pick and
choose where they go, what's
gonna stop a kid from wanting to
play baseball at one school and
then football at another or move
that way, we're not teaching
kids to
That sense of community, one of
the things I've learned I've
grown up in New Mexico is a
sense of community, that pride
we see that disappearing every
year, and I think doing this is
only gonna make that worse,
especially in those small rural
communities. Thank you.
Thank you. We have 3 online.
Travis Dempsey, Becca Ferguson,
and Shane Ison, so.
Travis
Good morning. Can you hear me?
And so,
OK, thank you, uh, chairman,
committee members, thank you for
the opportunity. Uh, I do stand
in opposition to this bill. I'm
concerned about the impact on
Title One districts such as
myself, Gadsden, uh, could
potentially displace a, a
tremendous amount of students
and becoming a, a significant,
significantly unbalanced playing
field across our state. In
addition to the proposed changes
associated with the composition
of the Board of Education or the
board of directors.
This would place rural districts
at a significant disadvantage.
One statistic I would have
committee members consider, I
believe in the LESC's analysis,
there were over 600 appeals, 20
of those, uh,
Appeals were denied eligibility.
So that's less than 1%. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Becca Ferguson.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Vice
Chairman and members of the
Senate committee. I am Becca
Ferguson, Superintendent of
Ridoso Municipal Schools,
representing 1750 students, and
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak in opposition to Senate
bill for 65 this morning.
While the bill aims to expand
participation in school
athletics, it's unintended
consequences will undermine
academic priorities, student
well-being and competitive
fairness. Unrestricted transfers
in private school athletic
scholarships risk creating
inequities between public and
private schools. By removing
eligibility restrictions for
transfer students, Senate Bill
465 could encourage students and
families to transfer schools
primarily for athletic reasons
rather than a
m ic or community
considerations. This policy
would disproportionately benefit
families with a financial means
to relocate, deepening
socioeconomic disparities of
high school sports in New
Mexico. For these reasons, I
urge the committee to oppose
Senate Bill 465. Thank you for
your time and consideration.
Thank you. And last, Shane
Aitson.
It's and
Is Shane there?
Mm
Oh, he left, OK.
Mr.
Thank you so much, Mr. Truman.
If I may, there's a gentleman
who just finally figured out the
zoom. Can you have a minute to
speak?
We have already been through all
of the those in in support and
those in opposition so it's on
the Zoom right this second. We
went through all of you.
Thank you, and I, I thank all
the people that spoke. I, I, uh,
have tremendous respect for
everyone who spoke. They do an
awesome job, but with the
exception of two of them, there
really was no argument.
There really was no tangible
intellectual argument.
We heard about uh the impact.
We heard the words impact, we
heard.
Uh, unfairness, you know, but we
didn't really hear any arguments
except for 21 is the
displacement that local kids
will get displaced if, if, uh, a
new athlete comes in.
And then also uh a couple
arguments that
We're talking about bona fide.
Living bona fide in the
district.
A Moriarty student would have to
move to Albuquerque to play in
Albuquerque. We're not changing
those rules or those realities.
Kids don't have a choice, Mr.
Chairman. That's a misnomer.
Kids play where their parents
live. They don't have a choice
where they live, they live where
their parents live.
So they don't have a choice to
bounce around, move around. This
is not like the NCAA. This is
merely if your dad moved from
town to town, and you want to
play ball, you don't have to sit
out here, that situation with
Mr. Pavia. If Mr. Pavia, when
he, when his, he couldn't afford
well respect, he couldn't afford
to Saint Pius, so he goes to the
local school. He transfers to
the local public school. If he
was the second string holder,
nobody would have cared.
And he probably would have
played varsity, but, but because
of their athleticism, people
cared and so I just asked folks
to ask themselves.
This notion of putting someone
at a competitive disadvantage.
We need as a state to.
To, to learn how to compete. We
live in a highly complicated
21st century world and kids from
New Mexico need to learn how to
compete at the highest levels at
all time, is that will give them
the life skills to succeed.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
OK. Questions from the
committee.
Senator
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Senator Master, I, I, there are
things I do like about the bill,
and there are things I don't
like about the bill, and
Maybe if we can go down each one
of these, um,
You, you mentioned the high
school student show not be
prohibited from parting athletic
activity.
Because they participate in the
activity athletic activity while
attending a different school.
I understand that. I mean, I, my
father was military, we
transferred.
Um, we moved around quite a bit
and.
Sometimes it might be in the
middle of the school year and I
would have been prevented from
participating in sports had um
Had this been in place. And so
I, I think we should allow
students to come in, transfer
into a school.
Live in that district and should
be able to play. I also agree
with uh with C, um, seems like
there may be some reasons why
students who are participating
in club sports can't participate
in uh.
You know, uh
If they don't just in a in a
school sponsored activity, but
they have club sports, then
they're limited in how much they
can participate in the school.
And there may be some other
rationale that I'm not aware of
maybe health issues that may be
uh injury potentials because
they're playing so much that
they may, they may be at risk.
So, I understand that, but it
also points to me that if
someone was playing cup sports,
they're probably pretty good at
a particular
skill, and that's just
Adding to their ability to, to
get better.
So I wouldn't, I don't actually
have a problem with C.
Uh, summary with the a student
who participates in athletic
training camps should not be
prohibited from participating in
the school sponsored athletic.
You go to a training camp to
learn the skill. So I agree. So
that's, I guess BC and D I
actually agree with.
I started having problems with
EF and the
Offering scholarships by private
institutions, um, I think that
would have a potential impact on
rural communities quite a bit,
uh, this recruitment idea could
impact, you know, some of the
good students from, say, a
smaller school like a Moriarty,
would end up maybe the parents
would move just because they
want to give their athlete a
better opportunity for exposure
and things of that nature. So I
can see how that could impact
rural schools.
And then
Again, 8th graders participating
in high school level and keeping
their eligibility.
I, I assume there probably are
some really good talented 8th
graders. I just worry about the
injury issues and liability when
you have an 8th grader competing
with a.
Uh, the 12th grader in the same
sport level, they, they'd have
to be really good or really big
or something like that to to be
able to compete. And so I worry
about injury issues and stuff
like that. So that's my concern
and level F.
Um
And then getting back to the
membership issue on, on a, uh, I
disagree with you that having
proportional to the population
of the counties to be
represented on the board. I
think that would inappropriately
overweight the the larger
schools and the larger
districts, and, you know, we are
not a democracy. We are a
representative government, and
so more like the electoral
college, I think it'd be
inappropriate to all the rural
schools would, would, uh,
would be impacted. So,
I really don't have a question
here. I guess my, my concern was
just that
There's some things I agree with
and some things I disagree with.
I guess I'd like to hear the
rest of the committee members
and see where they lay on this,
but
But because of that, I, I think
I'm leaning away from it,
because I think it maybe this is
something we could work on over
the interim and, and possibly
get some things that everybody
would agree with. It seems a
little early at this point.
That's all I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other questions or comments
from the committee, Senator Rio.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Senator Maus, I understand. I
think what you're trying to do
here.
You are the questions I have. I
was noticing on the uh, I think.
I, I'm pretty sure it is the
FIR.
Uh, whenever it's on the 2nd
page of it whenever it's talking
about how many high school
students do.
Participate in aMAA athletics.
Uh, tell me if there is a
protest, can you tell me the
steps that they have to go
through to be before the board
and to get some sort of ruling.
Or maybe somebody from NMAA
might be able to.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
I could defer to Mr. Yang. He
could explain the protest.
And then I could respond.
I guess if we could have someone
come up, actually, if you wanna
come up and take a seat, you
need the uh question repeated?
Uh, no, I think, I think I have
it and if you could introduce
yourself again. Yeah, Dusty
Young, executive director with
the New Mexico Activities
Association and we have an
extensive process for students
that are transferring to still
try and gain eligibility. um I
think that was listed in the
analysis we have about 600
eligibility petitions that come
in for transferring schools.
About 400 of those, they, they
get approve.
Those students are gaining the
eligibility in the sports that
they're they're seeking to
participate in. For those other
200, we still have plenty of
other opportunities for them
either participating at the sub
varsity level.
Um, so they might not be able
to.
you can participate at the sub
varsity level. Also, we, we have
various committees that look at
everything on a case by case
basis. All of our rulings from
the NMAA black and white based
on the rules that we have in our
handbook. Our committees can
then look at the gray area, the,
the hardship situations, we have
a hardship committee that can
look at particular issues. We
also have an appeals committee,
so uh uh eligibility ruling
comes down from the NMAA an
appeals committee of retired
superintendents gets together,
they review all the facts, they,
they look at that gray area and
they can potentially rule in
favor.
That stern in favor of that
student overturning the NMAA's
initial ruling.
From there, we even have another
step where they can go to our
board of directors, same thing,
present their appeal to our
board of directors that board
can then also overturn the
NMAA's initial.
decision, um, one step further,
plenty of due process, even
there are some cases that go
past our board of directors to
the public education department,
the Secretary of Education, she
has a committee that reviews
these situations and they can
come back with a ruling as well.
So there, there are plenty of
mechanisms already in place to
try and provide eligibility as
often as possible.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator, great
question. I would just kind of
ask us to think a little bit
more about the math.
If there's 600 folks, 600
families that are appealing. How
many families didn't appeal.
How many families literally
chose not to move to that new
town and take that new job
because of this rule.
then the the the the allowing
them to play junior varsity.
That
On its head, the displacement
argument.
So you can displace a JV kid,
but it's OK, but you can't
displace a varsity kit. It, it's
because
It's because of this notion of
competitive advantage.
You know, we, we can't, uh.
It's difficult to legislate
fairness without being unfair to
those individuals, and then
lastly, after you exhaust all
appeals.
If your family has the economic
means they can hire a lawyer and
go to district court, and I
don't know.
I think it's 5 straight or 7
straight district court rulings
have gone against the NMAA and
the judges are like freaking out
saying,
Why aren't you laying this kid
play?
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for that.
I do have a question going back
to Mr. Young. You said a lot of
these students do come in and
they're able to play varsity
level, I mean junior varsity
level.
My problem that I have with what
you're proposing right here is
allowing 8th graders to play
with seniors.
Because basically that's what it
says student in the 8th grade is
eligible to participate in the
high school athletic activity
without losing a season of
eligibility to participate in
that athletic.
In in their school.
I do have a problem with that
because lots of 8th graders have
not fully matured yet. I do have
a problem right there.
Um, Mr. Young or let's see what
was that one.
Would this be applicable, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Young and
Senator Maest just to
cheerleading.
Mr. Chairman Senator though,
yes.
Chair, Mr. Chairman and senator
and Mr. Young would be
applicable to a dance tape.
Chairman Senator, yes, all that,
all activities, the bill
addresses athletic activities,
but the transfer rules deal with
all activities. OK, but it has
to be school sponsored or
filled. That's what, that's what
your bill says.
Mr. Chairman says shall not be
prohibited from participating in
school sponsored activities
cause still student participate
in athletic at activity or on an
athletic team that was not
school sponsored or affiliated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator,
so that deals with the, the
notion of club ball or a non uh
high school team. It's my
understanding if you play a 10
games of club ball, you have to
sit out 10 games of your high
school team and that contradicts
the whole notion of sense of
community playing with your
childhood friends.
Uh, you know, it, it just, it's
just unfair. You should be able
to participate in anything
outside of your school.
Why should that prohibit you
from participating in school
activities, that should be a
choice of the coach and the and
the athlete and the team.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Senator, if I can.
Just wanted to give
Get clarification on that club
ball question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, senators.
Uh, so our provision is strictly
for the high school sports
season, the high school seasons
are, you know, 234 months long,
where all of our, all our
provision does there is state,
we don't want our kids to
establish overuse injuries.
We're trying to protect those
kids. Uh, we have our state or
our baseball and softball
seasons just started. Uh, those
are a little over 2.5 months
that that those programs are
running. We don't want kids to
be competing in, you know,
baseball and softball outside of
high school.
because it could be detrimental
to them when it comes to
overuse, especially in a sport
like baseball with pitching. So,
so those are the examples we
use. We don't prohibit it year
long outside of the high school
season, they can do whatever
they want. They can play as many
club games as they want. It's
strictly just during the high
school season that we ask those
kids to commit to their
programs, doesn't mean they
can't go play club ball, just
means that if they do, we still
want them to stick to that 26
game limitation for for sports
like baseball and softball.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Maestas
and Mr. Young.
Back in the last century, I am
bringing that up, some of these
people know what I'm talking
about.
Back in the last century and
this is going back lots of years
whenever I was in high school,
girls were not allowed to
participate in any type of
sports.
Even though as a member of the
gymnastics team, even though I
was a cheerleader, go articia
Bulldogs.
I had to get in that plug right
there.
But we did go to cheerleading
camp, we
It were not
Recognized by the school system
at that time until we came back
from that camp.
As far as competing in
gymnastics, the school did have
to recognize that we were part
of a team that were going to be
representing Artesia High School
in these activities. So whenever
I'm seeing that
How times have changed because
right now I do in my particular
district.
There is a team.
That has gone on to national.
And so would they be prohibited
then from coming back if this
bill passes, but they.
They would be able to go ahead
and represent that school
locally or statewide. Is that
correct? even though they have
gone on to nationals.
Mr. Chairman, if
Senator, if this bill passes,
no, they wouldn't be prohibited,
but maybe Mr. Young can explain
the current rules.
Yeah, so we, we have a current
bylaw in place that says if you
disenroll from your school and
attend a specialized sports
academy or camp.
Uh, it's just to be disenrolled
from your school then when you
come back, you're essentially a
transfer student again. So if
you stay enrolled in your school
and go and attend these camps or
specialized training, whatever
that might be, and you can still
play for that school that you're
currently enrolled in. So, so
that's already allowed.
So Mr. Chairman and Mr. Young, I
guess my question is, if there
is a team that is affiliated
with the school that does earn
the prestige of being able to
compete nationally.
Are they not going to be?
clarify that for me. So they,
they would come back and be
eligible just like they were
before they left. That's what I
wanted to make sure of.
And Mr. Chairman and
Sinus, I also.
Let's see, here we go.
I'm assuming that a lot of these
things that might be.
Questionable might go before the
local board, is that correct
before they went on, if there
was an appeal process uh before
the end of my A, is that correct
right now?
Either one, either one, I don't
care, Mr. Chairman, um.
No I appreciate Mr. Young
answering these questions as
well. um, Mr. Chairman Senator,
the NMAA board.
Is the law.
It decides.
All of these things as it
relates to.
Public education in the state of
New Mexico and so if, if you
wish to um
To appeal, you appeal to the
lawmaker, which is the board of
the NMAA. OK, Mr. Young. Just to
expand on that, so our board of
directors does receive various
proposals to, to all of our
bylaws through throughout the
year. Once our board of
directors approves that, it goes
back out to our membership for a
vote. So the board isn't the
final say. It goes to our member
school administrators, every one
of our member schools has a vote
on those particular rules.
OK, but like I said, if there's
problem to begin with.
The student or the student's
parents might be able to appeal
first to the local.
School board and then it would
go on up the, no.
No,
so reminder to everyone, let's
make sure to go through the
chair.
Mr. Chair.
Um, so Mr. Chair, thank you. So,
so any petition or protest to an
NMAA rule or regulation that
comes in, um, it depends upon if
it comes from a student or a
school, but in an eligibility
situation, uh, what it would go
to our appeals committee first
and then to our, our board of
directors from there and then to
the possibly the PED.
OK. So, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Maestus said Mr. Young,
I, I, I'm reading here that the
core values are still based
around education.
Education-based athletics and
activities.
That's, that's the crux of what
your job is. Is that correct,
Mr. Young?
Mr. Chair, senators, that is
correct. OK.
Mr. Chairman
The proportional representation,
I think the way it's set up
right now is.
It could use a little bit of
tweaking.
But whenever we do have the
bigger counties that.
Are represented in what the
makeup is whenever there is one
particular county that might
have 5 high schools in it and
another county that is hard
pressed to make up 18.
We do have to look at the rural
aspect of it, but I think that
the way it's population is made
up of the board.
I think that the adjustments
there needs to stay like they
are, Mr. Chairman, thank you
very much. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Ramos. Mr.
Chairman, thank you so much,
Senator. Thank you for bringing
this bill in front of us. There
are a few items on, uh, you
know, like C and D, I think that
we really need to discuss. I
don't think this bill is ready
for us. I, I really feel that uh
we, we really need to discuss a
lot of these items in the
interim, and therefore, that
being said, I moved to the
table.
Alright
Abel is
All the rolling.
Senator Senator Boone,
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, sender Hickey.
No
Cinder Nova, yes, Ciner Ramos,
yes, Senator Thornton.
Yes, the table.
Senator Pope
Yes.
And her soul.
Oh, excuse.
The
Senator May this year bill has
been tabled 7 yeses on the table
and.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
members really appreciate the
dialogue and the folks who
showed up today as everyone uh
appreciate Mr. Young and all the
work that NMA does. Thank you.
Thank you.
So next up, we have Senate bill.
Or 80
Student graduation reporting.
Will be presented by Senator
Nava.
And when you're ready, Senator
Nava, you have the.
And Senator Nova from my
understanding, we have a
committee substitute on this
bill, OK.
And so if we could get a
being handed out or
Right.
That's
I'm gonna, if we can get a
I think you did, you know, it
was a good motion, but I think
usually we do the do not pass on
the
Do not pass on Senate Bill 40
and
A do pass on Senate bill
Committee substitute first.
I'm still, I still, I'm still
learning.
Uh, Senator Nava, you have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, thank you
very much for uh having us
today. Uh, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, New Mexico's
graduation rate has hovered over
between 75 and 80% since 2016.
In typical senior cohorts of
just under 30,000 students, this
rate means approximately 6000
students who do not graduate
from high school every year.
Over a five-year period, the
equivalent of the entire
statewide senior class leaves
high school without a diploma.
Every year we appropriate
millions of dollars to our
institutions of higher education
and work for solutions to
implement programming that
provides pathways for our
students who may not have
graduated from high schools, um,
our public schools also offer
re-engagement programming for
students who may not have
succeeded, uh, who may not be
succeeding in a typical
classroom to try to get those
students to graduation.
These programs, high school
diploma re-engagement, high
school equivalency and workforce
credentialing are all
extraordinarily important in
providing pathways for future
success for our students who
have struggled.
The problem is that all these
programs have no centralized
list of students from which
students, from which they can
recruit, meaning that they have
to do a blanket advertising and
recruiting to a large group of
young people and hope that they
will raise their hand to
participate.
That seems very inefficient, um,
so I've introduced the committee
sub for Senate Bill 480.
Which would require that every
summer, the PED create a list of
all students who were in high
school and any of the last 4
years who did not graduate
within those 4 years. That list
would be available for the
higher education department,
post-public secondary
educational institutions, school
districts or charter schools in
New Mexicoba adult basic
education providers or workforce
development programs that
provide programming for out of
cohort students attaining a high
school diploma, a high.
high school equivalency
credential or workforce
credentials.
The hope is that with a specific
list of students to recruit from
these programs can be even more
successful than they've been in
the past and we can streamline
enrollment in, uh, enrollment in
the program.
Uh, I want to really highlight
Mr. Chairman and members, um,
that what this bill really does
is it holds, folks accountable
and it creates opportunities for
our students who may have
struggled. We all know that the
folks who end up dropping out
are at risk populations, um,
that precisely reflect low
income students, foster care
students, and students with
disabilities and we pulled some
numbers of graduation.
rates for these uh cohorts and
economically disadvantaged
students stand at 69.7%. Foster
students graduate at a 45% and
English language learners
graduate at 74.9%. And I will
tell you members, um, and Mr.
Chairman, um, as a first
generation college graduate, um,
as a community college graduate,
um, and I say you proud UNM
Lobo. I know that opportunities
matter, and I know that getting
that.
information to our parents and
to our communities and to our
students really is important,
um, and we need a more efficient
way in which to do that. I, uh,
would also, Mr. Chairman, would
like to introduce uh my expert
witness, Carrie Brender's right
here next to me.
Um, hello, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder. I do represent
public charter schools of New
Mexico, but we wanna be really
clear this is not a charter
school bill. Um, we actually
just had a brainstorming
conversation over the summer
where we were talking about all
of our students who may be
leaving high school before they
received their diploma, um, and
all of the different programs
that we want to be doing a
better job at connecting
students to, and one of the
things that came up was, well.
We don't even have a list of who
those students are, so we can't
do direct outreach to those
students to say, hey, this maybe
will work for you in a more
comprehensive way, um, so we
touched base with with some of
the community colleges and they
were like, yeah, we don't, we
don't have a list either, um,
some of the workforce, uh,
programs that come out of
workforce solutions and so this
kind of just became like a.
Why aren't we already doing this
idea, um, it would be very
simple. The PED every summer
would do just that. They would
release directory information to
the programs who request it, so
that those programs would have
addresses and telephone numbers
of those students and could do
direct outreach to them and say
this may work for you. Are you
interested in coming and really
closes that loop, um, even as
the LFC analysis, the
independent community college
analysis says where.
Those students will know what
those opportunities are versus
just kind of this blanket, uh,
advertisement that we have to do
right now, so, uh, we think this
is a bill that would help a lot
of different people, um, really
just came out of one of those
brainstorming sessions. So happy
to answer any technical
questions that you all have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Carrie. Uh, we stand, we
yield for any questions.
Thank you, Senator, for those
out in the crowd were once again
on Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480.
In the committee room. Do you
have anyone in support of this
bill?
You could start lining up for
public comment.
Have any online?
Do we have any opposition?
In the online?
All right.
You have 2 minutes, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Paul with Public
Charter Schools of New Mexico.
This is not a charter school
bill, but charter schools are
supportive of it. Um, for a very
long time since I've been
working in education since 2005.
We've accepted that 1 in 5 kids
won't get across the finish
line. That's our 6th year
graduation rate. I did a quick
count, don't check my math. I'm
glad the chair is not here, but
there's about 25 folks in this
room. That means 5 wouldn't get
it across the finish line. It's
sizable.
And we feel the impacts every
day in our economy and our crime
rates, and a lot of uh arenas.
Charter schools are one of the
primary interventions. We have
15 of our 99 charter schools are
focused on dropout
re-engagement.
They would all appreciate um a
list that helps them target,
target their recruitment to help
serve kids and re-engage them
with meaningful education and
help them get a high school
diploma. So we support the bill,
we think the sponsor for it, um,
and we urge you to pass. Thank
you.
Thank you. Morning, Chairman
Pope, members of Senate
Education Committee, Vanessa
Hawker, I'm the executive
director for the New Mexico
Independent Community Colleges
and we serve so many
non-traditional students. We
know for New Mexico that there
is a significant number of
Working, excuse me, young adults
who are not working, we lose
them somewhere when they leave
high school.
Not making it into the
workforce.
If we had this list, so we could
do some targeted reaching out to
prospective students that we can
help them obtain their high
school equivalency, continue
working with them through
workforce training so they can
get good jobs. We, we think this
is something that would be
helpful to the entire state of
New Mexico and we thank the
sponsor for bringing the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Kelly Fajardo,
and I'm here on behalf of Mexico
Kids can, and we aly support
Senate Bill 480. Unfortunately,
we know that so many kids um
don't finish school, but they're
smart enough to
To have a career. They just
don't, don't know the pathway.
We know that many students
aren't finding what they need,
and this gives them a chance to
re-engage, earn a diploma, get a
trade, do something, and
eventually fulfill their dreams.
This bill, this bill will make
it easier for them to to do
that, and we had asked for your
support.
Thank you. There is no
opposition in the room or
online, um.
There is an opposition, but just
want to give you a chance,
Senator Nova, if there's any.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you members. Um, I think I would
just amplify uh the importance
of information, especially when
we think about those who are uh
dropping out and when we think
of lack of access, lack of
resources, first generation
students, um, and the
difficulties in acquiring and
even understanding some of the
resources that exist for our
communities. Not everyone has
the same, um, ability to go to
their parents to get the
resources that they need, um,
but I think this would really.
Push it to a next level to
ensure that students know that
there are 2 opportunities that
there are 3rd opportunities that
there are a variety of choices.
If it's not, you know, if they
don't want to go to a higher uh
4 year institution. Maybe they
want to do a tech, uh, a tech,
uh, you know, um, career, so I
think I would just amplify the
importance of ensuring that we
get students the resources and
the opportunities that they all
deserve. Thank you.
We stand for questions.
Thank you. First up, we have
Senator I. If you want to get on
the list, let me know, Sennario.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator No my question was
whenever I asked this to move
the committee substitute, I
wanted to know what the changes
were in this, and as of yet I
haven't heard it, so let's,
let's get after it, girls.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and our senator
Eel. Uh, so the first one is on
page one, line 24 and 25, we
inserted directory information
for all of ah for all out of
cohort students so that it's
specific about the kind of
information that could be
released. That's important under
FERPA because under FERPA you
are allowed to release directory
information, it's not protected
information, so that um resolved
any concerns about FERPA. The
second change is on.
2, line 1 and 2.
Uh, instead of the immediately
proceeding one year, we entered
the immediately preceding 4
school years. I'm sorry, say
that again. So on page 21 and 2,
the originals Bill said, uh, a
public school in any in the
immediately preceding year. We
added any one of the immediately
preceding 4 school years so that
we're capturing on a rolling
basis, right? Students who were
in high school for those 4 years
and then maybe didn't finish.
Um, also on page 2 line 3, we
inserted upon request.
The department would provide the
report before it was just they
would have to provide the report
to everyone. We made it clear
that this was an affirmative
action, someone had to request
the information.
Then on line 6 and 7, we
inserted New Mexico-based adult
basic education providers, this
new Mexico base was important to
make sure we don't just have
these large out of state
companies coming in and trying
to, you know, kind of mine for
this information. It's our
homegrown programs.
And then also on page 29, we
answer, we inserted high school
diploma because the original
just said a high school
equivalency or workforce
credentials, and we do have
traditional schools that are
working for a high school
diploma.
So that's the difference, but.
I, I think she might be confused
on the bill and the.
Language that she has on page 2
starting on uh line 9 on the
amendment.
In line 8 on the original pill,
I'm, I'm sorry.
You, you have,
and, and Mr. Chairman and
Senator, that's where we entered
a workforce credentials as well
here. Um, and that was important
for workforce solutions and
those workforce training
programs to make sure that
students who may have left high
school, we also wanna be able to
do that direct recruitment for
those programs that are really
working on those students to get
them their workforce
credentials. That was the
addition there.
And you're correct. I, I
did Chairman and
Senator Nova, I do appreciate
what you adding those words to
the workforce credentials are
very important. We do have
children that do need to get out
in the workforce. So whenever
they have a certificate that
says, yes, I'm an apprentice and
I have done it for this many
years with electrician, a
plumber, whatever the case may
be. To me, that's very
important.
Mr. Chairman, my question is on
page one of your bill.
Whenever you're adding um.
The directory information.
It's PED on board with that.
Uh
Mr. Chairman and Senator Azel.
We heard in their FIR that they
wanted to be clear that this
would be FERPA compliant and in
order to be FERPA compliant
directory information is the
kind of information that we
needed to specify so that that
did not run afoul of FERPA. So I
believe that this insertion
clears up any concern that they
may have had, but I think PED is
here,
so I won't speak for that.
If you would come up
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mister Chair and
Senator Riel. um.
So, I will say that any time,
any identical and any
identifiable information is
released regarding students.
Um, there is.
Concern of
From the department that that
information is protected.
So any information that could
personally identify a student,
we would want to ensure has been
shared under a data sharing
agreement, so that entities
understand.
How to uh.
Properly use that information
and and guard it.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, and the reason
I'm asking about PED if they are
on board.
With all this that is going to
take place, Mr. Chairman, if
memory serves me right.
I think this has been.
15 years ago.
Representative Nora Espinoza
carried a bill that did further
the training for those.
Students may be that did leave
school, but they're they're
cohorts.
Might be of the age appropriate
with them.
be able to take these classes.
Are you aware of the bill I'm
talking about?
Chairman and Senator, I remember
that bill, um, I was still
in-house at Albuquerque Public
schools at that time, but yes, I
remember that legislation.
So how, how is that relating to
what we're trying to do right
here, Mr. Chairman and
Sinnova,
Mister Chairman and Senator,
students who are out of cohort,
number one, we're clear that
these uh.
These students are often going
into different programs and just
the traditional school programs.
I, I remember representative uh
Espinosa's concern was, you
know, she, she felt it was very
inappropriate for a 13 year old
student to be sitting in the
same classroom as a 21 year old
student, right? But the way that
reengagement programs are
working currently by and large
is if someone is
Past the age of 18, they're not
a senior anymore. They're going
to an alternative program.
They're either doing adult basic
education at a community
college, uh, if they're at a
charter school that's doing a
re-engagement program, that
charter school is created to
capture older students, right?
It is not the 13 year old
sitting in the same classroom as
a 22 year old, so I think that
the system has been created in a
way where that's not happening
anymore, so this bill doesn't
change that.
And would make sure that these
separate programs are programs
that have been specifically
designed as it says in the bill
to be working with students who
are out of cohort, who are those
older students.
Thank you for that, and Mister
Chairman, at this time I'd like
to move and do not pass for
Senate Bill 480, but they do
pass.
For Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480.
But we have a due pass from
Senator Diesel, a second from
Senator Ramos.
Just on the on.
And so I'll just hold that. Do
we have any other questions or
comments?
Looks like Senator Thorn.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
just one question here.
So these uh again back to the
information that's provided in
this directory. So will this
information, I assuming name.
Contact address, um.
What other information may be
included in this, in this
directory.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, under FERPA
directory information has a
specific definition and its
name, address, and phone number
and any uh dates in which you
attended school.
Um, I think that PED is
absolutely correct, a data
sharing agreement will be
absolutely appropriate. We do
those all the time between
different institutions when any
of this information is being
shared, and I think that that
standard that's already been set
is if I'm Santa Fe Community
College and I request this list
of out of cohort students. I
would be provided that directory
information under the definition
of FERPA, but I would have to
enter into that data sharing
agreement as PED operationalizes
this.
to make sure Santa Fe Community
College isn't then turning
around and let's say selling
that data to someone else,
right? That's something that the
data agreement would prohibit.
Got you. Thank you, thank you
for that. That's, that was my
question.
Thank you, Senator. I just have
one quick question before we
take the vote, um, I, I think
this is a great bill for
programs. Do we have that list
or are we gonna compile that and
just
We're really reaching out, just
give.
It's
students really.
Mr. Chairman and Senator Pope,
that's a great question, so
workforce training programs have
to be registered with workforce
solutions so that they meet
specific, uh, you know,
standards, um, so do adult basic
education programs so that we
know that their curriculum and
their programming is meeting the
state standards, um, I, so all
of that is already taken care of
in another place, and we do have
a list through those different
departments of who those
programs are that have become
register
er ed with the state so that
they can be using our state
dollars that we have in the
budget to actually provide this
programming to students. So
those lists are housed in those
different places.
Thank you.
With that, Mary, we'll go ahead
and take the role on committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480.
Sender Boone.
Sendriel.
Sander Figueroa. Yes.
Hickey
Senator No
Yes.
And Ramos. Yes. Sarah Thornton.
Yes, Scier Pope, yes, tender
souls. Yes.
And Senator, you have a due
pass.
8 yeses, 1 excused.
Congratulations.
And just for those in the room
on online, the next bill we're
gonna do, we're gonna skip 1,
uh, 490, we're gonna do house
bill 69 loan forgiveness
multiplier Act with
Representative Garrett.
And you may begin when you're
ready. Representative Garrett,
welcome to Senate Education.
Mr. Chairman, are we rolling
bill 490 or just not hearing it
right now we're just not uh
we're just not hearing it right
now. I will be presenting for
it.
Good morning. uh, Mr. Chair, by
the way, Senate Bill 82
unanimously passed. So thank
you. Um, I'm presenting a House
Bill 69 loan forgiveness
multiplier Act.
In 2023, it passed all of its
committees, including this
committee, it was the next bill
that was to be heard on the
Senate floor.
But the session ended and it
wasn't heard, so I'm happy to
present it today, should we have
any details that need to be
identified online. I have Amy
Chulata, the outreach and
advocacy manager for the student
borrowers protection Center.
Uh, Senate Bill 69, um, is the
public service loan forgiveness,
uh, multiplier act, the public
service loan forgiveness or PSLF
is a federal program that
provides federal student debt
relief to public service workers
who worked in public service and
paid their loans for 10 years.
Uh, every month they make them.
It was enacted by Congress
originally in 2007, the first
group of borrowers were eligible
for cancellation in 2017, 98% of
those who applied were denied
because of the complicated and
confusing requirements.
Um, public service workers often
did not know they were eligible,
they weren't notified and they
that they were eligible and
sometimes employers refuse to
certify employment. This fixes
that, the Biden administration
made several changes to make it
accessible to non-tenure track.
Um, contingent or adjunct
employees at institutions of
higher education and stated
their approval that you could
calculate the number of hours
that you work by multiplying
each credit or class hour by
multiplier of at least 3.35
because you have to have worked
30 hours a week to qualify for
forgiveness, uh, previously,
many adjunct and contingent
faculty.
were unable to qualify because
schools would only certify the
exact 3 hour course, not
counting office hours,
preparation time, rating time
and all the things that
instructor actually does.
So the PSL, uh, the PSLF bill
tackles, those two common
issues, uh, and insists that
there be a the awareness of the
program be shared so it mandates
a multiplier 4.35 hours to
calculate the hour's work, um,
mandates institutions to certify
employment in a timely fashion
so that people can get their
paperwork done, and it mandates
that public service employers,
particularly in this case, our.
Higher education institutes
share the information annually
with their employees, uh, and
with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative.
In the room, do we have anyone
in support of House Bill 69.
You can start making your way to
the front.
public comment, uh, you'll have
2 minutes and we have a few
online. Do we have any in
opposition?
All right, seeing none. Any
online in opposition?
You can go ahead and begin with
public comment. You have 2
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is John
Durch. I'm with the American
Federation of Teachers in New
Mexico and um this bill was
heard in 2023, made it almost
across the finish line. Uh, the
spill is important because it
underscores something for
contingent and adjunct
instructors in our higher
education institutions that is
similar to what we're familiar
with in K-12 settings, and
that's the the hours in the
classroom are only a fraction of
what instructors spend, um,
working with their students,
advising their students, doing
grading, doing course
preparation.
So what this bill aims to do,
uh, in a helpful way is to help
calculate all those other hours
spent by educators outside of
the classroom, so that if they
are eligible for uh service loan
forgiveness, they're able to
discharge those loans under
these federal programs and a
quicker and more accurate way.
So we do urge your support once
again for House Bill 69, as this
committee did support this bill
in 2023. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, uh, representing over
40,000 workers throughout the
state and the public and private
sector, um, you know, at the
very core of this bill, we, we
applaud the effort for loan
forgiveness for all public
sector workers, that is an
essential piece to getting
people to work in the public
sector as we know, that is uh
something that is desperately
needed nowadays, so anything to
make that easier is great, but
in the
specific case, um, as was stated
by the previous speaker, we are
in full support and stand in
strong solidarity with our uh
educators in the higher
education world and believe that
our adjunct professors should,
uh, have this opportunity to get
this loan forgiveness. We thank
the sponsor and urge your
support.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, uh, my name's Edward
Webster. I'm the government
relations director with uh NEA
New Mexico. Um, I don't want to
take up any more time. I second
with John and John said, uh, we
support this bill. We thank the
sponsor for bringing it forth.
Uh, please vote yes on HB 69.
Thank you.
Thank you. We don't have any,
anyone in opposition or anyone
online and support or against,
you do have your expert online.
I think we'll we'll just go to
your expert.
So with that, we'll go to uh
committee members with any
questions or comments.
I'd move a new pass.
Do we have a second?
We have a due pass from Senator
Souls in a second. Senator
Figueroa.
You can take the role, Mary.
Questions
Sender Boone.
Sendel
Senator Figueroa.
Yes.
And Hickey?
Senator Nova.
Yes.
Senator Ramos.
Thornton
Yes.
Sendder Pope. Yes.
Senator back to Senator Boone.
Yes
Signature souls. Yes.
have to.
Congratulations, Representative.
You have a due pass.
Thank you very much
7 yeses and.
And with that, I'm gonna go
ahead and give the chairmanship
back to Senator Soz.
OK, and Senator, we're doing
Senate Bill 490 Central New
Mexico school re-engagement
programs that you're presenting
for Senator Lopez.
Well he's coming down, I believe
the floor is at 11:30, so we've
got, we're doing fine, that
doesn't mean we have to take all
the time.
Just kidding, you actually you
this team is doing very well. I
appreciate that. Senator,
please, whenever you're ready.
So, uh
Mr. Chair, committee members,
um, I know I have a verbal
amendment and I think Mary's
gonna pass those out. I don't
know if we want to start with
the bill or start with.
Senator, is this
Pertinent to understanding the
bill uh you wanna talk about the
bill first or we can move the
amendment. I, I, I would, I
think moving the amendment just
makes it a little easier.
OK,
and I, uh, but we passed out
just so everybody kind of
understands what we're doing.
Verbal amendment or SB 490.
Yes, and so what would happen is
page one.
Line 12 in the title we're
removing central.
Um, and replacing that with the
counties of Bernao, Sandoval,
Torrance, and Valencia.
And then page 1 line 19.
We are striking central.
Again, and then including the
counties of Bernard Leo
Sandoval, Torrance, and
Valencia.
Thank you. Is everybody
understand find where that is.
Any questions on the amendment.
Motion to move the.
motion.
So Nava moved moved approval of
the amendment seconded by
Senator Ramos. Is there any
opposition to the amendment?
Seeing no opposition, the bill
is amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senate
Bill 490 appropriates 200,000
for the general fund.
To the workforce solutions
department for evidence-based
school re-engagement programs
for youth and in the counties
of.
and Valencia.
In school re-engagement programs
help students at the greatest
risk of dropping out.
And, and helps them show up,
reconnect and graduate from high
school.
Also, they're able to further
their education.
Your career and life
opportunities and improves
graduation rates.
For the past 18 years
re-engagement programs have
helped improve the lives and
futures of thousands of high
school students in New Mexico,
and currently,
There are programs in
Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, the
Pueblo Zuni.
This program is evidence-based
and has proven successful in
helping New Mexico students
overcome barriers to graduation.
The average graduation for jobs
for re-engagement graduates in
New Mexico over the last 10
years is 96%.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, I'm
ready for public comment and
questions from the committee.
OK, first, I was in the audience
in support.
Is anyone in opposition?
Stan, if you'd like to.
96%, did you hear that?
Mr. Chairman, stand rounds for
the school superintendents.
Had a program like this in in
Las Cruces, New Mexico. Mr.
Chairman, as you're aware, we
found that dealing with students
in this regard always has a high
percentage graduation, a high
percentage payback, so Mr.
Chairman, we believe this is the
kind of investment we need to
make in public schools and we
stand in support. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room?
Anyone online?
Anyone in opposition.
Not questions from the
committee.
$100.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. uh.
It weirdly feels very aligned
with the one that I just
presented, so this is sort of
the face B, um, almost, uh, my
only question, uh, Mr. Chairman
and Senator, is uh how the
counties were selected since I
know that they were amended, uh,
which I very much appreciate
because that expands to the both
of the counties that I represent
and just was wondering how they
were uh prioritized.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Nava, I
don't know if I give you the
precise answer. I think um when
they originally had on the
central New Mexico and I think I
believe the thought was to just
really target uh these areas
that did not have this program
or needed the resources. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you Mr. Chair. um, I'm
wondering if the sponsor could
give a couple examples of
programs or is it a specific
program that we are talking
about.
Mr. um, chair, Senator Figueroa,
um, I believe it might be more
than one program, but I know one
program.
Um
Mr. Chair and sponsor for the
people who are listening who
don't know, I appreciate it cuz
I do know what is the jag
program.
Mr. Chair, Senator, and I
apologize. I, I know about the
program, but I'm can't even
think of the
Acronym right now, um.
But I'm looking it up right now
on my phone.
To show how fast I am.
Um
And the program is Jobs for
America's graduates, uh, here in
New Mexico, and it's really a
youth-led school career and
community program. I've had the
opportunity to
Speak, um.
To one of these classrooms at
Rio Grande High School and um
some other substituting as well.
Um, it really just engages
students and finds ways to
really.
Um, see what they're lacking or
what they're not interested in
and and really finding a path
for them to really uh complete
their education. So, um, I
found, I found it to be a great
program to get students engaged
and really just complete their.
High school curriculum and
get their diploma.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
sponsors, so these programs
happen at.
Secondary school sites.
Um, because the money is going
to work for solutions, it's kind
of a weird path to end up at his
school site or are these
programs happening elsewhere.
Uh, Mr. Chair Senator, um,
unfortunately, I don't know if I
can answer that specifically
since I'm covering this bill,
but I know it would be going
through Workforce solutions, but
um, the programs would be
happening.
Also, from my understanding that
the schools set.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for covering this bill for
sponsor. I just realized that I
had to poke you for a specifics.
Um, thanks, Mr. Chair.
No problem.
Thank you. Other question,
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chair,
Senator, why isn't PD paying for
this? Why is the 200,000?
Contained in this bill
reoccurring from the general
fund.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I, uh,
I can't answer that question,
but um this would be an
appropriation outside of.
What we have in the budget and
not covered by a program
currently in PED, but.
I think that's a great question
that.
Established through PED and.
Maybe some type of reoccurring.
That's all I got.
Senator, we were all looking at
you.
Senator Thornton.
Uh
I, I think this is good bill,
good it seemed strangely aligned
with Senator Nova's bill, and
almost, it, it, it, it almost
seems like that they should have
been combined, uh, and it would
have been a direct relationship,
but, um, but I think this is a
good bill going forward. I, I
too was curious about the 200,
200K, it's not quite clear.
If it's going, it seems it's
going directly to uh
To the
workforce solutions group.
Um
And it, it seems like, given the
fact that we think that we're
trying to identify those
students who didn't graduate and
get them into a new programs
that would re-engage them, um,
it seems like it probably should
be coming out of PED maybe in
the future or something like
that. So, um,
But I, I think the, the program
looks like it's directly
oriented toward what we just
approved, so, so I'm gonna
support it. Thank you very much.
I would say Mr. Chair and
Senator Thornton, I think you're
right, but I think there's also
the piece of this where.
There's also gonna be students
here who do graduate and then
after we're kind of following
them. So, um, little.
Uh, some of the pool is similar
of students, but some are a
little different.
Other questions or at the
committee, please.
The result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Going back to what
A senator Ramos just said.
Whenever we're talking about
these particular counties of
Burnleyo Sandoval torrents of
Valencia.
What would happen and I hate to
put you on the spot, senator,
but I would like uh response
from PED over this. What if
other counties want to do this
too are we each gonna have to
come back and say I want it for
to have E Lee Lincoln and Otero
counties would I have to come
back and request that funding as
well?
Mr. Chair, Senator and I'd allow
you to
Of course, you can SPD their
opinions on this.
I know this is an appropriation
outside of uh what the PED is
doing. Um, we have targeted
these counties, um, and I think
I think what would probably need
to happen, I, I think Senator
Lopez would probably be amenable
to say how do we expand this
program and
different counties and so more
New Mexico students can really
take advantage of this. And we
do have someone for PED here.
And I don't mean to put you on
the spot, but I'm kind of
curious.
You, Mr. Chairman and senators
I,
I like to introduce myself. My
name is.
Jacqueline Sanchez, um, and I'm
the acting deputy director of
policy and legislative affairs
at PED.
Uh, one answer to your question.
Mr. Chairman and senator is that
funding does exist concurrently
for several CTE programs that,
uh, do fit in well with by the
bill.
Uh, that is available statewide.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Miss Senator.
Miss Sanchez
Whenever I see that it's a
recurring expense.
I'm, I'm just kind of curious
because with the amount of money
that we do put towards PED.
These are students that have
currently been in the system.
Now they're not, but now they're
gonna be coming back in and do
you think that $200,000 could
not be found in PED to get this
covered instead of coming out of
the general fund as a recurring
expense.
Senator, um, and Mr. Chair.
The way that I would answer that
question would be that there
there have been similar.
Funding streams proposed uh to
flow to workforce solution.
Uh, there are a couple of other
bills this year that have been
proposed, um, for similar
programs. And I do believe that.
The reason was to target those
uh those individuals.
are not concurrently in the
system.
Um, I do believe that.
Uh, the appropriation could flow
to PET as well.
Um, and
And I may also have to do a
little research. Mr. Chairman.
And
Senator Emma Sanchez.
I know that the workforce
solutions department does have
an employment have an
unemployment insurance program,
but once again I see that once
we get this program started.
That it would be an ongoing
effort to make sure that these
students that might have
discontinued.
Their education through the
public school department.
Go on with things like this that
are gonna be.
Uh, taking place in Burnleyo
Sandoval torrents and Valencia
County, but it also raises my
concern about.
If you're gonna do it for one,
why aren't we doing it for all
and I know it's the amendment
does state those four particular
counties.
It's so, like I said earlier, if
this is the case, why couldn't I
carry a bill next year doing the
same thing for Southeastern New
Mexico. Therefore, I do have a
problem with that. I understand
what you're trying to do here.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, but
golly.
We do need theportunities for
him. We do need them to build
their skills, we do need them to
be ready to make.
Make a job application.
But
I'm also reading these programs
can be particularly impactful in
central part of the state.
What the hell is wrong with the
rest of the state. You're
leaving out the rural areas of
our state and I have a problem
with that. I cannot support this
bill. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Other questions
Will of the committee.
Move for a due pass motion for a
due pass, seconded by Sin or
Nava, you'll call the roll,
please.
Sender boom, no.
No.
In Figueroa.
Yes
said Hickey.
Center Nova, yes.
Center Ramos.
No.
Senator Thornton.
Yes.
Sender Pope
Yes.
Cinder souls. Yes, so you have a
do pass on a 53 vote.
Chair.
Thank you committee members, and
thanks for giving me a little
practice on.
A bill that was in mind. Thank
you.
Uh, Sir Gonzalez or a
Representative Gonzalez or
Sarana.
The
OK, I know we're trying to, to.
Uh, yes, if you would like.
And sit in for her, that'll
work.
I saw her op in for a moment and
then left and.
Yeah, OK.
time of year.
And to see who's in the room and
which bills.
Really?
Right.
Almost perfect timing, we just
finished the other bill. Thank
you for coming back.
So let you get settled a little
bit, but House Bill 297 as
ainda, the school personnel,
computer science licensure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee um House Bill 297, um,
is just a bill that simply
expands on current um computer
science education endorsement
procedures. It expands the
pathways and that that
endorsement can be obtained, um,
and it does expand on the
licensure types.
That can be like that that
person that the teacher can have
to get this endorsement, um,
with that, I would like to
introduce my expert witness, uh,
Paige Prescott with the Computer
Science Alliance for her to
continue.
Thank you, Representative
Gonzalez, um, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, and Paige
Prescott, I have a, I'm with an
education nonprofit Computer
Science Alliance. I'm also
representing computer science
Teachers Association of New
Mexico, the local chapter, um,
and this bill we've been working
on uh computer science education
policies since 2017 and um
we're, these policies are to
expand computer science in our
schools, K-12, and one of the
things that we know is that our
educators.
are the key to that, um, to
bringing this important content
and skills to our students in
New Mexico, uh, the HB 188
passed in 2021 to establish the
computer science endorsement
and, uh, since then we've had
over 100 and almost 130
educators that have successfully
gotten that, uh, endorsement, so
that shows that within a short
period of time, educators are
motivated by the endorsement,
however, there are scores and
scores.
Of other educators that have
different licenses that have
been prevented from getting the
um this endorsement but are very
interested in it. So we know
that our teachers really do want
to be able to um grow their own
skills and to be recognized for
it through an endorsement that
they could then um use for
bringing computer science to
their students, um, K-12. And in
our experience, it's these
endorsements that do incentivize
um educators.
to increase their capacity, and
that's very important to bring
this new content, this new
knowledge to our students. Thank
you.
And with that we stand for
questions. Thank you. First out
the audience, those in support.
Anyone in opposition?
You want to come up, you have up
to 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair members of
the committee. John Dich again
with the American Federation of
Teachers in New Mexico. Um, we
were supportive of House Bill
188 in 2021, and I think as that
foundation has been solidified
and we're learning more around
um these types of endorsements.
It's exciting to hear that they
are in high demand and so as
this program grows and evolves,
this is a natural evolution and
so we're supportive of the
measure here today and urge your
yes vote. Thank you.
Thank you. And again, no one in
opposition.
and support. So first one,
please.
Hi, my name is Amy. Um, I also
work with Paige Prescott and
represent the expanding
computing educational pathways,
which is a national initiative
to reach more students in
computer science, expanding this
license this endorsement uh to
any teacher who wants it will
really help include.
Our special education teachers,
our early education teachers and
a lot of um teachers that we we
don't historically give access
to um computer science or give
those students um as much access
as they could get for computer
science. So this is um a win for
the whole state that anyone now
um could add computer science to
their license by getting
professional development or the
other routes, and it's exciting
for New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Roy Soto.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
my name is Roy Soto. I am a
registered lobbyist for
Microsoft, uh, well, first of
all thank uh Representative
Gonzalez and started for
bringing this bill forward. Uh,
we stand in support of HB 279 as
amended. Microsoft has supports
computer science education in
schools and has a vested
resources and best practices for
K-12 computer science educators,
learning coding and software
development, improves the.
students' creativity, critical
thinking, math, and reasoning
skill. So we stand in support
and urge the committee to uh
give us a two pass on House Bill
297 as amended. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
Thank you, uh, questions from
the committee.
Thinner.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Uh, representative, I do have a
few questions for you.
Can you tell me what the New
Mexico dash platform is, Mr.
Chair, um, uh, Senator SL, I am
not specifically knowledgeable
about Dash. I do know that, um,
there is a platform and perhaps
this is what it, um.
Is referencing is uh for
educators to apply for
endorsements, so there is a
platform that possibly that's
supporting.
OK. Well, Mr. Chairman and
Representative and expert
witness, I was reading under the
FIR.
And it's saying in 2021 PED
adopted a five-year plan, and it
does include uh create teach
pathways for computer science
endorsement, align annual course
reviews, professional learning,
beat 7 out of 9 code.org policy
principles.
Complete K through 12
integration in the New Mexico
dash program.
And ensure 50% of districts and
charters have an implementation
plan.
And then it goes on to say what
all else it does, but I whenever
I saw that I wasn't sure what
that meant. Um, mister, Mr.
Chairman, um, Senator Yel, um, I
and also as we're bringing this
endorsement to be a little
proactive, um, in the sense of
getting, getting ahead of where
we hope computer science is
headed in the future, um, as
noted in the FIR um by 2026 it
is a hope that computer science
will be integrated a little bit
more holistically within
curriculum.
Um, there was, uh, there was a
movement in 2021, um, where it
brought the first endorsement,
um.
Yes, but in, um, so over the
years in HB 171 in 2024 required
actually that all high schools
in New Mexico offer computer
science education. So again and
going along with that
curriculum, that is our hope
that by 2026 according to the
FIR that we are fully integrated
and this endorsement is a step
ahead, making sure that our
teachers are adequately prepared
to address the course load in,
in the work that goes along with
the computer science integration
in our schools. Thank you.
OK. Thank you for that
explanation, and Mister
Chairman, representative and
expert witness, I was also
noticing that uh this
legislation would basically
reinstate the pathways that
expired on January 1st, 2025.
Was there a sunset on this?
In the original bill, um, the
original bill, those two
pathways just had a sunset. The
remaining did not, so this bill
does clarify that all 6 pathways
would not have a current sunset,
um, and it would make it open,
um, again until the look of
computer science changes, it
would open up all six pathways
for an indeterminate amount of
time until then another pathway
is prescribed.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and
representative I see whenever
there's going to be an a
reinstatement path.
For these people to be able to
have that computer science
endorsement, uh, that they do
have to complete 60 hours of
professional development.
Development within 3 years of
applying for the endorsement or
possessing 3 or more years of
computer science teaching
experience is PED aligned with
this?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Senator, uh,
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, a habit to break, isn't it?
Yes, there, there is currently
um computer science,
professional development,
education, um, so again, there
has been a number of teachers
that have already obtained the
endorsement through these
multiple pathways. Um, this bill
just continues that work to be
able to happen, um, so the
current endorsement is happening
through public ed, there is
current professional development
pathways currently happening.
This just extends it beyond the
current sunset date and just,
you know, again, keeps it open
and keeps these pathways open
for our current educators.
OK, thank you very much for
that, Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Chairman, now you've got me
doing it, OK?
Oh.
$250 250,000 dollars is gonna be
go uh going towards the
development of this, but can you
tell me what the process is for
a person to be able to make
application for this money
that's gonna be available right
now that pathway has not been
officially determined. Um, there
is 250, there's general funds
allotted for um teacher
professional development in
House Bill 2 that was submitted
over, um, should this pass, we
will have a direct conversation,
um, you know exactly how that
gets.
Funneled out um in the past that
occurs that that money could go
to in the past dollars have been
allocated to provide stipends
for teachers allowance to attend
those weeks, um, in the past,
those funds have been allocated
to um during the PED STEM ready,
you know, days for again for
teachers to allow these
continuing education credits,
so, um, you know, if passed, we
will work with PED to allocate
those dollars accordingly, um,
and in the direction of how they
would like us. OK. Thank you for
that.
And Mr. Chairman, my final
question is representative.
Will this progress be monitored
in any way? Is it gonna be
measured? is it gonna be
standard set on what all they
have to have accomplished and to
make sure that it is age
appropriate.
Um, I'm gonna start with the
answer and then I'll defer to
the rest to my expert witness,
um, right now, New Mexico is on
a is on a path to make computer
science foundational within the
state of New Mexico, um, so
there are current benchmarks
that we have been working on.
There is current evaluation
models. We are allowing aligning
anything within our state to be
aligned with national standards
and national benchmarks within
computer science education, um,
and so with that, um, I will
pass it on off to continue with
maybe the explanation on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, we do have um national,
we have our state standards are
aligned to the national states,
uh, computer science teachers
association standards which are
under review and are going to be
updated shortly, uh, and then
there are also national teacher
standards around computer
science and any of the providers
that um to meet this
requirement, like for instance,
in the professional development
pathway that um they could be.
should be aligned to those
national standards.
OK.
I know there may be some changes
coming up soon, Mr. Mr. Chairman
and Representative in your
expert witness.
But I see that uh.
At least it gives our teachers
the opportunity to get updated
and everything to be able to.
Help these young people.
Actually, I need a young person
to help me.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Other questions from the
committee.
I, I have a couple of, did you
have a question, Senator? Please
go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you,
sponsor, um, on page 3, I love
the fact that we're striking
secondary and allowing all
teachers to pursue this
endorsement, but Mister Chair,
what I find strange is that we
are putting these 6 pathways.
We're pulling them directly out
of what is already
administrative code, what is
already in rule, and we're
putting them in statute.
Um, and ending the two sunsets,
which is also great.
Um, but we don't normally put in
statute endorsements, Mr. Chair,
this seems very out of the
ordinary.
Um, and, and limiting because
statute is much harder to
change.
Then rule or the administrative
code. So if they wanted to
develop a 7th or 8th pathway,
having this in statute is going
to imply that they cannot.
That only these 6 were ever
unless we change them in statute
will exist. So Mr. Chair, I'm
wondering why we didn't just
strike the sunsets in
administrative code and let
things progress in.
The typical fashion.
Mr. Chair, Senator Figueroa, um,
we were in consultation with the
licensure Bureau of PED and they
deferred to not pursue that and
and.
So we took on the opportunity to
revisit the old HB 188 in order
to update the pathways and make
sure more educators were
available or
eligible.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and expert.
Do I take that to mean that PED.
Declined to remove the January
1st sunsets on two pathways.
Mr. Chair, Senator Figueroa,
that is correct.
OK, Mr. Chair, in our PED person
explain perhaps why we didn't
just do this and.
Administrative code easily and
quickly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Figueroa.
So the intent around the sunset
provisions, um.
Had been to remain consistent
with existing science, math, and
ELA endorsements that
concurrently exist in law.
OK.
I apologize for hurting
everyone's ears today, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um.
So it was in summary, the the
reason.
those sunset
it with the concurrent
endorsements for uh science,
math and ELA.
Mr. Tare and.
Expert, I'm sorry, what's your
name?
Yes, my name is uh Jacqueline
Sanchez with PED.
Thank you, Ms. Sanchez, Mr.
Chair, so we have similar
sunsets in science and ELA
endorsements.
Mr. Chair and Senator Figaro.
Um
No, the, the provisions did not
exist at all, the uh
professional development and,
uh, 3 or more years of computer
science teaching experience,
they never existed in the uh
requirements for the other
three, we had included the other
three, Mr. Chair and Senator,
um,
In order to, to honor the uh.
Those experts who had already
completed the professional
development and 3 or more years
of computer science, the intent
was to grandfather those
professionals.
OK, Mr. Terror, and thank you
for explaining that.
Um
But Mr. Chairman to reiterate my
concern that putting the
pathways to endorsement in
statute.
In the future might prove very
limiting to us and we might be
very sorry we did this.
I'm not gonna oppose it today.
But it's setting a strange
precedent that might tie our
hands later.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I, I had the
very same things is, you know,
if things are functioning under
rules, we shouldn't be changing
it because rule is much more
nimble computer science
continues to be an area that is
moving and changing rapidly and,
you know, I just concerned about
putting these in, um, I had a
couple of questions also. First,
is somebody now required to have
the endorsement to teach
computer science.
Members of the committee.
Currently, the PED and
specifically uh career and
college readiness Bureau that
tracks the licensure, um, they.
Have identified endorsements and
uh licensure for computer
science, however, they have a
broad um approach to it to be
expansive and not restrictive,
um, but we do see that in the
future, it will become more
restrictive and they might
require these endorsements going
forward.
So, you know, if you can teach
computer science without the
endorsement. Why are we putting
the endorsement in law. That
doesn't make sense to me that
it'd be in law instead of, you
know, within code within PED.
Mr. Chair, committee, um,
currently there is an additional
technology endorsement. So
again, there are some classes
that both endorsements can teach
currently, um, but again,
looking forward to the future if
they meant that these teachers
would be ready with the
endorsement when those
additional say national
coursework comes down,
additional standards come down,
um, that our workforce and that
our teachers will be prepared.
Right now they are doing the
work of becoming computer
science professionals, um, and
this endorsement gives them the
validity within their, their
coursework and in their.
classes um that our teachers
wanna have.
And I'll, and I'll pass it on
for additional, I guess I
understand want to have, but is
it required that they have that,
and I'm very nervous about
putting things in the law that
are just kind of wanna haves.
That aren't something that has a
force of law and that you must
have this in order to teach
computer science is putting into
law.
An endorsement that, you know,
just add something else onto
your license that that doesn't,
I can't, it doesn't make sense
to me. Help me.
Members of the committee.
Computer science is relatively
young for our K-12 space and so,
um, we are looking at policies
that will support computer
science going forward, one of
them is the endorsement pathway,
which was uh the original HB
188. Um, so we have worked with
the New Mexico PED, they have
had a lot of turnover with their
specialists, um, in fact, right
now there is no K8 specialist,
um, for computer science and so
we are um advocating through our
means to um.
Expand computer science for New
Mexico uh educators and and
students and these are um
policies that can have an impact
and have had an impact, um, uh,
and we do see that, um, as
Representative Gonzalez
mentioned that we do see as this
matures and becomes more
pervasive, that there will be
more um rules about endorsement
and who can. OK. Uh
Of the 6 possible ways down
through here. I have questions
about a couple of them, earned
15 post-secondary course credits
in computer science. What counts
as computer science? Does it
have to have a CS designation or
will business computer systems
will uh attack one where
essentially you're learning how
to hook the wires together on a
computer, what counts?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, we.
have seen that it is specific to
computer science departments.
So, courses that are in computer
science, so those business ones
or in engineering.
Would likely not count.
Um, towards this, those 15
credits.
I worry about likely not count.
Do they count? Do they not
count, members of the committee,
my understanding, so as we look
at um, this is a national
emphasis in computer science,
and they look for things like um
at the high school level, what
counts is computer science, and
they often indicate things like
a minimum number of hours
towards coding and programming
languages, um, and so.
Mm
That being connected in terms of
the endorsement, we would assume
that the classes would come from
computer science and have an
emphasis in the background and
theory and the programming
languages that are needed at a
very basic level, um, but
through the.
OK, so years ago I took classes
in 44 with Watt 45, and cobalt,
which are nobody uses anymore
almost.
Would those still count if I
went to computer science
endorsement?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I would say yes, um,
although the languages have
changed, changed over time, the
logic has not, and we've seen
many um returning uh people to
the force that have prior cobalt
experience and they're
incredibly successful, because
they have some very foundational
knowledge that, um, can be
easily updated for our modern uh
computer languages. Thank you.
OK, on the second one.
The department approved teacher
licensure exams so I could get
licensed to teach or an
endorsement computer science by
just taking a test.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that is correct, um,
is Pra and it is computer
science specific, um, it is
based on.
Java and pseudocode, um, and it
is a common pathway, um, for
endorse content tests and that
one is specific to computer
science that already exist and
people are already using that.
I know of two that have.
Gone through that pathway.
OK, um, next one, minimum 2
years' work experience in an
industry.
Do they have to be working in
the computer science area of the
industry or just in the industry
as it reads, you know, they were
a secretary working for IBM,
they qualify.
As it reads
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, when we talk
about industry that their Bureau
of Labor statistics, um, kind
of.
Uh
Classifications around um
computing and so, um.
We would
Industry would indicate
something related to computing.
And that is something that, um,
the PED and their licensure
bureau would have to make a
determination.
OK, I'm, I'm thinking I have a
friend that runs a small
business and hire somebody to
come and
Program his, was it raspberry Pi
type of thing has been doing
that for 2 years, that would
qualify as
Excuse me, as him working in the
industry?
Or in an industry, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Raspberry pies are great, and
that is a fantastic way to learn
computer science. So, um, I
would support that and I think
that, um, computer science has a
broad.
Range of skill sets that are
needed in technology, um, and
those that have um experience
and exposure on the industry
level, have a lot to bring to
our students and, uh, it might
be more IT uh related and
networking, which would fall
under computer science and um
have
Strong impacts for our students.
Thank you.
Thank you and kind of my last
one on 5, complete 60 hours of
professional development, 60
hours is a week and a half full
time.
Um, 200 $250,000 doesn't cover
very many people taking, you
know, doing a
That level of uh professional
development.
When would the people they be
doing this over the summer, I
presume?
Um
Mr. Chair, committee, um, again,
as mentioned, there are current
professional development
opportunities again mention the
computer Science Week, which
does go for a week. It would be
over 3 years, so there have been
many teachers that are return,
returning attendees at even we
likely do have teachers that
have already met these these
credentials and met this hours
just by attending computer
science week, um, you know, over
the last course of the 3 years.
So, um, again, these pathways
give options for for the
different backgrounds of these
teachers obtaining credentials,
so there, so while 60 hours does
seem like a lot, there are
teachers that have already
accomplished this pathway.
And you know, it says it's to be
used for the professional
development of teachers.
Can teachers use that to go back
to school to get the 15
post-secondary hours? Can that
money be used with that and how
is that gonna move from EED to
higher ed to pay their tuition,
or is that not possible?
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I have not heard of
that of um professional
development hours counting
towards uh classes in computer
science, except for a very
special program that was, um,
funded by National Science
Foundation called New Mexico
Computer Science for all that
ran from 2012 to 2016 that, um,
had.
Teachs concurrently enrolled in
a graduate level computer
science class and uh obtained um
significant uh exposure to
computer science, but it was
both professional development
and credit bearing, but I'm not,
I have not heard of professional
development being accepted into.
And I guess my question on that
is, why is the money only for
the professional development
instead of assisting people
through one of the other
potential pathways.
Um, Mr. Chair, committee, um,
the easy answers for that is
that that was an easy way to get
some support for this
endorsement was to get these
professional development dollars
in.
Um, you know, futures, if, if
the support is there, we would
love to add additional dollars
towards other pathways, um, but
this do also allows, you know,
just teachers, um.
Just generally to obtain
professional development should
they desire it, so, so that was
the intention in this particular
piece of legislation, but again,
should the opportunity arise for
other.
So I guess kind of the the last
question along those lines is it
says for teachers who want the
computer science endorsement.
With this paper for teachers who
just want to get a little bit
better with computer science but
aren't headed towards the
endorsement.
As it's written, it's only if
you're headed towards the
endorsement.
And Mr. Chair Speaker, it, it
could, um, you know,
professional development, um.
I never want to turn away
teachers that want to enhance
their skills. Um, I'm never, um,
I would hope that as we progress
into the 22nd century of skills,
the teachers are hoping to
become more computer literate.
The teachers are hoping to take
on these fundamental skills, and
this may inspire an interest
down the road to become computer
science endorsed, but um, I'm
never one to turn away learning
opportunities and, you know,
just by the the nature of
education, you know, if it was
to support, supporting our
teachers and yes.
for it.
OK. Thank you. Uh.
Again, I've got some concerns
just about those 6 pieces within
each one, but my biggest concern
is, you know, this, it looks
like it's functioning well the
way it is. I don't see why it
needs to be in law, and so I
won't be supporting it with
that, but other questions from
committee, Senator Boone.
Mr. Chair Representative,
experts, uh, just in scanning,
uh, analysis from the higher
education.
I just need a clarification here
scan of New Mexico's 4 year
higher education institutions
found that only New Mexico,
Hollins University offers a
program explicitly leading to
licensure and teaching computer
science.
Uh, it is unclear if math
teacher preparation programs at
other ATIs include pathways to
earn computer science
endorsements in their required
coursework.
Uh, you know
Answer that
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Boone, my
understanding, um, in my, uh,
knowledge of the computer
science landscape in New Mexico,
is that, um, New Mexico Tech has
a program, uh, part of their a
master's in science teaching,
and you can get a computer
science, uh.
Concentration in that program,
so that's a pretty profound way
that that can happen. New Mexico
State University and their
College of Ed is working on a,
a.
Freer, computer science pathway,
uh, and will likely have a
course ready um by fall of 2026.
And um those are the, the areas
that higher ed that I'm aware
of. I'm not aware of the
Highlands program at at this
time. Thank you.
I can add some insight into the
Highlands program, particularly
as that has been within my
district, um, they went that way
with the hope of
An engineering pathway that is
the loan engineering pathway
that we do offer at New Mexico
Highlands University is very
math and computer science
specific.
Um, again, beyond the pathways
mentioned here by Ms. Prescott,
um, you know, there are other
Computer science application
courses taught at the community
college level at 2-year degrees,
but, um, you know, within higher
ed, there's, there's a large
scope of, of computer science
application within higher
education.
Mr. Chair and Representative
experts I I guess what I'm
getting at is, is the institute.
Of our learning in my district,
eastern New Mexico, or are they
just?
They're not capable of granting
this.
It's a licensure.
Mr. Chair, Senator Boone, um, I
personally know many teachers in
your district actually that are
active within the landscape, um,
and that actively attend a lot
of these computer science
pathways, um, personally just
within the day job, I do work
with many districts throughout
Southeastern New Mexico, and
they are actively working within
computer science education, um,
that they might not have
established computer science
coursework yet at their school,
but that is the hope that we
work towards that, um, but there
is.
very much a computer science
interests through educators
throughout the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Thanks. Thank you.
OK. Other questions?
Bill of the committee.
Cherry do pass on the House Bill
27 Amendment.
We have a motion for a new pass.
Seconded by Senator Naba, you'll
call the roll.
Senator Isel.
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes
Sender Hickey
Senator Nova.
Yes
Center Ramos.
Tinder Thornton.
No, explained my vote.
Senator Pope
Yes
Cinder souls.
No.
So it does not pass, so we are
still back here in the
committee.
There are substitute motion.
Oh yes, I'm Senator Thornton,
please, yes, I apologize.
I was inclined to support this.
I think, I think having the
various pathways, I'm completely
open to it. I think uh what you
have outlined is good.
And I was prepared to go
forward.
But Senator Figueroa's comment
that
You know, putting these kind of
administrative rules in the
statute. It's probably not the
best way to go, and it seemed to
me it might be an easier way to
If you would just identified.
At the end of page 3 it said.
We're going to follow.
Pathways identified by HED.
Um, and leave that within the HD
realm, then we wouldn't have to
put that in statute. I have no
problem with the rest of the
bill though.
So, so again, it's extending a
precedent if we start doing this
for everything.
Put everything in statute. So it
may be an easy way to substitute
that in and make a small
addition.
That that's my comment.
OK. Is there anyone else?
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna propose an
amendment.
OK.
Um
Because I think striking the
limitation to secondary teachers
only is important. I'd like to
keep that going.
Um, and we seem to be hung up
on.
Putting pathways to endorsement
and statute.
So
My
Proposed amendment would be on
page 3.
Line 12
On strike
The strikes
Uh, that's probably not proper,
but you know what I mean, as
determined by the department,
put that back in.
And then
Lines.
16
On page 3 all the way through
line 16 on page.
Strike
The new language.
Like the underlying material.
It, that's this bill.
Mr. Chair and sponsor and I
realized that, but the pathways
are in.
Code, at least 4 of them, so
they would continue and pathways
to become computer science
indoors would continue and at
least we would get it open to
non-secondary teacher.
So, Mr. Chair, that's my
proposed endorsement.
To keep this alive.
OK, was everyone able to follow
what that did.
want to make sure everybody
knows what we're talking about
voting on and and things of that
sort.
And so sponsor of head out to
you as far as
Whether you would consider that
a friendly amendment or?
Unfriendly or would like to
comment on it.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Figueroa,
can I ask a clarifying question
on that, so, uh,
There are currently 6 pathways,
2 of which sunset, and we, we
are not revisiting the those
last two that sunset. Um,
chair and sponsor an expert we
are removing.
From statute all the pathways,
so we would be down to the 4
that have not sunsetted in code,
um, with my commitment to reach
out to PED and figure out.
of why we don't remove that
sunset, if it's valid, it's
valid, it needs to remain valid,
um, but it needs to remain in
code.
And, and they might add another
way of doing this is you've
heard the concerns of the
committee, is send you away and
come back first thing on
Wednesday with those changes
that fixes the sunset as well.
Um, Mr. Chair, members, uh, um,
and Senator Figueroa.
Just, um, a point of
clarification that um practic
exam, um, and the, uh, higher
ed, those four pathways that
currently exist are very
rigorous, um, they would be
challenging for non-secondary
educators to um achieve the
practice exam is.
Although I know two people that
did it. They had prior computer
science courses and um chose to
try for that, um.
And
I know the state of Texas has
had a tremendously hard time
getting teachers to pass that
practice, um, as well as having
the course credits, so it does
limit that, especially for
non-secondary educators. Thank
you.
But
Isn't that things that they're
currently, it's within.
Ruling over imped that they
could fix those things there
without doing it in statute, if
that is in fact a limiting and a
concern.
Which I think is what we're
talking about or the
recommendation is keeping it
there.
And just trying to make sure you
get clarifications to what we're
doing. So, I guess, back to you
as you, if you'd like to proceed
with the amendment or would like
to get rolled over to Wednesday.
Um, Mr. Chair, committee, we
will touch base back with PED
again, we've had.
Prior, um, communication with
them. We will now revisit based
upon recommendation from the
committee, um, letting them know
our a couple of options and
maybe they'll be more favorable
towards the original plan in the
beginning, so but we will get
back with you and hopefully to
get back on and we will
definitely either either have an
amendment or an answer for you
by the next time. OK, and, and
you have my commitment, we'll
put you back on Wednesday. If it
doesn't work on that timeline,
let me know and we can move it
to Friday or whatever does work.
But otherwise, we'll
expect you back on Wednesday.
OK, thank you.
Committee, we are adjourned.
We're due on the floor in about
5 minutes. Uh, we are planning
on 9 o'clock on Wednesday.
