About the kinds of things
easiest in due to help us as
legislators in the state new
mexico and the education area
but then also you have a
presentation on education trends
so please if you give a little
more of your background and
welcome to the mexico senate
education.
Can you hear me is that okay
great my name is gary alla
rodriguez and I am the state
liaison to new mexico are
education commission of the
states before I was that ecs
i've been at ecs for four years
now but before that I was a
community organizer and denver
public schools and also worked
for us and that are michael
bennett and I just want to say
that i'm a testament to the
difference that education can
make when you make a strong
education policy i've really
benefited from immigration
policies that support students
and um just excited to promote
our services so
you all can make a strong
education policies and so i'm
joined on the screen hopefully
you can see them by my
colleagues her out of silver
pedron and if any mcdole who
will provide the trending topics
presentation but first i'll
share a little bit more about
ecs for those who are not
familiar with our work so
education commission of the
states was created through the
compact for education which was
a piece of legislation that was
enacted in all fifty states back
in the nineteen sixties and it
was created to provide a network
for state lawmakers to come
together and share ideas as we
work through education policies
and um.
Education policy solutions sorry
and new mexico is an act of
memory of ecs through that
statute.
We are unique and that we serve
all different role groups so we
have the opportunity to bring
together governor's officers
state department of education
state boards of education and
state higher education
departments and legislators like
yourselves and as part of this
we cover issues across the
spectrum from early through post
secondary learning and the work
force.
We categorize our work into four
different buckets we answer
research requests we publish
reports and offer a council and
host convenience throughout the
year.
You can see in the folder that I
provided more details about our
supports and services and so we
publish reports and fifty state
comparisons that highlight state
examples with important policy
considerations we track analyse
and summarise every single piece
of education legislation through
our state policy tracking
database and that database is
available on our website and our
team of researchers is always
standing by to answer
information requests and so say
one of your colleagues
introduces a bill on teacher
retention policies you can shoot
me an email to see how these
policies look in your
neighboring states or really any
state that you might be
interested and and so we were
closely with the alliance to
provide written memos about the
policies that you all are
working on.
Our council services include non
partisan testimony to
legislative committees on any
state education policy issue we
deliver kino or panel
presentations on a policy topic
or a national perspective and
background we also do one on one
team based policy consultations
and qna and we offer connections
to peers and other states and
outside experts so finally I
want a highlight our flagship
event then ecs national forum on
education policy where are new
mexico commission commissioners
often come together but you all
also have the opportunity to
attend we bring over six hundred
state education policy members
together
touch to show their state work
at our policy sessions and
celebrate their successes and of
course it's a great way to
network across dates but also to
spend time with all of your
appears in new mexico to it's
always great to see everyone
huddling in between sessions and
over
lunch terms see how they can
bring back the ideas and the
story that they're learning from
to their state and so without I
want to see again chair souls
for welcoming us and allowing me
the opportunity to connect with
you all i'm you'll go to a ecs
of you have any questions are my
business card is also in the
folder that I provided and all
turn it over to my colleagues
tifinian herodo for our trending
topics presentation.
Yes
they can get real that's
probably more important but then
I have a quick question before
yeah
yeah I was gonna let you work I
get that set and so
they're in the room that was
provided so.
Would you like me to step back
there.
Where is the
conference this next year it was
yes the conference is july ten
through the twelfth and
beautiful washington dc this
year.
Would you like to step back
there and.
That's going to conflict with
csg west which is in portland
organ this year oh no well you
know how fun are our national.
The.
While we're waiting introduced
surely in in the audience are
you deputy superintendent
schools
cheap of staff philosophers as
public schools joining us all
weekend we have lost crucial's
days up here in the last
christmas public school
delegation the superintendent.
The appeary superintendence
department had the various other
people were up here so it's very
nice having you hear an
education with us this morning.
The.
Okay good morning folks can you
hear me.
Yes good morning and welcome to
send it education in new mexico
and wonderful think you for much
thank you gabriel I think you
chairman sales and thank you to
the committee for having us
today let's try one more
logistical thing I draw our you
able to share your screen.
On able at the moment.
Me see if I can share mine.
Yes I got it now it's shown up.
So sorry everybody let me stop
this hearing for a minute after.
Okay and they were always there.
Has that.
That looks good we've got it on
the screen.
Fabulous thank you for your
patience and again thank you so
much for having us today it's
our pleasure to join you into
share with you some of what
we've been seen across the
country in terms of legislative
trends and educational policy we
know that you all have heard
from cabriel up up many of our
services including our
legislative tracking and on the
one picture she provided you
should be able to learn more
about how to navigate to our
education policy tracking page
we track education policy for
all fifty states in the district
of colombia providing a wide
rain in a right look at anything
from false to governance to
school choice from early
childhood through eight twelve
after posts again in the work
force as we hope you'll find
that to use their use author out
your legislative session at
derado and he are here to
present you at the top three
trends we sign education policy
last year and before we do want
to do a brief introduction and
my name is technical me policy
director at ecs and i'm joined
by drurys of up a drum one of
our policy researchers so let's
take a look at those type
education policy trends.
Last year in education policy
the top three trends we observed
were in teaching policy.
Cater twelve finance and student
health.
In addition we also tracked
significant activity around
career and technical education
and work first development in in
the early care and educations.
We will briefly provide more
detail on these tapric trends
then we're going to take a sneak
peak at some of the transfer
watching in twenty twenty four
and will conclude if you an aid.
So let's start with teaching
teaching as always a focus of
seat policy makers and for good
reason because we know that
teacher quality the most
important with install factor
that impact student achievement
nearly every state and dc packed
legislation related to teaching
and some way last year with at
least one hundred sixty seven
bills and acted in twenty twenty
three alone at educators work to
strengthen the teacher pipeline
there's three primary areas we
sactivity last year the first of
which was in certification and
licenser and the one hand last
year we saw several states that
were responding to teacher
shortages a removing altering
our waving certain licenser
requirements in many states in
particular have been evaluating
that our teacher life and your
assessments to understand if
those screening tools provide a
meaningful bar to entry to the
profession minister of those
states to opted for portfolio
models or some type of
alternative assessment instead
of continuing to use their
previous certification exam.
And the other hands some seats
have been adding new lights and
draw requirements including
assessments out usually the
promote alignment to another
initiative such as strengthening
reading and structure so several
states last year asked new
course work requirements for
perspective teachers or new
license exams required to enter
the profession related to the
science of reading.
Another area of movement in
certification and license or in
twenty twenty three was around
license responsibility a waving
states passed legislation that
formed the teacher mobility
compact that's an interstate
agreement that allows eligible
teachers to transfer their
lights and across state lines
with participating states
the second major being with
hours in recruitment and
retention the pretty bright
theme and i'm sure one that will
feel very familiar to the work
you're leading in new mexico and
this area states created new
grow your own programs also
teach her red the nc or a
printership models that with the
hope of better preparing aspirin
educators.
With many of these programs
coming at free or no cost or
limited costs to the perspective
teacher.
States have also taken stats to
address specific teacher
shortages in a variety of ways
hawaiian at the legislation
related to providing housing for
perspective or current educators
arkansas new jersey illinois and
virginia created in snaves for
retired teachers to return to
the classroom but without any
type of penalty for their
pension.
And south carolina passed a bill
that requires pete rental leave
for eligible school employees
joining only a handful of other
states who provide that benefit
ordinated by the state.
It's also important to note that
in twenty twenty three many
states focused on recruiting and
retaining other staff members
not just teach hers many
districts report that they have
the most severe shortages in
paraprofessional positions and
transportation and bus drivers
at so they're a criminal
attention the emails is
certainly not isolated to
teachers.
The third trend is in
compensation again another trend
I think we'll feel very familiar
to you all given that the big
investments that you've made and
new mexico and teacher salaries
the combination of healthy state
budgets are relatively healthy
state budgets with a tight labor
market by ministate second
center boost to teachers
alleries those boosts come in
three different ways one is in
an increase in minimum teacher
salaries which we saw in several
states the second is bonuses and
stipends including for hard to
stab schools or other teacher
shortage areas such as
stamfields.
And the third is around
retention bonus says or attempts
to keep teachers in the
classroom keep them motivated
such as increase pay for
national board certification so
those for the tap three trends
we sar in teaching last year or
now turn our attention to key
twelve finance.
Key twelve funding continues to
be an area a significant policy
activity area in twenty twenty
three we tracked one hundred
forty five inactive pieces of
legislation in forty two states
and dc this does include annual
or buy annual budgets which of
course keeps the issue top of
mines but within those different
budgets and other pieces of
legislation again we saw three
trends we went into a highlight
for you today.
The first is modifications to
funding formulas we witness
several changes in twenty twenty
three particularly around
increasing the base level of
state funding her student some
of those changes were enacted to
keep pays with inflation clearly
a massive concern over the past
several years however other
states enacted decisions to
increase the adequacy estate
funding perhaps make an
adjustment to their overall
informal for adequacy reasons.
The next effort we saw was in
targeting certain funding for a
specific student populations the
most activity was in special
education services where six
states colorado connecticut
north akora nebraska south
dakota in washington increase to
their allocation to districts to
provide services for special
education students similarly we
also say three states increase a
name for students from low
income backgrounds in two states
increased funding for english
learners.
The third area of attention and
founding was around what we call
student counts during declining
and rollment in many places many
districts are facing the
prospect of reduce state aid
going forward so some states are
adopting policies either cushion
the blow from these declines or
that are nacked in hold firmless
pervisions are blended student
count models that will move
those declining and roll make
counts over a several years we
are aware of at least ten states
that have enacted hold harmless
provisions and say year twenty
twenty two.
I nevada had read a fine the
enrollment in attendance how
enrollment in a ten minutes are
defined within their statute
related to student counts and
how that impacts funding
and remote instructions has also
been addressed by several states
including montena in new york.
Of course we've also been
tracking house states are
utilizing federal science and
expending those dollars prior to
their expiration that's a theme
we will be watching closely
within the year ahead with that
i'll turn it over to derado to
talk to you more about student
health trends.
Thing is almost sympathy and
think you to the committee and
center souls for having us today
we will not be transitioning to
the network with among states
which related to it and teacher
health ones.
Policies who dress you in health
monitors have game momentum
immense before the panamic but
you imagine over the last few
years since her rapidly
increased those efforts is yes
and try to hand thirty nine
that's pieces of legislation in
thirty five states plus tc and
twenty three the most common
let's save friends we saw him
policy makers and that were on
mental and behavioral house.
Mental health nutrition and
expanding access to health
services.
Mental health involves her
people part of students overall
house and are indicators
education engagement in academic
success.
Illusion of strings are now
allowed to be out in up to three
days in a given school year from
mental and or behavior of
reasons.
The student will be given option
to make up in his cover mister
in the school days and they said
the student will also be
referred to the appropriate
scores that are personal to get
him to seek the proper medical
support they may need.
The state that also added some
new requirements in how students
can learn to better manage
stress in anxiety.
On the top of the mental health
days for students last year we
did also see tons of legislation
around teachers gaining me to
hold these on top of their stick
thieves.
This was after now it's retained
more educators in the field but
to make sure educators are
taking time to themselves
mentally and to avoid you to
burn out.
Also on a topic of it on
behavior of two separating
continues to be a top priority
for steel meters for many states
such like west virginia they now
require state requires to
identification person include
information and the crisis
prevention potents and great
thirty six for twelve in their
pokes force.
Next nutrition another channel
was on twenty three sold states
and activates this and provided
students with school meals and
healthy options.
For example following the steps
of the meeting where that new
mexico has done with their
universal school meals program.
Many other states like mission
men sort of remark and
washington have also shared the
same prodi and I think
legislation that will love for
one three breakfast and one free
lines are not charged their
students.
Lastly and supporting families
especially working class for me
there was also some
conversations in discussion
around average to expand females
during summer school hours for
students.
And the last time we have been
seen has to do with expansion of
access to a wholesale reasons
and school settings.
This includes increasing the
number of mental professionals
the services the service is a
ministered at schools and access
to medication and other life
savings.
Research indicates from a
students there first that point
of access of quality hospitals
are sometimes in school
settings.
For example and a couple months
what difference are now able to
stop like again to treat it
student with division who
expenses an emergency till every
a little bit more school
districts are now required I did
his medical madmit plan that
must receive parents to consent
first so that educators and
other school staff members are
able to be supported in who may
be experiencing hyperglass in
your.
And for mission at the bill that
summer that will not approve
schools in the state provide
melijan products available to
all students and not cost.
And lastly another effort states
have been trying to navigate to
do with the shorter mental
professionals and school
settings.
Virginia not to the bill which
allows districts to hire
clinical psychologies license
for period of three years on a
provisional lesson sure.
The creation of provisional
license are some of the efforts
that states have been pushing to
recruit more house professions
into this course the card is
space.
To better grasp the manager of
these efforts the national
associations course apologist
nas recommends a ratio of once a
colleges for every five hundred
students currently the current
national representative is once
for psychologist for every
twelve months.
Now we will be transitioning to
twenty twenty four stay the
state trans and a sneak pic of
what governors are planning to
pursue this year state as the
addresses can differ between
states governors traditionally
and that sort of a button listed
priorities of what the governor
plans propose or push that year.
Since we are only a few weeks
into the year we have all the
allies nineteen states the
address is given by governors.
And based on that small simple
size of addresses we summarized
so far the trending areas of
focus in twenty twenty four so
far are teaching staffing with
fourteen governors addressing
opposing working compensation
and recruitment retention for
educators.
Fourteen governors automatic
kids were funning up to news
next week after the eleventh
governor's addressing and
proposing work in a ct and what
forced a lot of space.
Unless we both health in early
care and education where some
other police governors made
reference to and plan to address
these priorities in this i've
been coming spoil.
On the bump on the bubble were
also seen attitude in other
spaces.
Some of the other translocations
went by four first being
literacy this is a moment to
change how early reading is
taught with many states and
administrating based on the
science of reading which
requires early being attraction
to focus on evidence based
practice.
In the end I joined a number of
other states that require school
that you said that pricing a
length of the sites of reading
and requires the department to
develop guidance to integrate
those principles into their
prepared teacher preparation
programs.
Technology and how it faces to
transability to learn and scores
has been a commentary for years
but with technology developing
more and the emergence of a I in
school settings.
States have been monitoring and
the emergency the the emergency
closely and continue to discuss
the possible health implications
it may have on students and
their social and emotional
learning.
Next school choice continues to
flow as a consistent trend and
education space it's continuing
to explore ways and expand
options to prepare to choose the
best way i've been for their
further children instance
regardless of the slip code.
And last week states have
continued to invest in grant
initiatives and program seven
and make post secondary office
of more affordable and
accessible to also in
population.
And that concludes the possible
transportation of some education
work we saw last year and what
we may be expecting this up and
coming here.
We will not be transitioned to
the and want to think again to
the education committee and
center souls again from the new
city.
Thank you thank you I really
appreciate it with questions
from the committee and as the
other trying to incape anyone
ask questions in new mexico it's
nice we were highlighted on a
couple of things we're doing in
food nutrition areas and I know
that we're wet the leaders in
early childhood education space
and eminent products in the
schools and some things like
that but many of these we are
working on and already doing and
so it's nice to know that were
right along where the trends are
with most of the rest of the of
the country of questions when
the committee.
Oh I don't I thought you were
reaching for your micro.
Just just
curiosity the reciprocity thing
that was mentioned earlier in
the presentation could you
highlight that a little bit what
states are involved
is is there like a standard that
has been developed by ncsl or
somebody like that that.
Work as a model for us to adopt
I don't think we have risk
across the necessarily do we
miss chair.
I don't think new mexico does
the military there is one that
center brand carried a while
back for military reciprocity
ones but I don't know that we
have just one that's kind of
nationwide for any that are in a
compact you're doing so just
just to comment thoughts about
expand on.
The.
Rightly pink you chairman thank
you for the question on the
committee at your rights and
ask that that in in indicators
of the new initiatives so the
contact was only formed last
year it was developed through
the council of state governments
in partnership with the
Common profession amongst
military houses and of course
they move frequently across
state lines so that apartment of
defense in the council state
governments convened a working
group with state policy makers
teachers quite a large group of
state holders to come up with
the language that be referred to
as the compact will it council
state governments has
facilitated similar processes of
interstate agreements for other
professions including each
pathologist nursing is he and
they have experience in that
area of occupational life
injured so the compact outlines
certain qualifications it
teacher must meet in order to be
eligible for russia procedure so
for example they must be on a
full or standard white sense
that cannot be here teacher on
an emergency air provisional
license and I think it's
important to note that anyone
who moves their license through
the compact is still subject to
a background check that's been a
a free point in the soron
amongst folks have taken a look
at the compact language and
there are there was safeguards
in place for each receiving
state to make sure the teacher
is safe and qualified to enter
the classroom at some of your
neighbor seats did pass this
legislation including colorado
it was also passed in oregon
nevada you talk in nebraska and
this oklahoma and then several
states further east
pennsylvania kentucky albama and
florida are members of the
compact the legislation is
pending and several additional
states and states are eligible
to join the compact but they
needed at least ten to pass it
to form this interstate
agreement so and this is the
first year so we don't have much
data about how many teachers are
eligible for it how how many may
choose to use it it says that
quite an emerging policy area I
hope that answers your question
and i'll be sure to provide more
information through capri for
anyone who's interested.
Thank you miss chairman I
appreciate that I can see
certain areas in new mexico the
never reservation you're part of
the world's senator soles were
you next till passo there would
be a lot of.
Desirable area.
Useful if we could work out
something some of those are
joining states thank you mister
thank you and I agree we've got
a number of military bases and
people moving in and out
and clearly it's not going to be
demand for this session but
potentially something we ought
to be looking at in new mexico
or the next for the sixty day
session next year it may be very
helpful for for our military
families in particular.
Other questions comments
committee members.
The.
I I think that'll going to do it
then really appreciate you
spending some time with us this
morning getting some of the
national perspective that
sometimes you're new mexico we
can feel a little isolated and
it's nice to know that lots of
of what we're doing in education
is in line with what's going on
around in education in other
states.
Thank you very much every other
new thing else that you'd like
to in with her.
Now just thank you for the in.
Thank you we appreciate you
coming down here from denver and
then being with us this morning
then as we talked earlier you
might we head over in check in
with the house education so that
they get to know who you are as
well.
Thank you very much.
Will now go to our we have only
two bills today that looks like
we're going to run those in
order the first one senate bill
one fifty two
thousand y investigations and
background checks and I think
we've seen this a last couple of
years and that this is some
technical things to continue to
make it matter with what the fbi
is looking for if I understand
so.
I don't want to steal your whole
presentation center if you would
please thank you mr chairman
members of the committee that
pretty much some set up we stand
for
so I have a senate bill when
fifty two which is a technical
fix requested by the fba which
will allow eccd and see why
after you to continue conduct
conducting background checks and
those individuals who provide
care to new mexico's most
vulnerable children and so for
the ecd.
Senate bill one fifty two places
the department volunteers and
employees and the section
requested by that fbi allowing
the department to perform
background clearances for eccd
volunteers and employment
employees and for cyfic senate
bill when fifty two provides
definitions for CYFD two conduct
background clearances on and
people like the foster or
adoptive parents adults residing
and foster or adopt of parents
households operators employee
employees student interns and
volunteers for behavior
management skills case
management and in juvenile
detention and correction
facilities and treatment
facilities and with that
mrperiod chair we stand for
questions and I have my expert
witness i'll let her introduce
herself I guess before.
So with the early childhood
education and care dependent.
Thank you.
Do we have anyone in opposition
to senate bill.
One fifty two.
So if we could have you for come
up I think there's the mike
right there on the side if you
could come up and make a comment
possible.
I'm good morning mr chair
members of the committee to be
sick as others cabinet secretary
designate for see by fd i'm just
here and support of this bill it
is technical fixed to the
language that will enable us to
continue doing background checks
for individuals that we work
with and that we employ at cyfd
so I stand in support of the.
Thank you
eric and members of the
committee elizabeth cregency
secretary for the early child.
Senator him pill for sponsoring
this and urger yes boat to clear
up our technical fixes with our
background related to the fbi's
feedback.
All right do we have any support
more opposition online.
All right so then i'm going to
go ahead and go.
Until first in the center I
guess
thank you mister chair members
of the committee and think you
send it to him kill
the haven't looked through the
bill is there a time l.
Process.
Yes thank you mr chair senator
pinto there is not a specific
timeline outlined in the bill in
the regulations that are drafted
from the background authority
there are timelines for
background text.
And if these policies aren't.
Quality.
The.
Uh.
Mister chair senator pinto the
enforcing authority
if there is a issue it would go
to the
executive at ecc or c way of the
respectively otherwise I guess
the enforcing authority would be
the due to sharing.
And mister chairman members of
the committee it's just the only
agency that would fall under
this I know PED is also one of
the agencies with the teachers
but and then see why f d.
What other how many.
Yes mister chairs senator pinto
there are number of state
agencies that require background
tax for different individuals
and each of them have their own
authority independent authority
as required by the fbi the only
two agencies are factored by
this bill of the ecd and cyfd
otherwise pd department of
health they believe a ltsd is
seeking their own background
authority as well and as far as
i'm aware those with the
agencies that currently have
background authority think to
miss a channel members of the
committee and the reason I you
know asking his questions is
because during this past year
there was an entity with health
that was trying to get this done
and it took almost over a year
and this time lying that we're
trying to shoot for I think in
in every department probably
it's very hindering and it also
can do
our health
does that are trying to nurses
the art trying to come in
because that gap in which you
don't know if you're gonna get
your background check our
waiting to work
in those that come out of school
it said critical time and it
seems like the longer it takes
the more we lose people that
wait to in that delay and I
wasn't sure if it was the fire
who actually dropped the ball
but I think it's again the the
story was that the
entity that needed to have these
background checks done on their
personals did not know
that they need it to go and log
in so I don't I didn't really
look through the bill but that
part of the medication of our
you know those that are wish to
do business in the state in the
mexico that also needs to be a
factor considered thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee.
Center gages
thank you miss terran senator
appreciate this as welcome love
the definitions
six line twenty four gone always
age eleven one two.
Is there a reason we hadn't had
this historically.
The.
Thank you mister chair and
senator let me expert witness
answer
thank you mister chair said or
nor gay unformally the fb I just
hadn't required that level of
specificity for who would be
cleared um it loud for more big
definitions more recently I
believe in the past five years
there was the fbi updated their
public law i'm requiring more
specific d.
Um get those definitions and
place and state law we agree
that these are
it's it's nice to have specific
definitions in there and that's
what the spell
um will do for us
thank you for mister center yeah
I had a lot of opposition see
why just because of some
historical issues I think this
gives us clarity the other thing
I wanted to make don't I
understand you're going more
towards federal but do we not
know mister center
do background checks I
understand we do
all the way to the foster
parents.
So what is different from what
we do now and what is fed chased
because I had thank you mister
chair senator gagas and we do
back on clearances on all of the
individuals that are in the
spell currently we are under a
grace period with the f b I
ecd is has a full clearance for
everybody except for the
employees and volunteers of the
department directly because of a
technical issue and see why also
and has previously been cleared
with their own or I with the f b
I to conduct background
clearances on all the
individuals that are listed in
this film
but the great grace period
currently will expire in
september of twenty twenty four
unless this bill is pass.
The definitions are made part of
law and mister chair and senator
just also out that it was the
summer twenty twenty three
review that the fbi conducted
that determined that cyfd's
current statue is no longer
sufficient to comply with the
fbi requirements and the
definitions were too vague and
so that's what kind of started
this
push and like my expert witness
at the awarded cyf period that
will expire september twenty
twenty four.
Thank you for that actually I
love oversight I tried to the
embargement forever because I
think we it's legislature is
have a few not not adoring to
see why fd but just a window but
mister and center then my last
question is to part how much
more time is this going to take
and what is the cost difference
from current background checks.
Mr chair and senator thirty cost
per individual for
seventy dollars or mr chair as
under during us do you mean the
cost the the individual paying
the cost of the cost to the
agencies to implement this I
would say are the costs of the
agency to have the background
check dot and and I don't know
let's say it takes ten days now
will it take thirty days for my
feds and what to cost
differences mr chair senator
goes we already doing all of
these clearances so the cost to
the agency while that change and
the time period that it will
take us while also not change
i'm based on this build this to
build just allows us to continue
doing what we are already doing
at this time
this chair center in my final
question is then the only thing
we're doing is only federal
guidelines in giving definitions
is accurate.
The.
Mr.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you.
So great so we just think I let
me just make sure I understand
the so section one is just
just clarifying.
You know employees in volunteers
a department employees.
Section two
I was asking myself where did on
page or mister chairman.
Lane sixteen at land twenty
three i'm saying you're crossing
up and see where did that go.
And then of course it goes to
section e with all those
wonderful definitions
up seven eight and nine
but there's no
but where these world.
Definitions.
These definitions are not in the
bill so these definitions and
other sections of.
Mr chairman senator mr chair and
senator thank you for your
question i'll let my expert
witness
thank you and send it up.
Mr chair senator masters.
Currently
so if we go back in time when
you see cb became an agency um
we didn't have our own
independent fbi authority to
conduct background clearances
for child's care facilities so
there was an amendment made that
went into the children's code
which is what you see that's
being struck out in line sixteen
through twenty three that
amendment was made to allow ecd
to conduct their own background
clearances the fbi
wasn't in favor of doing it this
way and asked us to do it a
different way have you seen cd
have its own independent
authority which is what we
passed the real years
twenty twenty two and twenty
three and saw those definitions
for those sections that were
applied to eccousing section b
is now in our own independent
statutory authority and it's
under section nine twenty nine
eight point one so that's where
that went and that per isn't
being amended because last year
when we did our amendment most
of the definitions that were
created and by ecd to satisfy
the fbi were passed the only
lingering issue was this
department and employees and
volunteers so the strike out
impatience for section sixteen
to twenty three is to remove the
ecd because it was no longer
necessary and the f b I required
us to remove this section from
the children's code so that the
changes that we had made
previously and twenty three
would control.
Thank you very much mister
chairman generally thank you
the.
So essentially sections b and e
became the new section e r and
so they're not really defining
stuff in this particular bill
but I think there may be an
error if I can ask mister
chairman senator look on page
five
line ten.
We strike section being b and c
and line nine but we substitute
with section a online ten
should we substitute that with
line with the section e
should.
Thank you I I will tell me if
this is i'll just make it in the
form of all she tell me that
this is friendly on page five mr
chairman line ten
it it draws the reader to
subsection a it says for the
purpose of investigating the
suitability of persons in human
right in subsection a of this
section blah blah I believe that
should read subsection e.
And so I I would like to change
eighty eight that friendly and
my kitchen it might off base.
Mister chair senator masters if
I may if you
read through section that's for
the purposes investigating
suitability of person's
enumerated and subsection a and
then if you look at a it talks
about all operators employees do
to interns volunteers
perspective operators employees
student interns volunteers
facilities programs juvenile the
tension facilities driven out
correction facilities treatment
facilities etcetera so it does
actually enumerate the people in
section a that would get
background clearances section
east of the definitions of what
those people mean so we do need
to reference in section b we do
need to go to section a that
lists out it's just a list of
the people and then those people
are defined in section.
Thank you mister.
Doesn't but I did but i'll.
But it's unfairly swell although
I won't make it thank you
thank you senator.
Anything else no thank you other
questions from the committee.
You have not emotions in order
please
buy center guy goes by senator
pope mary and if you will call
the role please.
This.
Yes.
Send her so yes
a bill and I believe it goes to
the judiciary next so incentive
i'm sure they will look at
carefully there thank you mister
chair
thank you
mr chair
yes I just wanted to remind
folks I think today's local.
And on the same prace to the
lowballs as the
gotten any swag or anything i.
Do we have some mobiles in the
house student government
looks like they're not here is
mexico stayed out of much bigger
showing as I recall
yeah
and I have to say in new mexico
once the eggies and mobiles have
both played their games.
Every base and eggy everybody's
a local after that
senator stewart I know is over
in
rules
nay think I can present this
for.
That this is pretty much.
All right so next up us senator
souls will be presenting senate
bill one ninety three reading
materials fund.
You have the forest under.
Thank you center pope this is
something the l c has been
talking about for a while we've
been spending time in the
interim working on the
structured literacy this is a
funding bill to provide the
materials for that structural
literacy
as that we were reviewing it
earlier on if anything I think
it's not enough money that.
But other than that it's to make
sure that these this is plenty
directly for the structured
literacy reading materials that
the schools are going to need as
we continue to move through that
process.
The.
Thank you senator with that do
we have any from the audience do
we have any opposition.
We have any and one in the
audience that supports this.
All right if I could have four
folks line up
and just make comments just let
me just have four folks the
first four that come up.
There's a microphone right there
for you walk up it's going to be
on the left hand s.
About two minutes.
The.
Good morning my name is bunny
like president of the coalition
of educational leaders on behalf
of standard new mexico school
supreme court is restaurant
supported this bill.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee I made
out of on executive director of
new mexico kids can very
supportive of this appropriation
we were truly hard with senator
stewart now the supporters last
year to make sure that this
reading materials fund was
aligned for structure literacy
so now that we're insured that
the policy is the right policy
we need the money to make sure
our school districts can get the
right materials for their
students thank you so much.
The.
Hello mister chair members of
the committee my name is chelsea
granio i'm the first grade
teacher and rear rancher public
schools are my my national board
started by teacher and language
I am a teached pleasure mexico
policy fellow and i'm a graduate
of oscris's high score as a
first grade teacher arm
structure literacy curriculums
are necessary in all school
districts in our states it's
really the only way to properly
teach her child how to read a
right so i'm in support of this
bill.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is tennis lucas and in mexico
teach plus fellow I do support
speed one ninety three and
currently i'm a middle school
teacher and most of my students
are at least two great levels
behind and it's probably seventy
five percent of them and I
believe that if we can really
arm start honing in on some of
this we won't have that problem
anymore to close those gaps and
arm I believe also that these
and these materials will help
close them gaps until the new
curriculum adoption is available
so thank you very much and have
a good day.
The.
And it looks like.
Supporters online so give each
of them two minutes.
Two minutes.
Thank you good morning mr
chaired members of the media my
name is lydia parkia with ethnic
mexico voices for children and
we are support sp ninety three
because this appropriation will
help districts I have the
funding to access appropriate
reading materials that are
evident space so we can see
greater improvements and our
students ability to read thank
you.
Thank you next we have chelsea
canada.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is chelsea
canada.
The.
Your muted chelsea up
the inch mr fair mister chair
members of the committee my name
is healthy canada and i'm the
director of public policy at the
new mexico chamber of commerce
the state chamber supports b one
ninety three and thinks the
sponsors are bringing up forward
we applaud the legislature's
work and supporting teacher
training based in the same
separating giving teachers
access to it and structural
materials align with the science
of reading is this the next step
and will give teachers the tools
to use the skills they learn
translated in the classroom this
is the next necessary step to
improve our reading proficiency
rates ensuring that teachers
insurance have the tools they
need to succeed thank you again
senator stewart and sponsors.
Thank you and our final
supporter online is going to be
to ball westfall you have.
Well good morning chairman
stills and committee members i'm
to bar west fall executive vice
president of policy and programs
for the better album he chamber
and i'm here to test by in
strong support of senate bill
why ninety three our public
schools are on a mission to get
our students to grade level
especially in reading and a key
to making that happen is
ensuring that our teachers have
appropriate instructional
materials specifically for
structured letter is seat speed
one ninety three which you know
is sponsored by two career
educators will transfer twelve
point five million from the
general time to the existing
reading materials find reverted
proven reading materials last
year our public education
department noted it's been at
least a decade since the
legislature has made an
appropriation into this find.
We have many many great teachers
but we can expect them to do
their jobs to the fullest
without the necessary tools it's
essential that we insure our
teachers have the best materials
available to do their jobs to
the follows and get our students
reading a grade level and so we
encourage you to give sp one
ninety three a due pass thank
you.
Thank you and that's the end of
the comments from the audience
and online now we'll go to the.
Senator brent.
I really would do pastor senator
brant a second.
Was there.
Okay that is a great bill thank
you mister
apologies right I didn't see
anyone else.
Yes.
The.
Yes.
And you have a due pass center
thank you great to have all this
comment now to find
this is not in the budget yet.
And I will pass it back over to.
All right so that's the end of
our agenda today thanks everyone
for coming we will be back at
eight thirty on wednesday I
don't have it what's.
Okay three bills so far for
wednesday maybe an additional
one or two but we will see
everybody eight thirty on
wednesday thank you.
The.
