Good morning, everybody. Welcome
to Senate Education. Uh, we've
got a fairly
Lengthy, healthy agendas, so
we'll see how we do on moving
through all of that, uh, as we
get started, I'd like to
introduce my guest today, uh,
Doctor Davis is head of the
transplant unit at UNM and so
he's gonna be shadowing me today
in committee and then on the
floor. So it's very interested
in public policy and how policy
is made.
Any other announcements,
anything of that sort, senators?
They're not seeing any, then uh
we'll start with the top of the
list and welcome Chairman Rometo
if you would please. You know,
welcome to Senate Education for
House Bill 63 is amended public
school finance formula changes.
Alright. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Good morning,
senators, um.
House Bill 63 is overgone has
undergone um an amendment which
I'll kind of talk about, but
it's to comport with the um
house version of House Bill 2 in
the budget.
So it's taken on a little bit
different shape than what's
worked on in the interim, so
House Bill 63 is the product of
2 years of work, um by the
legislative education Study
Committee and Legislative
Finance Committee, and various
other education stakeholders.
This was a request that was made
2 years ago by um.
Representative Herrera to really
study the, the state
equalization guarantee, um, so
through that work there is a
number of proposed changes. One
of those is to be at risk index,
um, so the funding for at risk
will still be called at risk,
but it's using the mechanism of
the family income index to
better identify students living
in poverty at the.
School site um to identify those
students and to provide funding
to those schools directly, um.
And then it would create a
standalone English learner's
factor. So again, the students
that are English learners that
are generating those funds, um,
those schools would see those
funds directly to
To the school. Um, I will say
that I think this tool using the
family income index and then
having a separate English
learner factor is a better way
to really pinpoint for our
purposes of accountability, um,
what schools are generating
these funds and then for us to
be able to come back and
identify what the schools are
doing with those funds, I think
is is gonna be really important
from this bill. Um, one of the
other things that you may.
Not from the amendment that was
needed to be placed was um in
house preparations and finance
and the budget making process,
the increase to the secondary
factor, the large increase that
we had didn't make it into the
budget, but what was put into
the budget was some funding for
an increase in the 6th grade
factor, um, so in the amendment,
there's a separate 6th grade
factor that gets increased, um,
but I have
Um, Daniel and Stupinan from
LESC and uh director Senna here
as well from LESC for any sort
of questions. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Chairman Rometo, uh,
and my understanding, we're
working with the finance
committee about putting that
funding back into the budget
over on this side, Mr. Chairman,
yes, that is our hope that the
original bill would get in place
through Senate Finance.
Thank you. Um, of the audience
first, just quick show of hands,
those in support.
And in opposition.
Supporters would like to come
up. You have up to 2 minutes.
To speak
They're very capable sergeant of
arms will help manage the
microphone for us.
Thank
Mr. Sher members of the
committee. My name is Gina
Morales with JD Bolington
government relations and we
represent the Kalo McKinley
Community Schools, and they
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, Joey
and executive director of the
New Mexico School Boards
Association. We participated in
the two-year study. We had 2
seats on the committee. We felt
very strongly that uh the, the
bill that came out of the uh
committee, uh, is, is very good
for us in terms of increasing
that risk of funding and also
secondary funding, so we support
the original bill, uh, and
hopefully, uh, it'll leave that
way from.
the Senate, uh, again, we're
stan in strong support. Thank
you.
Uh,
good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Alvin
Warren with the Lano Foundation,
we also are in strong support of
the bill, both in its original
form and in its current form, we
appreciate the focus on the 6th
grade factor and also continue
to support the increase in the
secondary factor. We appreciate
all the work that went into
producing this bill over the
past 2 years, the research has
been done, um, and we, we just
want to urge your support and
the do pass. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Amanda Aragon
from New Mexico, Kids can, like
you've heard, we're in strong
support of this bill, especially
the more precise measure of the
risk index to make sure that our
students that most need support
are getting those funds to get
that support. And then a note
that we've been making is, uh,
when we're in good budgetary
times like we are now, we would
really encourage phased in
approaches so that, um, schools
and districts can better support
the transitions in their
funding, and we don't lose.
good policy, um, because a one
year transition sometimes
creates some tumultuousness.
Thank you.
Chairman, committee members,
Edward Webster with NEA New
Mexico. Uh, we also stand in
support of HB 63 for many of the
reasons that have been said
here, the increase in funding to
the secondary and as well the at
risk. So we ask that you support
and vote yes on HB 63. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot. I'm
the current president of the New
Mexico Coalition of Educational
Leaders, happy to represent
school superintendents
Association, um, in addition to
that, we represent 230,000
students in the state of New
Mexico, nearly 1000
administrators and 89 districts,
so we stand in support of this
bill in order to do pass and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Ellen Bernstein. I'm the
president of the Albuquerque
Teachers Federation, speaking
today as a member of the
committee and for AFT New
Mexico, I'm very hopeful that we
can go back to the original bill
and get the funding, and I
support the bill as is and in
the future. Thank you.
Thank you. And online we have
two Matthew, Matt Paul.
A math called Matt, we know him
as.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, we stand
in support of House Bill 63.
This has been something charter
schools have been wanting for a
number of years, um, the ability
to generate our own at-risk
index, um, you'll note on the
FIR that there are a number of
charter schools that really get
hit hard in this, so we're
thankful for the uh one year
hold harmless, um, we're hoping
to work for a longer term
transition um in the future, um,
but we, we like the bill, but we
ask you to be mindful of.
that as you move forward here.
So thank you, we support the
bill.
Thank you, Matt. And then Jason
Morgan.
Yes, hello. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
um, I am the principal at the
Academy for Technology in the
Classics in Santa Fe. We are in
fact one of those charter
schools that um for us, we stand
to lose $200,000 in funding from
this bill about a 4.5% decrease
in uh at-risk funding, and I do
support the logic of the bill. I
do support the adjustments.
made, but I, as, as Matt just
said, um, a one year hold
harmless means we're going to be
preparing for that now, a 3 year
old harmless gives us a minute
to breathe because we're talking
about uh counseling positions
being cut, we're talking about,
um, training and support for our
peer mentoring program being
cut, um, training for
instructional coaches to better
provide support to teachers for
culturally relevant instruction
that benefits.
are at-risk students the most,
uh, these, these are gonna be
felt pretty immediately, um, and
so I would urge uh that this
bill go forward but with either
the original funding put back in
or um with a 3 year, at least 3
year hold harmless or phase out
um of these cuts because they're
gonna hurt um at a time when it
seems like we need more support
for at-risk students, uh, in our
school community. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Is there anyone in opposition?
He won an opposition online?
If not
Any other comments before we get
questions from the committee
chairman. ready for questions,
Mr. Chair.
Great, uh, questions from the
committee, please.
Thornton
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. I think
We have sat down and we've gone
through the SDG formulation. You
guys have done a tremendous
amount of work.
Thank you for that. Uh, I'm
really pleased with the results
of what you've accomplished.
The only issue is the one you
just heard about with regards to
the
Charter schools that have
Some concern about holding
harmless for 3 years versus.
And I've got the list of
schools, several of them are in
my district, so, so I'm
concerned about that, and
And I know that you're looking
at the appropriations and maybe
that's gonna go to finance next.
I mean it gets out of here, um.
But is there a possibility of
amending that or to make it a
three-year. We're looking at
possibly maybe 4 to $8 million.
you know being added to the
budget for the.
to support these to hold these
schools harmless for 3 years, so
I guess some time to do the
adjustments and maybe move staff
and then after that, SCG form it
kicks in.
How, how open to that are you?
Um
Mr. Chairman and and Senator um
certainly open to it, um,
obviously we're at the will of
the finance committee as we were
the first go around, um, in our
committee hearing in House
Appropriations and finance, uh,
it was discussed and made a
priority of the chair and the
vice chair to look into this
issue also during the interim,
so even if the money weren't
secured um for
This bill now and it stays the
one year hold harmless, um, uh,
our chair had indicated that he
would make it a priority that we
that LFC because he will be the
incoming chair of LFC along with
us at the LESC to to look into
whether that's warranted. I will
say to you, Mr. Chairman, is
that part, part of my concern in
this bill as well is that um and
what's at stake is that a lot of
these charter schools have been
getting the at-risk funding
currently of their school
districts with
Out servicing those students
that are that student population
that's at risk. So part a lot of
and I would have a map. I wish I
had that map with me that a lot
of the the charter schools that
do stand to gain from this or in
the district that I represent in
the far South Valley and parts
of southeast Albuquerque, that
service very, very high
populations more than our school
district of APS of of at-risk
students. I think it also, Mr.
Chairman, begs the question of
how much more should we be?
Funding um schools because you
heard from some of these schools
that stand to lose some of this
money that they're providing
added services for their
students, that to me begs the
question of even are we
adequately funding our schools
enough to be able to provide
these services in general.
Thank you for that. I, I.
understand all of that, and I
think
I think this idea of identifying
your local region and
understanding.
I just to bring in and funding
them accordingly as appropriate.
Um
And you guys have done a
remarkable job in doing.
So, so I, I was gonna vote
against it because it impacts my
schools, I will support this
because I do know that.
Have one year, so with some
guarantees that you guys are
gonna fight.
2 years cause I certainly.
Thank you for that.
Other questions
centers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm trying to pull something out
of this because
Some of my pages are missing in
my book.
Mr. Chairman, it's good to see
you again, Mr. Chairman.
If this closed and I'll get back
to my question here in one of
the, is this an amendment
whenever I'm looking at the
definition.
the bill.
You are talking about
membership.
And my question is,
We're talking about students.
starting to be on page 8.
The students absent from the
public school for as many as 10
consecutive school days.
And then it drops on down. I'm
seeing there's some strike
through there on line 14 or who
are chronically or excessively
absent.
Kind of fill me in there.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator is, uh,
so most of this is uh the
definition of membership is
current language and uh the
pieces, the pieces that are
amended that, that you're
pointing to are to um
Bring this language in line to
changes that were made.
To the uh student.
attendance for success actually
we used to call students
habitually truant.
We now call them chronically
absent. It's a, it's a sort of a
national uh change in language
and how we look at attendance
overall. So this is just um
moving to
Aligned with the current statue.
attendance.
So Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
What do we do about these
students who are chronically or
excessively absent, and what are
their parents doing about it?
Um
Mm
Mr. Chairman and and Senator,
um, currently for students that
are chronically absent, uh, the
schools are to start putting
together a file on those
students to get an idea of why
those students are chronically
absent, um, and continually
absent from school and bringing
the families in, um, we had in
December, I believe is a part of
LESC we had CYFD folks that
handle these in.
that handle these cases and I
think there's general confusion
as to whose role is why in terms
of of absenteeism and who's
supposed to be creating that
file because that file is
supposed to be created and then
it would be up to the juvenile
justice to decide whether or not
there are any uh uh.
Uh
Violations uh on the parents or
upon the students right as
pertains to the Children's code.
Um, I couldn't speak to parents,
Mr. Chairman, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, I think that's bad
man. The parents aren't notified
when their students are not
attending school, there is a
problem.
parents get involved, there's
going to continue to be a
problem.
But whenever you say they are in
need of intervention.
Or chronically or excessively
absent.
Why
Why does it
Why are the parents kind of left
out of that loop. They may drop
their kids off at school, but
then their kids could just turn
around and walk up.
So what is being done there?
Senator, I don't think that's
the, what this bill is about
that's just the language change.
This bill is about the funding
formula some answers on that
though.
Senator, it's not part of what
this bill is. This bill is about
the funding formula, not about
attendance act.
This is just an, an update on
the definition.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
whenever we're talking about the
federal poverty rate, I'm
looking at it right here. What
is the definition?
Family income index.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, I
believe in 21, you all created
the family income index pilot
program.
As a new approach to identifying
poverty at the school site
level. So if you refer to page
3.
I G
That's the definition of the
family income index rate that
will be used in the at-risk
index to calculate poverty in
each school district and each
charter school.
you read that to me again cause
I'm not seeing it.
In one of these.
Mr.
Chairman sent a result referring
to page 3
of the bill item G
in the bill a statute in
proposed for statute that
provides the definition of the
family income index rate.
So Mr. Chairman and
Experiment
2025 federal property rates, one
person 15,652 people, 21,03
people, 26,000.
4 people, 32,000, is that what
we're basing this on?
Mr. Chair, Senator. So just to
clarify, the family income index
Act is a state statute that does
use federal poverty levels as as
a sort of
baseline to to uh in which
Families that are placed into
the income levels.
Um
And I believe our two lowest
categories are extremely low
income and very low income are
at 130% or be or below the
federal poverty level.
OK, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
in 2024, the average household
size in the Mexico is 2.55
people in the median income
there was $60,980.
That was
The world population review.
That brought it into factor
whenever this was.
First implemented, Mr. Chair and
Senator, um, I don't know that
we've talked about the family
income very much in this
committee, so I'll do a quick
rundown because I, so the way
that the family income index is
determined that each currently
at each school site is that
we're actually looking at
Family, individual student, and
family incomes, either via
The income tax.
Benefits like Snap.
And census data. So we're not,
we're, we're actually matching
individual students and
households to their specific
income levels using that data.
So,
I, I, it sounds like you're,
you're citing some of the
information from the FIR but
we're actually tracking these
students uh individual family
income, not using any sort of
allergens or anything like that.
OK.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
I, I see that you target here is
for those students that are
basically in middle school, am
I?
Mr. Chair and Senator, the
current version of the bill
increases, um,
The 6, the factor for 6th grade
students, yes.
to make
That
Uh
My problem is I went back and
looked at my, my schools and
there's 5 of them.
That are gonna be hit, 3 of them
that are gonna be hit pretty
hard. So I have a concern with
it.
This funding
It's not gonna be very evenly
distributed.
That's my problem.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
I
Against my, I'm gonna be
through, Mr. He. That's fine.
Thank you very much.
Anything else, Senator?
That's all, Mr. Chair.
Other questions from the
committee.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
House Bill 6.
We have a motion for a due pass,
is there a second?
Exactly. Seed by Senator
Figueroa, if you'll call the
roll, please.
Yes.
Senator Hickey, your bikes on
just briefly while you.
Yes. Ramos Thornton.
Yes. The Pope, yes, send her
souls, yes.
have a unanimous due pass. Thank
you. Thank you for your time
here in our community.
Our
next bill, and I think uh
Senator Figueroa, you're going
to be putting on House Bill 167
as amended.
Yes.
Which is the higher ed payment
for certain tests.
167 as amended.
You're getting settled. I'd like
to take this moment. I do have
another guest shadow today.
This is Alexis Espinoza who is
uh
Mr. Master's degree in social
work.
At New Mexico State University
is gonna to be working in one of
the family centers it's just
getting started down in Las
Cruces, uh, very fortunate I get
to have her as a shadow today
and show her what's going on
with, with the legislatures.
Welcome.
S, please go ahead.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
committee. Um, the expert
witness here is Amber Gallop,
who is the director of the
prepper of the adult Education
Division.
Division.
Thank you, uh, HED and I'm
covering this bill for
Representative Garrett and 3
other reps who could not be here
this morning. This is House Bill
167 and directs the higher
education department to provide
free high school equivalency
credential test to New Mexico
residents and the criteria are
they must be at least 16 years
of age, not currently enrolled
in secondary school.
Have not graduated from an
accredited high school or
received a high school
equivalency certificate or
diploma already and have passed
an official practice test with
scores indicating test
readiness. So, HED reports that
test costs for the high school
equivalency exams.
Total 145 degrees per exam.
And the fewer than 6000 New
Mexicans took a high school
equivalency exam in fiscal year
24.
So the total exam cost would be
approximately 870,000 per year.
That's their calculation of the
cost, and with that we stand for
questions, Mister Chair.
Thank you. Out to the audience,
those in support.
There any in opposition.
His supporters would like to
come up, you have up to 2
minutes.
grass on ruralleso eddilio de
los examine alexamine for a
gratis continustudios.
studios.
Metaria paso so mama trabajadora
yama de casa es neosos ado de
los via la comida Ipagar extra
polos examine is the cada
materia
meallimitado and no
continuartelesculare piquete
pola ache.
That's uh, Mr. Chairman, may I
interpret for her? Sure, thank
you. Good morning, Chairman and
committee members. My name is
Lucero. I am a member of
Samosumumido, a worker and
immigrants' rights organization
that organizes in 8 counties, 7
of which are rural, including
Eddy andley County. I am here
supporting HP 167 because the
price of high school equivalency
exams is too high, and I have
not been able to finish because
I cannot afford it. If the exam
were free, I could continue my
studies. I have been trying to
finish my studies for 5 years. I
would like.
to work in an office, but my GED
is the first step. I am a
working mother and a housewife
in these times, everything has
gone up in price, the bills, the
rent, the food, thinking about
paying the extra for exams of
the subject has limited me from
continuing in school. That is
why I ask you to vote yes for HB
167. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Online
Yeah.
Hey
Anyone in opposition in the
room, and we have one online in
opposition.
If the on a.
Please go ahead.
Uh, good morning. No, no, no, I
was in a, in um
And position that I, I get
wrong. But, OK, um, good
morning. Everyone's, um,
committees, uh, my
I, I'm on position because um a
lot of people are in my
community, my Kenley County is
getting here, uh, here, um.
Uh, residents, uh, and they need
to, to improve her, her studies
and they, and, but they have to
work to, uh, to do to jobs and,
and we need uh we need this
help, please, please support
this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, and I believe that
was in support, not in
opposition, so.
Senator, anything else before we
go to questions.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
The result
Thank you, Mister Chairman.
Senator, I do have a question.
What, what expenses will the HED
have as far as the prep test go.
The cost for the prep test, Mr.
Chair and Senator, are rolled
into the 145 that they used to
calculate. So it is paying for
the uh
The exam, but it is also paying
for the practice exams.
And Mr. Chairman, uh Senpreted
these.
Where the prep is taking place.
Mr. Chair, um, senator, the
protests can take place in a
number of places, they can do it
at their adult education or
adult literacy program. They can
do it online at home, which is
more common, I think, way to do
it, uh, and they can also do it
at the testing center itself.
OK, and, and
I'm assuming, Mister Chairman
and Senator that these prints.
Basically the same thing as the
tests that they're gonna be
taking to get their GED, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
they're very closely aligned
with the actual test and are
good indicator of whether the
candidate is prepared to pass
the final exam, which is why
it's listed as a requirement
that they pass the practice test
before we pay for the final
exam.
And madam, and Mr. Chairman and
Senator.
I'm assuming that if they need
help with this, they can get
tutoring on it. Is that correct?
Mr. Terence and, yes, it is.
And is it a 1 to 1 or is it a
classroom size or?
How, how did they go about
prepping for this, Mr. Chairman
and sent to Figueroa.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, we
have a variety of
Programs and opportunities for
adults who want to pursue their
GED exam or their high school
equivalency exam, but you can
talk to the variety if you
would.
Mr. Chair, Senator is out, yeah,
we have a variety of different
ways, you know, a lot of people
in the state, um, simply study
uh with a book.
book, um, and materials that are
available uh for them, um,
sometimes they do it
independently or with various
organizations, um, NMHED funds
26 adult education programs and
18 adult literacy programs
around the state and they offer
preparation in both the
classroom setting and in one on
one tutoring, um, formats as
well. So basically depending on
the, the need of the person.
Some people prefer to have a
tutor one on one. Some people
are fine to go through an adult
education.
class.
OK, thank you very much for
that.
Um
If they, Mister Chairman and
Senator Figaro, if they are not
successful the first time taking
this test, will this kick in to
pay for the 2nd time.
Uh, Mr. Cha and Senator, yes, it
will, but requiring passage of
the practice practice exam prior
is an indicator that that will
be less likely to happen. OK,
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Figueroi said that they could
prep online as well as in person
is this test taken in person or
online.
Uh, the majority of the tests in
the state are taken um in um the
uh testing centers that we have
around the state. Um, however,
you can take an online proctor
test. Uh, that's tricky because
you have to have, um, uh, nobody
else in the room. There has to
be really strong internet, etc.
So people sometimes do online
proctor tests at home, but the
majority of them are done at our
approved testing centers around
the state.
Mr. Charon, uh, senators, OK,
uh.
Mr. Chairman, maybe it's just
me, but it seems like it would
be.
Better for these people to take.
in person because nobody could
make a guarantee that strong
internet service, we know how
that works in the state of New
Mexico, the noise factor in
somebody's home, you know, but
there's a.
Uh
The child that is needing
attention from somebody. I know
how that can be.
Mr. Chairman
I noticed that there were your
appropriation was taken out. Can
you tell me where that money is
now for paying for this?
Yes, Mister Tarrant, Senator,
the appropriation was stripped
in house appropriations and
finance because these funds are
included in the budget.
OK, Mr. Chairman, that brings me
to my next point. I kind of
figured that was gonna be the
answer Senator Figueroa.
And uh
I'd like to thank the New Mexico
oil and Gas Association for
providing these funds for
getting these tests to all these
people that are uh wanting to
get their GED to better their
lives, and they can get that
done in the oil field in the
past.
And uh
I just have to
All the money that we're
spending up there comes from two
main.
Contributors to our budget,
that's oil and gas industry and
agriculture. If you kill one,
you're going to kill the other
one.
Hope people understand that, but
I hope all these people out here
that are supporting this truly
understand.
The importance of getting that
good education.
Mr. Chairman and Senator
Figueroa, and this is the way to
do it with the thanks from those
two industries I.
name of. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Other questions
Mr. Chair, I move a Duke pass on
house once.
I'll motion in a second. I do
have one quick question about
the, where are the testing
centers and availability of
them, are these the same ones
that
Nursing students take to get
their nursing degree and welder
and take the written test, is it
the same testing centers and
where are they located or where
are the main ones? I worry about
people needing to travel.
Las Cruces, we have one that's
only open occasionally so people
usually have to go to El Paso or
Albuquerque. Are these the same
testing centers?
Um, in some cases, they are the
same testing centers, other
cases they're not, um, it
depends on, um, you know,
normally these are located at
community colleges and we have
some of them in community-based
organizations as well. I think
our total is about 60 around the
state. 660. Uh-huh, but um there
are um uh but uh a percentage of
those are inside correction. So
I think we've got like about 45
publicly available testing
centers. I will note that though
we do have enough and people are
going to them, um, for our
current.
needs, uh, there is a shortage
of testing centers that we've
been working on. We've added 8
in the last year and are
continuing to try to add as many
as we can.
Thank you. The reason I ask, and
I think there are different
levels of testing centers, but
I'm talking about are the ones
that require the federal.
You test level type of things
for professional degrees and
things of that sort which are
different than the ones
typically that are at community
colleges and stuff. Thank you,
that clarifies that. Uh, we have
a motion for a due pass if
you'll call the roll, please.
You never turn your bikes on
brief while you vote, please.
Senator Boone.
Yes.
Send her excuse me,
Cindel Cinder Figueroa, yes,
Ciner Hickey, yes, Center Nova.
Yes, Centrous.
Yes. Senator Thornton, yes,
Senator Pope, tender souls, yes,
you have a unanimous due pass.
Uh, the next bill going down,
we're gonna do Senate Memorial
19, the New Mexico meat, cheese
and produce in schools.
Senator Brantley and Senator
Boone.
Boom, welcome to Senate
Education. Glad to have you,
sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
pleased to be here.
On the other side of the desk,
I'm pleased to be bringing this,
uh, Senate Memorial 19 before
you today. What uh
What we aim to do with this is,
is we, uh, as it states in the
first paragraph of the bill, uh,
this memorial is, is, is gonna
be requesting the, the Mexico
Department of Agriculture and
the public of Education
Department.
To convene a work group.
To develop a plan in which
And, and
We had 50% in here and, and we
got
Advised to maybe possibly drop
it to 30, but, but we know this
is an ambitious plan, and we
know that this is a big idea to
try to, to pull off so we
decided we'd leave it at 50 just
so we could get across the idea
that we're swinging for the
fences with this deal and but.
You know, 30% would be good as
a, as a beginner, but, but
anyway, uh, a plan in which 50%
of the beef, cheese and milk
served in public schools
originates from and is processed
by New Mexico producers, uh.
We, we do have a, a robust.
Agriculture industry here in the
in, in the, in the state of New
Mexico and our, our beef.
And our dairy.
Is a very healthy, we, we, we
know we've had some
Downfall in the dairy industry
here lately, but, but what's
here is still very healthy and
and produces a lot of good stuff
and, and we
Just would like to see.
We, we've had
Fruits and fresh fruits and
vegetables going into our
schools for the last.
Period of time, I'm not for sure
how long, but we just, this,
this kind of rose out of, of
several of us legislators that
are also beef and dairy
producers sitting around talking
and we thought what, what better
way to, uh,
Prepare our children for uh.
The most optimum learning
processes than to than to feed
them the best possible.
Food and what could be better
than New Mexico produced beef,
milk and cheese, so that is our
aim to do this, we, uh, we have
a, a work group.
In mind of, of, uh
New Mexico cattle growers, uh, a
couple of the cheese plants, um,
New Mexico farmed livestock
Bureau, but we don't want to
limit them to that. We don't
want to really get the, the
meeting room crowded and, and
over.
Over, uh
Abundance, but we at the same
time, we would like to have all
the technical advice we can get
and try to put together the best
plan we can and see what we can
do and, and how the report put
together by November 1st and,
and report to uh.
The interim and and see what we
can get done and so with that uh
we'll rest and, and stand for
any questions.
Thank you. Uh, first, out to the
audience, those in support.
In opposition.
Reporters would like
Oh, you have an amendment.
We want to move the amendment
first, sir? Yeah.
I propose, Mister Chair, I
opposed, I propose to the Senate
Education Committee the
following amendments to Senate
Memorial 19.
On page 3.
Strike lines 4 through 7.
And on page 3 also line 11
strike September.
And insert in lieu thereof
November.
OK. Everything comfortable with
what the amendment is.
So, questions on the amendment.
out. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Boone, I do have a
question. Whenever you struck,
uh,
starting on
Page 3, line 4 through 7.
Can you tell me who would be
represented there because I'm
not gonna have anybody.
That the Senate
For the house majority leaders
and minority leaders pick out. I
think it needs to be people from
the industry.
Can you tell me who that might
be.
That's your amendment, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
representatives from Mexico
cattle growers, dairy producers
in New Mexico.
Southwest cheese producers and
to carry Mountain cheese and uh.
I would also
I would also
Offer that there may be other in
industry affiliates would be
interested in having some input
in there too.
Um
Such as New Mexico farm and
Livestock Bureau.
Or
Some, some of the New Mexico
state people that might have
some expertise in in this.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess my
concern here is most, most times
whenever we have something like
that, it is, we will have the
Senate.
In the House majority minority
leaders pick somebody up and
then the member at large or
whatever, so I do want it where
it is industry that is going to
be working on this, putting it
together, I think it only makes
sense that we do that.
I'm assuming that PED would be
involved in this for for it to
be distributed throughout the
state, and I see that the
members of
That you have left the room with
the exception of one.
Uh, I would like to see.
There are other industries have
out there that do offer
Whenever it says um.
Let's see
I said, you're being very
Whenever you're saying beef
production.
Later on page one line 19 L
milk, cheese and beef
production, and if we didn't
have all those damn coyotes out
there running around our sheep
men would still be a business,
OK?
Mr. Chairman, I understand.
What you're trying to do here. I
am pushing this bill as hard as
I can to.
I don't like our products being
shipped out of state before
they're brought back in to be
possibly served at our schools.
Schools need to realize that the
taxes that the agricultural
industry pays also pays for
their child's education.
And they need to be made very
aware of that.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to, even though you
have stricken out the language
on page 3 of your bill where
names of these.
Um
Representatives from the
industry.
Who will be making that decision
on where this where this will.
What target groups you're going
after.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, uh, in, in
my opening statement, uh, I, I
said that, uh, NMDA and, and the
PED would convene a work group
and uh to develop this plan.
And uh so that was, that was the
premise of
Of uh
Of the memorial.
And Mr. Chairman, I, I kind of
disagree with what you just
said. They're going to set up
the premise of this.
Where is industry representation
on this if you're gonna have,
tell me the two departments now
PED and who else?
The Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
And Mr. Chairman.
I have been after the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture to
let's get rolling on this for
how many years now.
And we're still dragging our
feet.
OK. So whenever we're talking
Mexico Department of
Agriculture, what have they done
to help us.
It is.
Distributed equitably throughout
our schools to help us get our
product that we grow here in New
Mexico.
Senator, we're on the amendment
right now. Please stick to the
amendment. Thank you, I will,
but whenever I'm, that is part
of the amendment, Mister
Chairman. It has to do with this
part that was stricken out.
Mr. Chairman.
Whenever you have taken that
part of it out.
You're requesting the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture and
PED to convene a work group.
It's not very specific whenever
they're naming this work group,
is it, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair
Senator, uh, the
NMDA and the PED were the ones
that are supposed to.
Come together
And
Get them
decide who's gonna be members of
the working group who's gonna.
Who's gonna do this and uh.
They're the ones that are
supposed to convene at the
beginning.
At our request.
To, to do that.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman, it was
very plain in your, in your, uh,
Amendment where it was stricken
out you were very specific on
Southwest Chiefs and Teamurri
Mountain Chiefs to be invited to
be part of the work group.
Mr. Chairman, I think that we're
also leaving very
Integral part of that particular
industry, yeah.
And that is Larino with Ross on
New Mexico, who produces more
mozzarella cheese than anybody
else in the world.
So I don't want to get specific
on this. I just think maybe
whenever you are visiting within
MDA and PED that these very
specific entities are all
inclusive.
So
Mr. Chairman,
I like the idea that you're
going back to November instead
of September. That's kind of
crowding it.
Will this, with this amendment
with you moving on page 3 line
11 striking September and in
certain lieu of November. Will
that give schools opportunity to
set their budgets for the
following school year implement
this if it does.
If people start going forward
with this.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, I, I
would, uh,
Without having expertise in
that.
In that particular area, it
would be hard for me to make
that statement, uh, uh, we just
realized that September 1 was
going to be pretty ambitious to
try to get this done, so we
decided to move it to November
1.
And uh
Just
Just get the working group put
together and uh
And let him
Make their
do their work.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate what
this bill is trying to do. I did
or this memorial is trying to
do.
I did so on too because Mr.
Chairman.
I believe in our farmers and
ranchers in the state of New
Mexico and the products that
they produce and the jobs that's
created whether it's through the
dairies, the cheese plants, the
processing plant, whatever it
may be.
And we already have something in
place as far as
Or
Vegetables that are grown in the
steak, but this does.
It's very
Narrowed down to where it is
beef or dairy.
and over here.
And milk
Well, milk and cheese.
The.
But we also have other
Protein sources well.
That would be she go.
pigs, chickens, whatever the
case may be.
So Mr. Chairman, we have to get
our schools on board.
I want our children to be able
to eat healthy.
I don't want food coming in from
some foreign country that we
don't know what's been sprayed
on it.
There's no rules and regulation.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Thank you for walking me
through your amendment.
On the amendment, Senator, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Mr. Senator, um.
Sounds like
This amendment takes out lines 4
through 7.
And NMDA public education
department.
Set up that work group.
Um, so I support the amendment.
Happening.
Um, because on here I just me
not being in the industry, want
to make sure it's not too
specific for certain company
that.
Produce cheese
But also the fact that
Education we might want to have
someone school district, folks
that actually.
Purchase
Oh
Um, I, I like what you're trying
to do here and not being
specific.
Thank you.
Mr. Cha, Senator Pope, uh,
That's, that's our intent, uh.
It was just for NMDA and PED to
come together and create this
working group and, and
Those
Entities that were mentioned
there.
Uh we just suggestions and uh
Just ones that came to mind at
the time we were brainstorming
this thing and uh we, we
certainly don't mean for it to
be the limit or, you know, we
would welcome, I would think, of
course it will be the
responsibility of PED and NMDA
if they, if, if this gets
through and they uh are gonna
convene to put together this
working group, it would be their
choice of who to put in there,
and I would, I would hope that
they would reach out and get.
is good a representation as they
could from our industry in order
to try to make this as
comprehensive and as good a bill
as can possibly be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks.
Thank you. The emotion for the
amendment.
Mo a two pass on 02317294
reaching for their mites. We
have a motion for it to pass on
the amendment seconded by
Senator Ramos. Uh, is there any
opposition to the amendment?
The opposition to the amendment,
seeing none, Devon amended, uh,
memorial, sir.
OK, back on the bill, uh,
anything else on the bill, sir?
Mr. Chair, no, sir.
OK, uh, to the audience, those
in support again.
OK. Anyone in opposition in the
room?
If you'd like to come up, you
have up to 2 minutes to speak in
support of the bill.
the, the memorial, not a bill.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, my name is Abby
O'Connor and I am a 5th
generation rancher, and I
represent the New Mexico cattle
Growers Association. Cattle
growers support Senate Memorial
19, the beef, cheese and milk
that we produce in our state is
what we should serve to our
schools. It is healthy and
nutritious, and it comes from
our own state. In fact, my
family actually does serve beef
within central New Mexico to our
surrounding community.
in both schools and senior
centers just last week, we took
3000 pounds of ground beef to a
Moriarty school district, um,
Senate Memorial 19 is
aspirational with the targets
that it is sending, but it's
definitely not out of the
picture if called upon, we look
forward to working with the
Secretary of AG and Education to
develop the plan to feed our
schools beef, cheese and milk
grown here in New Mexico, and
there are many limiting factors.
In terms of meeting these
regulations to provide to
schools and simply providing the
amount of product that we need,
but working in this group would
allow us to work on supplies
chain infrastructure to
facilitate feeding these
schools. We urge you to support
Senate Memorial 19. Thank you.
Thank you. Yes, ma'am. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, Committee
members. My name is Elena
Pisano. I represent the approved
supplier program, which is a
food quality assurance, food
safety and marketing, technical
assistance program for farmers
and ranchers selling to
institutions across the state,
uh, that program is called the
New Mexico Grown Program. Y'all
have funded it for many years.
We've seen incredible success
impacting livelihoods around the
state and 2 years ago we added
in meat products, so now all,
uh, New Mexicoan buyers can
utilize.
their grant funding for up to
40% of their grant funding to
purchase beef, bison, lamb, and
pork products produced here in
the state. We have over 94% of
counties in the, in the state
are purchasing local through the
New Mexico Growing Program, and
that represents 32 different
ranching and processing
operations primarily we see beef
in that value chain. There are a
number of steps and work to be
done, but I'm here to say we did
a robust evaluation last year on
the meat purchasing program.
Specifically, we have some data
points, qualitative and
quantitative, and something to
build off of. So I stand here in
support of Senate Memorial 19
and hope to be a part of the
collaboration. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, committee members,
my name is Pam Roy. I'm here
representing Farm to Table and
the New Mexico Food and
Agriculture Policy Council for
the things that have already
been uh said in support of
Senate Memorial 19, we also
stand in support that we're
building out economic
opportunities for our farmers
and ranchers, and those who are
doing the processing as well in
the state, as Ms. Paisano said,
we have a robust infrastructure
that has also been evolved in
New Mexico is seen as a leading
state in this world.
So we look forward, we hope to
be also part of this process,
um, as we continue forward and
that there's an amazing
collaboration of of agencies and
um community organizations,
ranchers and farmers who are
currently involved in this and
look forward to the expansion of
this work. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, chairman and
members of the committee, Jason
Espinoza speaking on behalf of
New Mexico Farm and Livestock
Bureau, we stand in strong
support of the memorial and just
believe it. So win for students
in our local agricultural
community. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. My
name is Gillian Joyce, and I'm
representing Rocky Mountain
Farmers Union and our family
farmers and rancher members
across New Mexico. We strongly
support Senate Memorial 19 as a
critical step towards supporting
sustainable markets for New
Mexico's agricultural producers.
For many of our members,
securing reliable institutional
buyers like our public school
system can mean the difference
between profitability and real
financial struggle. A guaranteed
market for
50% of beef, cheese, and milk in
our schools would would provide
a consistent revenue stream that
allows producers to plan and
invest and grow their
operations. This initiative
isn't just about keeping farms
financially viable. It
strengthens our entire state
food system. When local
producers supply local schools,
we create economic multiplier
effects, reduced transportation
costs, provide fresher products
to our children, increased
needed redundancies in and
resilience of our food system
and build community connections
between those who produce our.
food and those who eat it. Thank
you for this opportunity. We
urge you to support this
memorial.
Thank you, Bonnie.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Bonnie
Lightfoot, president of New
Mexico Coalition of Educational
Leads speaking on behalf of
school superintendents and for
all the reasons you've already
heard, we are to do pass and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
Thank you. Yes, sir. Thank you.
uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Lawrence
Gallegos and I represent, uh,
both the New Mexican food and
Act Policy Council, uh, Latino
farmers and ranchers
International and I also worked
for uh National Grazing Lis
Coalition and we uh on behalf of
all these organizations, we uh
ask you to support this
memorial. We, we understand that
here in New Mexico, that so much
of our our uh
Uh
and, and, and meat and
everything are are things go go
out of state and then come back
and we need to, to make sure
that, that they they get as much
into the uh space here in the
state, not it's costs a lot more
money to go in and come back and
everything that, so we ask you
to support this bill, make, make
a lot of sense.
Thank you. We have one non
online Kimberly Meeks.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair and
senators, I am Kim Meeks,
director of student nutrition
for Roswell ISD.
We only serve New Mexico beef
from USA beef packing here in
Roswell for the students. I also
purchase as much New Mexico
grown produce as possible. It's
not even close to the 50%, but
we buy as much as we can. We
only have a few growers on this
side of the state. I am a strong
supporter of the New Mexico
grown Program, and it'll need
funding.
Last year, Roswell Independent
School District spent $596,000
on New Mexico produce and beef.
I serve about 8000 lunches a
day, which requires a great
quantity of produce daily. I
would love to be able to serve
it always New Mexico grown, but
we need the growers. Thank you.
Thank you. And let me ask you
again, anyone in opposition?
You want an opposition.
Any comments before we go to
questions from the committee on
your memorial.
chair, No, sir.
OK. Questions from the
committee.
This chair I move I do pass with
Memorial night.
The motion for a due pass in a
second.
Yes.
If you'll call the room, please.
Sent a boon.
Sendel.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote. Tender Figueroa, yes.
Hickey
Yes.
Innada. Yes, Tinder Ramos, yes,
Senator Thornton.
Yes. Pope.
Yes. Tender souls. Yes, yeah,
they do pass on your memorial a
unanimous.
Oh
Mister Chairman, thank you very
much. I just want to point out
to the group that's hearing
people listening online. Uh,
this program was put into place
in 2015, and here we are 10
years later. We're still saying,
let's help the Mexicans help New
Mexicans.
So I hope that uh NMDA and PD
does get their butts in gear.
And work with industry.
get this taken care of, and I do
want to
Thank the
Very, very.
strong lady that does provide
lunches in our in the Roswell
Independent school system. They
do an outstanding job. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. So you have a do
pass.
The chair members of the
committee, thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go down to uh
SB 434 math and reading academic
support Senator Lanier.
Sir, I apologize you were up
last year, last week, and we had
the governor called kind of
unexpected meeting and we had to
close down. So welcome back.
To the victors go the spoils,
right?
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning to all of these awesome
senators that
have welcomed me with open arms.
I want to.
Um, take this time to
appreciate.
How nice that everybody has
been, uh, for this poor little
freshman coming on.
the guys.
Thank you.
All right, so Senate Bill 434.
Um
It's, it's a bill that we, we
came up with, obviously in, in
the state of Mexico, we have an
issue with uh low scores in
reading and in
Math
And so we wanted to find a way
that we could, we could help.
High impact tutors, those
students.
And so we come up with a bill,
we kept it very general so that
the schools still have their
ability to tweak it and move it
around so that it's not
something that we're just
mandating. This is how you have
to do it.
So, um,
The other thing that that I want
to make sure and, and introduce
today is there's already money
in the budget, so this is not a
new allocation. Uh, there's $7
million for high high impact.
Tutoring. One of the issues that
we found when we started
researching this.
is that a lot of these rural
schools.
We, we have programs for before
school and after school, but we
don't have anything for during
school and no high impact
tutoring in the middle of the
school day. So we tried to
figure out a way that we could.
pull them out of classes, let
them be tutored, those ones that
For example, in, in Bloomfield,
New Mexico, where I live.
We have students that are on the
bus almost 2 hours one way.
But that's a 4 hour trip for
them. So before school and after
school tutoring is not a
possibility for them at all.
And so we, we did make a few
changes in the bill, and I would
like to thank Senator Figueroa
for uh helping us draft a new
A new version of that and with
that,
I will, I'll let my expert
introduce herself, Amanda.
If, if I might, Senator, we
probably ought to move the
substitute for discussion
purposes, so.
Mr. Chair, I move, but do not
pass on Senate Bill 434 and for
discussion purposes, uh do pass
on Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 434.
Thank you, and that's necessary
to make sure we're all talking
about the
The substitute that was just
handed out and that the 4:34
original one is now nothing.
Please go ahead. Yes, thank you.
I will, I will let my expert,
Amanda, introduce herself. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Amanda
Aragon, uh, executive director
of New Mexico Kits Cannon.
Any questions you may have.
Thank you. Uh, anything
different in the
That we ought to know in the
substitute, yeah, we, we did
make a few changes. It's not
It mostly language, so we, in
the original bill we had
accelerated learning, and we
changed that to high impact
learning, um, you know, it's
just verbiage that makes more
sense and we changed the and and
identified student from the
bottom performance level.
to the bottom quartile.
And so that, that's language
that we changed, um, and allows
for tutoring, tutoring providers
and requires small groups of 4
or less. We didn't want it to be
another classroom where we're
You know, almost like an IEP
classroom or something like
that.
And for context, uh, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
the reason that we changed
bottom performance level to
bottom quartile is bottom
quartile is actually less
students, um, to try and match
with the budget. So if you're
curious, the um the percentage
of students scoring in the
bottom performance level on the
NASA, which is the assessment
that we're using here, um, it's
24% of students fall in that
bottom level on ELA, so very
similar to a bottom quartile,
but in math.
We have half of the students
across the state just meeting
performance level one and we
obviously didn't mean to bring a
bill that would identify half of
the students in the state for
high impact tutoring. So that's
why we switched to the bottom
quartile instead of bottom
performance level.
OK, very good, um, out to the
audience, those in support.
In opposition.
The
way, uh, and online, uh, we have
two mat.
and then Enrique now that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, we
support the bill because it
targets the dollars to the uh
the students who need it most,
and so we appreciate legislation
that does that. We think we will
have the most impact for
students, um, at the end of the
day, so, uh, uh, PCS andM
supports the.
Thank you, and reaching out.
Thank you so much, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Enrique and Nell
Chamber of Commerce, supporting
Senate Bill 434, high impact
tutoring is proven to maximize
student learning, boost academic
proficiency and improve
attendance. Uh, in fact, the
University of Chicago found that
this program can double or even
triple student learning within a
single academic year in
Tennessee, test scores increased
8 points in English and 10
points in math after
implementing high impact
tutoring, Louisiana
jumped from 50th to 16th and 4th
grade reading and from 45th to
29th, in eighth grade reading,
and a recent study at Stanford
University found that high
impact tutoring had the largest
impact on chronically absent
students improving their
attendance by at least 5 days.
The chamber respectfully asks
for your support of Senate Bill
434. Thank you.
Thank you.
And I think we're questions to
the committee.
Robertson, Mr. Chairman, thank
you and, and Senator, thanks for
bringing this bill in front of
us today. Um, Senator, we've
recently heard of two pieces of
legislation in this, uh,
committee, uh, Senator Stewart's
literacy bill and chairman
Soul's math bill.
Can you explain how this bill
relates to those two pieces of
legislation if it does at all.
Well, I, I think it's, it's just
adding to it. It's um
Giving it shadow.
Enhancing it if anything else,
um, like you said, the funding
is already there. So
Like if we take statistics, for
example.
When, when you bring a, a, a kid
that's in a low level.
Mass already.
They don't like math.
So if we can, if we can take
them in a smaller classroom.
And
Get them to understand it where
they're not afraid of it, then,
then it
It just kind of brings them
along to where I might spark
some interest, if nothing else,
the understanding of it is the
most important part, and then we
can start, you know, honing in
and, and getting him those exact
um techniques that they might
need.
Um, Mr. Chairman, go ahead, go
ahead.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, I
would also like to say I think
um my understanding of both the
math and literacy but which are
which are tremendous pieces of
legislation are to raise the
floor of what we're doing and
what we call tier one
instruction, that first teach in
the classroom, so every child is
getting excellent instruction in
math and reading, and then
interventions like high impact
tutoring would be there to
support the students that are
struggling, even as we raise the
level of instruction in all of
the classrooms, so, um,
Not to speak for Senator Souls
whose legislation it is with
Senator Soul'sville and Senator
Stewart'sville in both math and
reading are really intended to
make sure that all of our
instructors have that high
quality training to be the best,
um, instructors possible and
then at the same time this bill
would support by again just
supporting the students that
still remain struggling after we
improve instruction in every
classroom.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator, it
seems as though not all tutoring
is created equally.
course
Um
Senator, can you explain how
this bill ensures a high impact
tutoring will be effective,
rather than just adding another
layer of homework.
Torsky.
Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, that,
that's exactly why we're doing
this and we leave, we left it
open ended enough so each school
can caneuver a little bit. So
what's going on in say
Albuquerque, uh, classrooms
might be different than in San
Juan classrooms or in Silver
City.
So we wanted to make sure that,
that we left it where they can,
they can mold it around. Now we
do want.
That
that high impact.
That high impact tutoring is
going to enable
Um
Do
I, I lost where I was going,
yes, senator, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator, there are, there are
several components that make
high impact tutoring what we
call high impact tutoring, and
that's that it's targeted on the
students that need it the most,
that it's frequent that it
happens 3 times a week for at
least 10 weeks, so it's a very
specific dosage amount, uh, that
it's personalized and that's
that 4 to 1 ratio, you can't
have more than 4 students being
tutored by one tutor, and then
it's high quality, then it's
aligned to the curriculum.
Um, that that district is using
and aligned to the scope and
sequence of that district. That
is what makes high impact
tutoring very different than,
let's say homework help, um, and
some of you, especially
Albuquerque senators may be
familiar with uh right in COVID
when tutoring became a big
thing, um, Albuquerque Public
Schools signed a contract with a
company called Paper, um, and
that was subsidized by state
funding, and what we saw is
students weren't participating
in paper. It was more of
homework help than it was high.
tutoring. I think through the 5
years that we've now experienced
since COVID, um, the department
has learned a lot about high
impact tutoring and even in
April of last year, um, put
contracts in place to supplement
districts with high impact
tutoring for those that wanted
it. So that's really the big
differences. The dosage amount,
that small student, uh, to tutor
ratio and um making sure that
it's aligned with the districts
and sequence and curriculum.
Mister Chair and Senator, that's
great. What evidence do we
Have that high impact tutoring
can significantly improve.
Student achievement,
particularly for those
struggling the most.
Uh
Mr. Cha and Senator Ramos, um,
one of the supporters of the
bill kind of covered this, but
I'll just reiterate it. There is
um probably the most preeminent
study that we've seen, um, again
emerging from COVID is a uh
study by the University of
Chicago. That study actually
included a pilot that New Mexico
did, so that was New Mexico,
rural students in math,
particularly getting high impact
tutoring in algebra, um, online.
So the other benefit of high
impact tutoring is it is been
known to be effective with
online tutors when necessary,
when it's embedded in the school
day. Um, and so that, that uh
University of Chicago study
showed that it can have a major
impact, a separate
meta-analysis um of dozens of
studies have found that this
type of high impact tutoring is
more effective than 85% of other
education interventions. It has
absolutely come out and emerged
across the nation as one of the
most impactful ways.
Um, that we can enhance student
learning and that is largely
because of the University of
Chicago study and lots of
research coming out of Stanford
University.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um
We already have a shortage of
teachers and
Are we going to find
So
How we gonna find high impact
qualified tutors.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, well.
It's kind of came through COVID
already, so we, we have some,
uh, programs set up in the
school system already that has
um
Educated and trained specialists
that contract to the different
Schools and
And I hate to keep going back to
the rural school area.
We didn't make it specific that
you have to have this, this
degree or whatever it might be
because in some of these rural
areas,
We can't find those teachers
now, so much less for tutoring,
we can't find those. So, you
know, the second level of that
would be, um,
bringing in contract educators.
That's all I've got.
Thank you, Senator No.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing the
bill forward. Welcome to Sun
Education.
Um, I have a few questions about
the bill on, well, first of all,
what grade levels um does the
high impact tutoring target.
OK, so this would take 2nd
through 8th.
3rd, 33, sorry. Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Senator. Um, OK, and on page 2
line, I mean, page 3, line 16,
where it says that a parent
shall be provided with periodic
written progress reports for the
students while uh high impact
tutoring is provided. Um, I'd
like to also understand and
acknowledge uh English language
learners and how this would work
for them and how this type of
communication would work for
parents who may not be, uh,
English speakers.
That Mr. Chair, Senator, that is
a great question because that is
one of the things we want to
take care of is the language
aspect of this, and that's why
we're, we want to pull them out
in.
During school so that we're not
hiring somebody else.
To bridge that language gap.
And so
I think
That was one of the things in
our minds, exact things in our
minds when we were writing this,
and I'll let Amanda give you the
details.
Mr. Charing center Nava one
aspect of the grades that I
would like to clarify because it
is a little confusing. The, the
language in this bill refers to
the assessment and
accountability statute, which
dictates which students take
which test based on the federal
requirement. So instead of
putting a specific test, let's
say our current test, the Amasa
into statute. We just referred
to that. So if in the future,
the state assessment ever
changes or the federal
requirements change and we
decide to change our
Green testing to meet the
federal requirements, whatever
they may be that we don't have
to come back and address this
piece that it just refers to
whatever that uh great band test
is for the federal requirement
is the test that we're using to
identify students in here, so if
that's, if that was confusing
and you're like, wait, it
doesn't say grades 3 through 8
anywhere in here. Um, secondly,
related to your second question,
I think it would be our
intention, um, that the school
obviously has a relationship
with those parents, um, already.
And it would be my hope,
although not in this legislation
that they are already
communicating with the family
and the family's home language
and these reports would go right
alongside any other progress
reports that the student is
getting, um, and are made
available in the student's home
language.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Bye.
Other questions.
I've got
But
a couple of questions and kind
of write along those lines
because as soon as she said 3
and 8, and I'm like, you see
that in here.
So
Aren't those tests given towards
the end of the year?
And so it would be, when would
they be identified to let the
parents know it says within 30
days on which the student is
identified, that's usually
during the summer.
Help me on how this works in a
practical way as to when they
get identified, it's then the
next year that they start high
impact tutoring, how would that
work, please?
Mr. Taha and members of the
committee, uh, that would be the
intention, yes, that once that
data is processed at and we've
been in front of your committee
before talking about assessment
timelines from the public
education department. But once
the school receives that
information in the early fall,
that that would trigger the
30-day notification for the
parents and that that student
would begin the high impact
tutoring in that subject at the
beginning of the school year or
as early as possible in the
school year.
So, if I understand correctly,
there's only 2 grades that are
affected in the students are now
in 4th grade and in 9th grade.
When they would be getting the
tutoring. Is that accurate?
Uh, Mr. Chan members of the
committee, it would be any
student identified using the
grades 3 through 8th grade
assessment. So it would be 4th
through 9th graders.
Because they would use from
their prior year to be
identified, so they're assessed
in 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th. This is
not the
The ne ones that are only given
to certain grades, these are all
of the assessment. Mr. Chair
members of the committee correct
this is the federally mandated
and state mandated to align with
federal guidance or federal
requirements it says you have to
test students every year, uh, in
grades 3 through 8.
OK, and so the majority of this
is going to fall on
The typical and I realized we've
got all kinds of different
patterns of schools. Uh, the
typical elementary, the 4th and
5th grades.
And then middle school and
freshman in high school. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, yes, that is
accurate, uh, the next question
is sort of long question that
was asked is, where are they
gonna come from?
Um
And along with that, where in
the day, what part of the other
education, are they not going to
be getting when they're pulled
out for doing this.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, Senator Lanier
has worked really hard to make
sure that this legislation is
flexible on both of those
components. So whereas it could
have been very prescriptive.
Students can only be pulled out
of an elective or during lunch
or whatever it might be, we know
that our, our local districts
are best suited to decide how
this is gonna work best for
their students and so as long as
it's during the school day, the
district could work to identify
the times that work best. They
might have um a pullout.
blocker, an intervention block
that works for them. They might
decide to redo their schedule to
work um at large scale across
the district, but we want to
leave that up to the local
districts and then likewise for
the flexibility on staffing.
There may be some schools that
have the capacity to do this
with educators in their current
building, and we know that
they're likely is a lot of
schools and districts that
cannot do that, which is why we
did provide the opportunity for
them to use outside vendors,
some of which have experience
with the public education.
department, um, the public
education department and a very
challenging timeline, as I
mentioned before, has already,
um, last year, executed some
contracts with high quality
vendors, I believe those vendors
were varsity tutors, air tutors,
one on one learning and tutor
fly or the four that were
eventually awarded, but there
are many high quality vendors
that have experience with New
Mexico schools and districts,
and this bill would make those
not just those vendors, but any
high quality vendor available.
to fill in the gap should the
district choose to go that path.
OK, thank you, uh, my concerns
are, you know, if the kid's
losing PE or recess, then it
becomes punitive, and we know
the value of recess in kids
burning off extra energy and
things and we don't want that.
We want to make sure it's not
taking out of their lunchtime
where we want students to sit in
and eat their lunch, but if it's
coming out of instruction, then
there's other things they're not
getting, so I worry about that a
little bit, um, in a middle
school, for instance, typical
middle school in a larger
District might be 800 students,
25% is, you know, that's 200 of
them, which means you've got to
have 50.
Tutors or doing multiple
sessions, I realized, you know,
that you, you spend 15 minutes
with each one and you'd have one
tutor running several different
groups through all of that.
There's some logistical things
that I just worry about going
forward.
Where is the accountability who
oversees this or is this just,
you know, for districts and, and
I, I trust our superintendents
in our districts and our
principles to do well, but is
there a mechanism to ensure that
it's going on and if so, what's
that mechanism?
You know, and how is it
monitored?
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you, and
So it will fall under pet. It
will be Ped's responsibility to
make sure that this is getting
carried out. Um.
Just stepping back just for one
second.
That was one of the things I
wanted to make sure is that
we're not pulling a student out
every single day from PE every
single day from history. I
understand that they can't read
and they may not be getting what
they
but they need out of a history
classroom, but it's, it's not
fair to take them out and say
something that they really love
and enjoy and may keep them
interested in school, so we're
hoping that the school districts
will, will maneuver around each
student, and if we have those
instructors there are during the
school day, all day, then they
will know that student and they
should be able to, um, it, it
almost be like a social worker.
where they could go in and
understand what the faults of
the student may be where the
system is, is falling short and
so we can, we purposely left it
very open so that each school
district can get those kids.
pulled out of, of the class or
whatever time is needed for that
student. Some, some students may
not need um
You know, 2 hours.
instruction time. Some may only
need 30 minutes and and
something like that. So, and
then I'll let Amanda answer the
second part of that question.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um, your, uh, the
questions are
Probably the most important
questions when it comes to um
effective implementation of high
impact tutoring. And so one,
making sure that we have that
local flexibility is critically
important, but also coming
alongside the public education
department and working with them
to make sure that we're
identifying national best
practice, and luckily there are
a lot of um wonderful uh
organizations out there that
have helped figure this out at
scale, um, and have a lot of
really good guidance that we
would hope the public education
department.
would share with districts and
saying, when you're thinking
about creating your schedule for
high impact tutoring. Here are
some things to consider.
don't use it punitively, being
an example, um, because we know
that the logistics are
definitely challenging and it is
our intention to come alongside
the public education department
and make sure that they have
everything they need to support
our schools and districts and
implement it, implementing this.
Thank you. And, and again, I
very much trust our
superintendents in our districts
to do what's right by kids, um,
many of the kids are going to
fall in both the reading and the
math, uh, lots of the concerns
and issues often are not.
School issues there, the
community issues as to why
students are in the bottom part.
I very much supported. I, people
have asked me, yo, are you
concerned? Is this, you know, go
against your mouth when I say,
no, these are parallel. They
work together hand in hand in
making them work. uh, there
certainly will be some
interesting logistics in some of
our smaller districts are
finding uh tutors and enough of
them to, to meet the needs in
larger districts or larger
schools as well, but certainly I
think it's the right thing to
do.
Uh, just a very quick story when
I was teaching math and had a
remedial algebra class and
Had a couple of yahoos that
really didn't care much about
math, but at the end to get them
ready for the test, I took, I
had an assistant who took care
of the Yahoos for a while. I
took 6 at a time up to my other
classroom, and in an hour or
two, I could get them up to
speed on a lot of this because
there were only
456 of them who were all focused
on math rather than all the
other distractions that often go
on. And so I, I fully understand
that, you know, when you get a
small group that really focuses,
it's amazing the amount of math
that you can learn when you're
not fighting learning math.
Thank you.
Other, other questions,
question, uh.
Will of the committee.
Motion for a due pass, uh, well,
we don't need as amended, uh,
the committee sub.
Senator, we already did that.
We're all we need is a motion
for a due pass.
One more try, madam.
I do pass on the committee,
seconded by Senator Nava. If
you'll call the roll, please.
Ciner boom.
And so, yes, sender Figueroa,
yes, sender Hickey.
Yes, your Nova, yes, Cin Ramos.
Senator Thornton.
Yes.
an der Pope,
And so, yes, you have a due
pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee.
OK, next bill, Senate Bill 516
public charter school financial
monitoring.
Sure, please go ahead whenever
you're ready.
Good morning. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members, so Senate
Bill 516 would require each
school district and charter
school to engage in a financial
monitoring that would require
the public education department
to prepare a report.
them
Assesses the effects of local
spending on student achievement.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, there is an
amendment on if you want us to.
Would you like to act on it now
and then we go back, and
Senator, if you have the
amendment in front of you, my
assistant for my uh analyst
indicated #2 on that.
Before we do it, you might want
to say before available say make
available.
So page 1 line 13.
What
Sure, that would be fine.
Each one line 11, page 1 line 13
after synthesize and insert.
Yes.
Emphasize in
that doesn't work either.
The size available.
Districting charter school.
Yeah, I don't, I don't think to
make works there, so never mind.
Yeah, never mind.
Mr. Chairman, I move amendment
to
231-7.
231-789.1 for discussion
purposes.
OK. So on the amendment, please.
children of members of Un to my
expert witness, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, uh, so.
Just those two things it
clarifies who will be held
accountable.
Essentially it's those who would
receive the money from the $10
million appropriation.
In the original language, it
made all districts in New
Mexico.
Under the requirements of this.
And this now simply.
Fireflies that only those who
receive the funds.
Would then be required to do the
reporting of those.
OK. So,
On the amendment
Everybody chance kind of to scan
through it we can review through
what's on there.
The
questions, let me kind of start
or just some clarification.
I, you know, this is, there's a
financial monitoring system and
instead of everybody doing it,
this is districts who opt to do
this, so almost on a
A grant or an opt in basis that
they then will have that.
My understanding that Mr.
Chairman, that is correct.
OK, where before it looked like
everybody was gonna be required
to do this and had to provide
data. Mr. Chairman, that's OK.
OK. Questions on the amendment.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass on
the amendment 231789.1. I have a
motion for a do pass.
seconded by Senator Reel is
there opposition to the
amendment seeing no opposition,
you are amended.
terminal
How
rounds as my expert winners, and
he can uh.
a synopsis of the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, this
bill is simple. It's, it, it is
an opportunity to do something
that the
Uh, Albuquerque Public Schools,
the Las Cruces Public Schools,
the Gats and Independent Schools
and the Poland School Districts
have become in this last year.
Essentially, here's what's
happening as you receive money
and you make budget decisions,
especially as we saw the federal
dollars arrive.
One of the questions is what
stands in highest regard, he
continued doing as a practice in
your district.
And the endgame is to be sure
that you receive funds that they
are meeting their intended
outcomes, but more importantly,
Mister Chairman, there are
several usually programs that
are competing for the same
dollars for the same outcomes.
So this is a totally
independent.
review of data.
Not just test day, Mister
Chairman, all the data that you
would, you would collect as a
district.
So that is what I'll call soft
data that comes from your
public, from your students, from
your teachers, and others as
well as the hard data which are
performance data from students,
changes of student behavior or
academic learning.
These models
melded that together.
And provide the school
administration with a very clear
picture.
Of what the highest.
Ranking investment might be.
And Mr. Chairman, this is
important as we hold ourselves
to a standard with the money
this legislature provides every
district.
To the intent is to begin a ball
rolling in New Mexico.
To get to expand that practice
among our districts.
You finance that.
So that we can get the models in
place.
He began to use that to inform
local districts first.
But also, Mr. Chairman, to
inform you the legislature and
others.
Of the best investments we are
making in students in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, I'll be happy to
stay with questions.
Terminal stand for questions.
OK, up to the audience, those in
support.
No
to come up. Is there anyone in
opposition in the audience?
This chairman members of the
committee, Joey in with New
Mexico School Boards
Association, um.
prior to a few minutes ago, we
were looking at standing in
opposition, but from what I
understand, we have not seen the
amendment. Uh, if it makes it
optional and there is definitely
funding tied to this
requirement, then we can stand
in support. It's important,
however, that this legislation
be contingent on this, on this
funding right now I understand
it is not in House Bill 2 and
uh, uh, until
It occurs then uh we would be
opposed. So again, just to
clarify where we stand on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in opposition or awkward?
Or support.
And online we have one map,
please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Matt Paul with
Public Charter Schools of New
Mexico, um, we similarly support
the amended bill, I'm making
this something that uh that
school districts and and charter
schools can opt into, um, I will
note there's an unfortunate
title um on this bill, which is
not the work of the sponsor or
or anybody else on the bill, but
um when we say public schools
and charter schools, it creates
a false dichotomy that states
that we are not public, so, um.
That's the, you know, the
content of the bill is good, but
I did want to point that out,
and I know that's not something
that books on sin and that
believe or think, um, but, uh,
these kind of phrasings can
reinforce misinformation, so we
support the content of the bill,
we don't waste the time.
Thank you, Matt. Yes, we do
understand. I appreciate you
pointing that out. Um.
Regularly I try and correct
myself that I talk about
traditional public schools and
charter schools if I try to, to
separate things out at all. So
thank you. I appreciate it. Um.
And he
And yet the other
Mr. Chairman, I don't disagree
with Mr. Paul's comment,
however, in the drafting.
Of this, which
is in council services not in,
in our hands. I understand why
they might because there's
certain things.
That have independence, if you
will, between the two.
Um, Mr. Chairman, final point
in, in your first
Amendment on line 11.
It it begins to set the concern
that Mister Guilham talked
about.
The original bill was requiring
every district.
If you read it as you're to do
this, what this now says it
allows.
And that allows local options.
It allows local decision making.
It allows districts.
To determine whether or not they
would apply for the funds.
But it provides the opportunity
rather than their requirements
term.
Thank you. Questions from the
committee.
There.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Senator, for
bringing this forward. I'm, I'm
just curious to maybe you can
help me out.
Understand a little bit about
why is this necessary I think.
There's a lot of reporting that
already goes on so I help
explain to me in layman's terms
why this feels very anti. Why is
traditional reporting is.
Mr. Chairman, I'll be very
frank.
We believe that if we put in
place a system that looks across
the whole array of data.
And begins to look at the
questions that are asked
locally.
about what is working better and
what is not.
You may eliminate many of the
current reporting requirements.
that are there. We're trying to
streamline information.
But also make directive at the
real questions we're asking.
In a
Mhm
Totally neutral format.
So Mr. Chairman, um,
Why the appropriation, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Thornton is
This has a cost to a likely as
you run this into your system.
There's several independent
contractors as an example.
That do this work.
And we believe it would benefit
overall in the state of New
Mexico, but we are trying to
unbundle, if you will.
All of the information is there
rebundle it in a more concise.
And reasonable man.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair,
I, I
so.
So you're looking for more
specific information that you're
not getting out of the current,
current data that comes back
from the education itself
because my understanding is
every, every school or district
has to spend the educational
plan, you have to provide a
narrative explaining their at
students.
Uh, students with disabilities,
um,
And they got to do 4 quarterly
financial reports as well.
So
Um, it feels as if you're asking
for more specific information.
that. So I'm struggling with
what additional information can
they do, and I
The $10 million appropriation
here saying it's gonna require
additional work.
So again, I'm trying to
understand what, what are you're
not getting now that you think
you're going to get with.
So Miss Chairman in the
districts that I mentioned,
they're, they're moving in
independent ways that they're
consolidated in this sort of
vision.
The vision is as we spend
dollars in our local district.
Which of them, which efforts
provide us the greatest
impact.
On leading our goals.
That hasn't been done in New
Mexico.
But it is a it is a data.
Analytic process that allows you
to ask those questions.
In two of the districts, they
are even looking at staffing.
And even uh um
Staf evaluation.
And program evaluation is part
of what they're using this
model.
Or to answer.
those kinds of questions.
And as a practicing
superintendent for 27 years, I
will tell you I yearned for.
This kind of neutral.
Analytic that could bring in
things like community
conversations.
To bring in staff of um
information that comes forward
and rebundle so you can look at
all the parts that.
Interoperate
To determine what has the real
long-term impact on where you're
trying to go. So you can make
the best decisions, Mr.
Chairman.
As, as a practicing super temp,
I made a lot of really good
decisions.
And they did, they were
sometimes disparate in how they
what the outcomes were.
And I needed to understand that
this brings that to the table.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, so
there's, you mentioned it in
the about a financial
monitoring. Is there some, is
there some software out there or
is there a uh
tool that these schools could
use if they choose to do it. Is
that, is that what we're trying
to get them to to move toward
this.
Financial monitoring system.
Mr. Chairman Senator, yes, there
is.
And I might mention that um.
one of our other expert
witnesses of Doctor Lee Vargas.
was planning to be here, he had
a death in the family.
And he's been a superintendent
in various states.
And uh
emit from very large districts.
that he could have never worked.
No good
In his capacity.
You know, with, uh, without
using a system like this, so he
said um, I
You know, it would be very, very
hard for him.
Of having that data available
the way he did really helped him
with a lot of the decisions
about the same thing with the.
Good communication with the
school board.
OK.
Yeah, thank you for that,
Senator.
Uh, yeah, so.
So if we have a system that
you'd like them to go to, you,
you just took out the language
with your addendum.
You had made it a requirement.
Now you've made it.
allowable as that they something
they could use.
The concern I have now is that
you're going to get sparse data,
some, some schools, some
districts may choose to use it.
choose not to.
It's gonna be hard to ferret out
that information. You're gonna
have some areas where you're
gonna get the information you're
looking for. Now, since you're
not making a requirement or
mandate.
Yeah.
You're gonna get, you're gonna
get the sparing information so.
How do you, how do you
reconcile?
Oh, Mister Charmin and all,
Senator Rome.
You're correct on that, but um.
The whole part is that
eventually as other districts
can see what.
The other districts are doing.
They will fall in.
You know, it might take a few
years or it might take, uh, you
know, they might see it sooner
than that.
But the whole important part is
that eventually, you know,
that within the public schools
and the charter schools.
They start seeing the value of
it.
And it might take time, but I
think coming forcefully required
might be a little more.
Resistance then versus on a
volunteer.
And also as they see the
progress and they see the value
of it.
engage.
And Mr. Chairman, we, we need to
respect local decision making.
Because there are 89 motifs of
what is happening in districts.
In fact, I'll say, Mr. Chairman,
there are 89 different sets of.
Parameters around the decisions
you're making, is to control
your budget.
This conforms to that while
providing.
responding.
For districts who were willing
to step forward and begin to
implement.
I believe in being in this
system of New Mexico public
schools, now my fifty-second
year.
That when you
Bring diamonds to the fore.
Everyone will call us around.
That once they understand in
their own motif, Mr. Chairman,
the Senator Thornton.
So this is
an opportunity to begin that
ball rolling.
And began to systematize in some
important systems. I, I
mentioned.
That are already on board and
moving forward, but I seem to be
very beneficial to our
understanding of how this might
merit for every district in New
Mexico.
The local boards of education,
local communities.
so different.
That we need to have a system
that that pulses with that.
That's the attempt to forward.
Thank you. Thank you, sir.
That's all.
is
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
I'm glad that this was changed
to allow school districts
because I know the impact it
would have on our rural schools,
on our charter schools.
small school districts.
Most of them don't have the
funding to get this done, so Mr.
Chairman,
uh, I appreciate you doing that.
Uh, the other question I have is
I was reading an analysis, and
it stated the lack of statutory
requirements.
Are we planning on having this.
Go forward. I've noticed that
the appropriation in here was
for.
Was it $10 million.
$10 million.
Is this going to be an ongoing
cost to the state.
Mr. Chairman, there will be.
Part of that cost yet to be
determined because Mr. Chairman
Senator.
Sizes an issue.
So often our cost per student is
higher than smaller districts,
part of what will come out of
this is an understanding of what
that metric might look like in a
long term. This is getting it on
the ground, being able to
facilitate.
$10 million worth of work
statewide.
And report back to you, the
legislature of the Education
Department and others, my hope,
my, the intentionality.
That I see here is that we not
write a bunch of these statutes
or a bunch of new rules.
What we try to do here is
provide a tool.
So we can answer the questions
that were trying through statute
and rule.
Continue to dig in
Try to find what the real
answers are.
This was on biased and this
synthesizes data in a way we've
never done in this in in the
state.
Some reason
Hm.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that
explanation, there.
Um
Whenever I was talking about the
appropriation, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Mr. Browns.
That's $10 million.
$10 million that it's not house
bill to 2, is that correct?
I.
of Mr. Chairman out of out out
of the house appropriation of
finance Committee.
This is not included.
It is in the Senate which
The senator is
Sitting on that and I can't
answer, Mr. Chairman Henry Zell,
the status of.
the Senate Finance Committee
considerations of.
OK,
I guess my next question is
maybe I'm just.
I, I
Ark Mr. Chairman.
The senator Mr. Ros, aren't
these schools are already
required to do this.
Mr. Chairman Senator,
the schools are required to do
re require a a whole lot of
reporting.
On the schools don't have.
And
My opinion, personal opinion.
Is the tool set.
To enable them
To do the analytics they need to
do.
Really answer a lot of the
questions that we ask both
legislatively, but also we're
trying to answer in that
collection of data.
collection of data without good
analytics.
It's just data
And it may give us some cues,
but it doesn't tell us.
What outranks what in decisions
I'm making locally.
Mr. Chairman, as an example on
what is my community
perceptions.
What our student perceptions.
What are our staff receptions
along.
flow we see coming out of that.
We have nothing that aggregates
that this tool, these kinds of
tools.
do that. It's, it's a, it's a
very large data assimilation and
analytics process. There were in
in Stan's opinion.
We're short on the state of New
Mexico. This is an attempt to
bring that to the, to the floor.
Mr. Chairman and Senator and Mr.
Rounds.
Whenever you're stating in your
um um
substitute.
Or your, I'm sorry.
Amendments to Senate Bill 516.
Allowing school instead of
requiring available school
districts.
A school district may, may adopt
this. You're asking for $10
million to get this done.
If this continues, if you are
getting
Some day but not all of it
reporting how can, how can you
make a good assessment of what
is lacking and where.
Senator, you need to speak up.
They're having a difficult time
hearing you on Zoom. Thank you,
sir.
Right.
Uh, Senator, um,
It is gonna take time too.
Get everyone on board.
But all, the sooner the better.
And uh
In to your question is the ask
is for 10 million.
And say that perhaps like you're
saying, you know, maybe.
third might volunteer.
We might not end up using the
entire 10 million.
But you know, it is so.
Possible that um.
You know, it's uh if everyone
was to engage that you want to
make sure that you have the
appropriate funding.
So there's no need to spend the
10 million, you know, if he
doesn't call for that.
of the other part is having it
will definitely uh.
Make it available statewide.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and Senator
Mr. Rance, whenever you're
talking about this, the more the
participate, the better results
you might be getting in to make
this determination.
So is if every school district
out there and I'm including the
charter schools in this every
school district out there does
decide to participate in this,
you've got $10 million. How is
that going to be distributed
where they can get this.
Requirement done.
I'm sorry, it's not a
requirement.
After which amended, it is not a
requirement, my bed, uh,
financial monitoring system,
having that published.
So, Mr. Chairman.
If every district and every
charter in New Mexico did this,
Mr. Chairman, I hear Senator,
your question really being, is
that enough?
He
I would have to research that a
little further since I have to
fill in expert.
At the moment, however, $10
million knowing the contracts
are in place in
4 districts I've mentioned.
It was likely, Mr. Chairman fall
short.
The total cost.
Chairman, however,
I like public schools and
charters as I do. Pardon me,
Maxing her tendency is we will
have those who will initially
join in.
In the risk and those who want.
So I'm not concerned about.
I, I think, was Charon at the
end of the day, that's what.
Um.
Are of peace to be provided.
Uh, and to see what those.
are to come forward. So this
isn't a final bit of complete,
Mr. Chairman. It is a step up
into the direction.
Getting this done.
Mr. Chairman.
Senator and Mr. Rounds is
spending then is just for one
year. Am I understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Chairman, this is a one
year.
Non-recurring request.
This chairman informing long
term, however, may I also
indicate, Mr. Chairman, that
once softwares and things that
do this work are on board.
Your largest cost is finished.
And then it's how do you sustain
that data flow.
Over time
In the vendor world, those
vendors that are currently
engaged.
are quite gracious, I guess the
term I would use for at the out
your costs.
is the highest cost of the front
income.
Setting this up.
Mr. Chairman, so.
I wish I had a number for you to
say well then yeah if we did 10
million now, the your costs
would be.
And I don't have them, Mr.
Chairman, that, that has to be
through an RFP process.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Mr. Rounds, I guess my
concern here is, like I said
earlier, I pointed out that the
smaller schools and more rural
schools.
Of those particular districts
probably will not be able to, to
participate in this.
Because of the front lack of
funding that they do have right
yet because they're just
Oh, they're doing an excellent
job out there, but there,
there's constraints on them
right now is what I'm trying to
say. So whenever a school system
such as IP Albuquerque Public
School System.
Does
So yes, we do want to
participate in it.
How badly with what with their
reporting, is this going to
affect the school system like
OK.
Mr. Chairman,
let me, will that skew.
The numbers that we are seeing
statewide.
Because you have
Probably 4 or 5 really major
school systems in our state and
the rest of them are smaller,
not necessarily real but smaller
school districts.
And I think that this might
Play rake habit on the smaller
school systems because
Actually, the number's not the
number of students is not there
as far as progress on what is
actually I have a concern there.
Would you like to comment on
that, Mister Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, if I could.
I believe this is more
inclusive, Mr. Chairman and
senator.
You're feeling, and I understand
the concern.
We've looked at models of using
RECs as consortium points for
providing this service to small
districts regionally.
As an example, in a way to get
there.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, this is
independent data separate from
anything that's in the state
requirements. I believe it won't
affect.
Small school district.
Functions or decisions.
If they're not in.
This is to allow the local
decision makers.
To decide what programs are most
beneficial.
We continue investing.
And which ones are not, then
Mister Chairman Senator,
I know a lot of programs that
are in small districts. Some
are, some are through RECs, some
of they've done independently.
Some of the collaborated with
one or two other districts to
get there.
This could be Mr. Chairman, a
tool for them to use to sort
that out.
$10 million isn't a portion, Mr.
Chairman, by membership.
This is, this is an available
resource for this purpose that
would be determined.
Once we get into the grant
process.
To determine my personal hope
would be that we would draw in.
Murals as part of this, the
The the initiation, if you will,
of this, along with those that
have already commented.
have already joined to an
extent.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for your explanation there.
I still do have concerns in
this.
But
You say that this is a one-year
deal right now, but
Because we'll be out there
because of the software that
might need to be made available.
My concern is, Mr. Chairman.
We're spending money hand over
fist up here while we're in
session.
You know what, so one of these
days that money is gonna run
out.
What are we gonna do then?
That's my concern. We're
supposed to have good budget set
in place that is.
And good for all.
But we all know, and I don't
have to repeat myself again, oil
and gas and agriculture are the
two largest contributors to our
budget.
You know what, I know the
volatile prices in the oil and
gas industry.
We've seen it before, Gonzalez.
We were up here whenever it went
like that.
And we were scraping wherever we
could standing wherever we could
just to.
Just to get by and therefore I
have a problem.
Um
I understand what you're trying
to do here. Don't get me wrong.
But
I'm assuming this bill is going
to go to finance next, Mr.
Chairman. Is that correct?
That's correct.
All right.
And is there a me bill on the
House side, Senator Gonzalez.
Of Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, what
was that?
Is there a mirror mirror or
built on the house side.
No.
Chairman of Senator I know.
And
All right.
Like I said, I understand what
you're trying to do here. I, my
concern is with the small
schools that
Really can't afford to do this.
But
appreciate all your answers.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Other question,
Senator Nola.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing the
bill for the bill forward. Um, I
have a question just in regards
to the premise of the bill. So,
and I believe accountability is
very important, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, uh, and I believe
that's what this is sort of
hinting to, um, but I wanted to
know because what I see here is
that APS Las Cruces, and Gas in
public schools use the same
commercial data analytics
service, uh, by the name of
Everest Analytics, is that
correct?
Mr. Chairman, uh, senator, an
expert, how many companies in
New Mexico can provide this
resource.
Mr. Chairman, more than one, but
Mr. Chairman Senator, not about.
I don't know what the universe
is because we haven't really in
New Mexico.
long and deep in this
particular.
Respect
And so I do know that avarice
analytics is the one that's
common between them.
Uh, there are others that are
out there that I that I know are
there, but I don't know what the
number is. I apologize for not
having it.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, expert, I
think that would be extremely
beneficial, especially as we
discuss issues and uh, and being
able to acquire this for rural
communities as Senator Azel
noted, um, it's very clear that
not all districts are
Um, so I think it would be
extremely important if we're
going to allocate that kind of
funding to know what is actually
available in the state. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you. Other questions.
A Thorton, I'm back again. Thank
you for your time.
So as I'm listening and, and
reading the fiscal impact.
Um
It's
It seems like what we're really
talking about here is, is
creating a, a new database.
This financial monitoring
system.
Would take into effect, um,
It says here, operational and
programmatic expenditure.
And then identify student
demographics, performance and
outcomes.
So it, it seems like you're
wanting uh a
A to
That basically incorporates all
of these because right now I
guess we have a lot of separate
tools that that the system is
used, uh, in the, and again in
the fiscal impact report, it
talks about the
There's an operating budget
management system ODMS.
And that there's a student
teacher accountability reporting
system, stars, and then when you
get down into
various student information
systems seems like there was a
list of at least one.
There's at least 10.
Or so different student
information systems that the
various districts, schools are
using.
So you've got all these
desperate pieces of information
out there. What you're trying to
do is coordinate all of this.
pull it in so that one can do
either AI on it afterwards and
evaluate, do, do true analytics
as you mentioned. So I
understand what you're trying to
do now. Now this is all coming
together.
It should have been called the
the generalized database system
for PED something like that.
Uh, cause that's what you're
trying to get to. Am I
understanding this correctly?
Chairman Senator Thornton, you
do understand and
You know, the difficulty is the
superintendent for 27 years
because I had all that that we
were reporting out.
And all of those data.
We were trying to look at and
then I'm asked to make a
decision.
In this next year's budget and
was chairman Senator, I was a
superintendent during the 2008
downturn.
I'm a superintendent in Hobbs,
New Mexico when I in Maine had.
Almost 11,000 students in in
August I had 8.
8500 students.
I understand the pulses that go
on and the challenges, Mr.
Chairman.
I have not found
A general analytics tool that is
agnostic.
It grabs every piece of data you
have plus something that we.
ever analyze.
They can give you true
analytics.
When I want to ask questions
about
propriety of certain decisions I
would make.
That's what we're trying to
produce, right.
Mr. Chair, I completely agree
with, I think that's exactly
where we need to go so that we
understand what, what's
happening in our education.
I guess my sense is that I
I feel as if there needs to be
some more work done, maybe
during the interim before.
We could support something like
this because I think there's
a true need.
And
And I think because we have all
the, all these desperate
information out there, schools
using whatever they could find,
whatever they could afford.
But it also seems like there's
a, not only do we need to have a
system like this, but it also
seems like we're gonna need the
training to support it.
And the $10 million whatever
that word should,
um.
It seems like this needs to be
more focused and
Yeah, I would like for you to
come back.
But I, but I think there's a lot
of work between where you wanna
go and, and what this bill is
suggesting.
At least that's what I see. I
And I would even work with you
and support you in, in going
forward with something like
this, but I, I think there's a
lot that needs to be done behind
the scenes, make sure that we
understand the ramifications,
especially if we're gonna get a
centralized system that we want
everybody to buy into.
Um, and I don't think we've done
all that work this way, but I
agree with you that's exactly
what we need so that we can
start doing true analytics and
making proper decisions.
Which, which programs work,
which ones don't, and which ones
do we want to continue to
support?
For so
But that's kind of what I see.
I, I, I, I applaud the effort
and
Maybe I can hopefully work with
y'all just.
next coming here so to move this
forward.
Thank you. Uh, I have a couple
of quick questions or
comments on it.
Is this
Using AI to, to help make those
kinds of decisions. This sounds
very much like old statistical
things of multivariate analysis
of variants to see which are the
things that have the biggest
impact.
But bringing in then, as you
indicated the soft things which
you can't really do with
straight up uh statistical
numbers.
So Mr. Chairman, as I understand
it, and I'm not the
Coder that does most work with
you mentioned Es analytics.
Um, there's a lot, a lot of
coding and.
form fitting to district
specifics.
That I see as I, as I've watched
his history to do this, Mr.
Chairman, I won't be surprised.
Every time.
AI components in it. The issue
isn't isn't there, the issue is.
What role does it play in the
what extent.
Does it
Meet the lodgings that the
humans are trying to put forward
to find the proper answer. And,
and is this going would be
customized for each district.
This isn't big data for the
state of New Mexico, of which
Albuquerque overwhelms this is
customized for each individual
district, is that correct?
Chairman every district has its
own specific
Applications, in fact, the
districts I mentioned are asking
very different questions.
And are indifferent.
formations, if you will, of
these data analytics what's
important, Mister Chairman, I
just making the last plug on
this is this is truly
individualized to each district
as a superintendent, I would
demand that.
Because I'm going to make the
decisions with my board of
education and I want to get the
data analytics that allow me to
do that.
That's what this
Thank you. And, and my concern
with it is there's essentially
one vendor right now in New
Mexico and I'm always nervous
when we're passing laws to
support a vendor, uh, you know,
we've had that in this committee
regularly, somebody has a
program and a vendor, and they
want the state of New Mexico to
fund that vendor to be, to
provide the services. I'm always
nervous about that. Uh, can
question, Greg.
You know, with uh PED we can do
a whole lot of these programs to
administer another grant program
is PED able to handle all of
those?
You
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
question. So in terms of um
managing the administrative
implications of this particular
bill, the PED does see that we
are able to to manage that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, any other questions? If not,
It's been, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
And, and Senator, if I could
beforehand, I believe we are
scheduled on the floor at 11. So
we're gonna shut down at about
11. So I think we'll get through
this. We may get an introduction
on another bill, but just so the
committee knows unless we get
word that they moved us to
11:30.
Yes, this, I think this will go
pretty quick. Uh,
Just curiosity on, on page 23 of
this analysis, I, I've just
Tag this early on whenever we
got first got started talking
and it says New Mexico's
education data systems are
inefficient.
And more expensive compared to
other states.
Could you just tell me?
Why
Ouch. Mr. Chairman, I, I will
tell you that.
And this isn't self-serving. I
would tell you that part of the
outcome of this.
is to eliminate that analysis.
We, I, I believe there's a lot
of
good intentions we've done over
the years.
But we've run down streams that
aren't necessarily collaborated
or collected, and we lose a lot
of data.
That aren't the hard data.
To talk about how our community
see it or what their comments
are about it. We never not quite
know what to do with this with
these kinds of data analytics,
you are able to incorporate all
of that.
was a superintendent. I can hear
both my public and statistics
and look at my cost implications
and my return academically and
make decisions about what I
keep.
And what I lose
And how I.
Mr.
Uh, that's Mr. Chair, uh,
around that's kind of what I
expected to hear, but I, it, I
just had that tagged and it was
just, just curious to me. It
seemed like here in New Mexico,
every time we turn around, cost
us more here than it does
somewhere else, so I just
I thought I'd ask that question.
Got pretty close to the answer I
thought I was going to get, so
thank you.
OK, will of committee, please,
Mr. Chair, and will the Dubas on
Senate Bill 516.
have a motion for a due pass for
second.
They can by Senator Hickey.
If you'll call the roll, please.
tender boon.
Yes
Diesel
Yes.
Figueroa. Yes. Ciner Hickey.
OK
Yes.
The Nova, yes.
Cinder Ramos, yes, Thornton.
Now in my boat.
Sinder Pope, yes.
your soul. No, and I explained
my vote. That's the reason why,
uh, Senator Thornton.
As I mentioned before, I think,
I think.
The ideas concept is good. I
think there still needs to be a
lot more work done in this area,
in this arena, um, and I'll be
working, I'll be willing to work
with you to, to make that
happen.
Looks like you're moving on
anyway. So thank you very much.
So Senator, you do have a do
pass on an 8 to vote.
Yes
he said,
I do.
Uh, I don't see Senator Charlie.
We have about 5 to 10 minutes.
So,
Probably have time for, for an
introduction, but we do have a
hard stop, go in about 5, 10
minutes.
Unless we get worse than
this back to 11:30.
So Senator, and we maybe I'll
get some introduction. I don't
know that we'll get all the way
through.
Thank you
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, this is the first
time I've been in this committee
in the 6 years I've been here.
Um
So when these amazing women,
grandparents for Truth and the
school librarians brought this
bill to my attention or brought
the issue to my attention. I
told them that I was not a
member of Senate Education. Oh,
and there is a committee sub.
we probably ought to make sure
that everybody's, cause I don't
think it's in our book, we need
to make sure we've got the
we need to move the committee
sub.
It, it was uh provided to the
committee on the 7th of March.
was
Yeah
Thank you.
So
I guess I need somebody to move
the committee.
Mhm
Mr. Chair, I move a do not pass
on center bill 552 and a due
pass for discussion purposes on
Senate education substitute and
a bill 552.
and the number is 0.231097.
Senator, because in the agenda
and other things, it doesn't
have a title, please, you know,
can I start with the title and
other, other information.
This is um the protection of
school library Materials Act.
Although I would call it the
protection of school librarians
Act.
Um
So when the grandparents for
Truth and school librarians,
many of them are uh constituents
in my district, um, when they
brought it to my attention, the
issue of, of school librarians.
I told them that I was not a
member of the education
committee, but that we should
start the conversation. So I was
able to bring a generic bill to
start this conversation. I asked
Senator Pope because of his
interest in protecting public
libraries if he might be
interested, um, and of course he
wanted to hear it, um, to
decide. That is why we are here.
School libraries are so
important to our students, they
play a huge role in expanding
students' educational
development. Freedom to read and
learn is of utmost import
importance, especially now.
Students in many areas live,
especially rural areas, live far
from public libraries, so their
access to libraries.
is in our schools.
As I said, this is a bill that
that protects school librarians
and school libraries. I have
Rachel Altobeth, who is a senior
director of library services and
its structure instructional
materials um with Albuquerque
Public schools, and Francine
Binner, the librarian at
Cottonwood Classical Preparatory
School, uh, which is a charter
school. She is also the vice
chair of the New Mexico School
Librarians Group of the New
Mexico Library Association. And
just to briefly, um, briefly
describe the bill.
The, the heart of the bill.
There were, well, I guess two
hearts of the bill.
But, um, one heart, one very
important aspect of the bill is
um
On page 3.
Which
says that school boards and
charter school governing bodies,
um, shall have written policies
and number A is so important
that comply with the First
Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Article 2
Section 17 of the Constitution
of of New Mexico concerning
freedom of speech, whichever is
more protective of speech.
So that is a very important
aspect of the bill and the other
important aspect of this bill is
um on page.
On page 5.
Retaliation prohibited. A
library staff member shall not
be subject to termination,
demotion, discipline, or
retaliation for refusing to
remove a library resource before
that library resource has been
reviewed in accordance with the
applicable reconsideration
policy described in this bill,
or for making decisions that the
library staff member believes in
good faith or in accordance with
that policy. So those are the
two really important aspects of
the bill. The rest of the bill
is modeled.
On Colorado.
Um, that this is how Colorado
protects their school
librarians, um, and so with
that, I will turn it over to
Rachel and to Francine to speak
briefly about the bill if they
care to, or they're here to
answer questions, whichever they
choose. I know we don't have
much time.
Good morning. My name is Rachel
Bell, um.
Push the button, sorry.
It's just like Zoom.
My name is Rachel Altobelli. I'm
the senior director of library
services and instructional
materials for the Albuquerque
Public Schools. This bill would
support all of our districts in
good library practice. Policies
like this help make everything
clear and transparent and give
everybody a framework, so
everybody knows, you know,
what's in the library? OK, this
is how like we decide this is,
these are our processes. We
love processes, almost as much
as we love Post-it notes, um,
and it, it helps us.
Help the kids. This bill would
help school librarians in New
Mexico, no matter where they
are, do the
Create that moment that I know a
lot of you are teachers and have
had this moment as well.
When you've got to have so many
different books and so many
different things cause you never
know what the book is gonna be.
That will make a kid come back
and say,
I'm a reader now, and they're so
happy and they're so proud, and
now they're a reader, and now
they can, now they can do
anything.
So
This
This would help us do that.
Thank you.
All right. Can you hear me OK?
Fantastic.
So, as a charter school library,
my, my role is a little bit
different. I support students
daily with book checkouts, uh,
material selection. I provide
research instruction, ensure
access to curriculum and
personal reading materials. I
assistive technology, I helped
shape school policies and I help
teachers use technology in their
classrooms. Like Rachel was
saying, a few things are more
rewarding than helping students
get access to a book, right? And
having them come back and
they're eager to to share what
they've learned. It's not just
about getting them to read, it's
about fostering a deep
engagement.
With a variety of perspectives
that expand their understanding
of themselves and the world, and
that's what this bill helps to
protect. Even more fulfilling is
guiding students in developing
developing discernment, a well
curated library cultivates
critical thinkers who become
wise consumers of information.
In an era of misinformation and
rapid technological change. This
skill is more critical than
ever. Libraries are not just
book repositories, they are
learning hubs that empower
students to navigate the world
with skill.
So SB 552 reinforces the
essential role of school
libraries by encouraging and
adopting policies that are that
that protect our ability to
build strong diverse collections
and uphold students' rights to
read. Supporting librarians and
selecting quality materials
ensures that students, staff,
and schools continue to thrive,
investing in libraries is an
investment in informed, engaged
citizens who can think
critically, question
responsibly, and grow into
lifelong learners. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and the committee.
Thank you. We are up against our
timeline, but just how, how many
in support in the room?
And in opposition.
OK, and so I've got
About 6 in opposition on online,
but we're not gonna get to all
of that today. Uh, you all will
be first up on our Wednesday
agenda. Uh, we're planning on
starting at 8:30. Uh, it could
get moved to 9. I think we're
gonna be getting some other
house bills rolling over
depending on how many. We get a
bunch, we'll be at 8:30,
otherwise we're looking at
probably 9 on Wednesday, you
know, and, and some of that is
lots of some of the committee
members just saw this for the
first time and that gives them
an opportunity to, to look into.
Read through it all, so thank
you. I appreciate everyone being
here. Uh, we're looking at
8:30 on Wednesday, and education
is a journey.
