And and it's that you know
that's really the core of it but
the other is the pressure on
On that Chicano studies to it to
in large I think one of the
things that we haven't mentioned
is that all the degrees
bachelor's master's and PhD is
are all in person or online so
what's happening is there's a
lot of teachers in New Mexico
who are able to then advance
their stat their educational
status by getting degrees in
Chicano studies while they're
working so that's another large
growth area we have not even
marketed a Chicano studies very
much and there are.
Thirty people apply for graduate
school as I recall in biology I
could be wrong I think I saw a
seventy this year so we're you
know it's very competitive with
even the strongest departments
within UNM.
Mr chair if I may add to that
Senator.
I just wanted to
thank
After lunch then for bringing
this up because it is really
important I'm an example of of
the ability to be able to take
my and comply with my Ph.D.
Course while I'm here.
And I'm online and would not be
able to otherwise be able to
take this course if it were if I
had to be and per in person
we've seen our department grow
online and access and Dr want to
wash my is absolutely correct I
think that it's important to
note also and I want to thank
the the individual Anna Rosa
spoke on behalf of the United
graduate workers of home I'm
part of I also have time into
going to kind of studies and I
also for your information Mister
chair and members of the
committee and one of the
original founders attended to
kind of studies back in nineteen
sixty nine so it's very close to
my heart and I think seen it
personally on campus growing and
serving our communities and I've
seen I'm a grant writer I also
have seen that was been part of
my professional career is was
grant writing we don't as a
department have stuff to watch
print indicated the capacity to
be able to leverage even the
small amount of money that we do
get and research grants so I
just wanted to add that
Mr chair and Senator pope and
thank you for asking that
question an important question
thank you.
And so I think that's enough
okay yeah I'm good
I just think this program is so
important especially for folks
wherever they're at to have a
program like this now in the
state but around the country
that someone could come here and
learn about their history their
culture and understanding and I
think it's important that we
have the size at this degree is
not this terminal degree here
and agree that folks go on to do
other things with this education
so I'm in support of the some of
support this I one is also
support you know the other
programs that we have a UNM
africana studies native American
studies so with that that's all
I have Mister chair if it's okay
I'd I'd like to second but the
past week yes couple questions
for we actually get to the vote
it indicated there's been a ten
percent year over year the
largest program arts and
sciences.
Why is this not fully funded
through the university if it's
one of the biggest producers and
growing programs typically
universities put money into
programs like that while pulling
back from ones that are
shrinking why do are you asking
for an extra six million dollars
outside of what would be the
normal higher education funding
formula.
Mr Chairman our growth which has
increased significantly
since two thousand nineteen.
Occurred during a period of
budget constraints at UNM that
that is my answer however I will
say that
as a department we do not want
to be limited by our ability to
serve our community at the
undergraduate and graduate level
and the faculty have taken on an
incredible amount of workload to
ensure that are sixty five
graduate students are going to
be successful we've been
incredibly successful though
under funded we have a hundred
percent retention and graduate
graduation rates of our first
two cohorts.
We I believe we are at a time
where that funding can catch up
to our growth in many ways
having having not having the
funding that is required to
support our current.
Degree earners is going to be a
crisis if we don't get
additional funding we are losing
for faculty to retirements we're
already a small depart I mean
we're we have a small number of
faculty relative to our graduate
students I have twelve graduate
students most any peer I know
across the state doesn't work
with that amount of graduate
students so the funding now is
critical if we are still
assisting our college
preparation program our
undergraduate degree earners.
In our graduate degree earners
and we're hoping if it's
possible that that funding can
now not only catch up with us
where we're at but you know fuel
our growth into the future thank
you how much is the budget for
this department increased over
last year to the U. N. M.
funding.
Currently two got put excuse me
set a chairman.
Currently our department has a
five hundred and eighty eight
thousand R. P. S. P..
That funding has accumulated
since two thousand nineteen
through junior bill allocations
from five to seven legislature
that's not what I'm asking all
of the UNM graduated last year
that was approved what is the
request this year how much is
that increased in the overall U.
N. M. budget for this
department.
Chairman.
It just ask me that question
again I'm trying to get there
for what I'm trying to get at is
this is a UNM program is the
administration at UNM increasing
the budget for this program or
they keeping it flat and causing
you to have to go outside the
funding formula to ask for
additional funding and it would
if you would please give us a
Cup the council university
president.
The quick this program actually
did started provided funding
that I match the adversity going
back to two thousand four two
thousand five two thousand six
and it's grown since then of
course to the recession to
comment we thought cuts are
PSP's experience about a percent
those cuts State University add
of course why the group is up
here today is to try to make up
some of those funds here's to
New Mexico on how the budget
along with the rest of higher
education New Mexico is that
they don't Nestle build the
request at this time when it
comes to hire at it like state
agencies from that one in
September what higher it has to
do is that we come up the
legislature we have some of a
sort of skeleton budget New
Mexico state's pretty similar
and we lobby for an increase in
our instruction in general we're
requesting five percent increase
in section general that's
roughly about seven point two
million per one percent for the
state of New Mexico so the more
instruction John we can get the
more we can help match with the
funding we get from the state
legislature whether it's in
junior or from a direct
appropriation within house bill
two so the county universe
presents us strongly along with
all the institutions for at
least a five percent increase
ninety to help support these
programs Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you very
much thank you and.
Yeah I've I've been in higher
education for a long while
there is a higher ed funding
formula and as I look at this
and please understand it's by no
means that this is a good
program that's not where I'm
coming from at all but for
instance what's to keep the
engineering or the geology
program at tech coming in asking
for six million of additional
money outside the funding
formula because they've got a
growing program or at New Mexico
state The Ed college asking for
additional money outside and
then the whole higher ed funding
formula which is supposed to be
covering for growing departments
producing lots of degrees
they're supposed the
universities get more money for
those kinds of things.
Why is that I mean this disrupts
that funding formula when you it
goes for a direct appropriation
that's my concern
kind of a long the the same
lines this is six million
dollars you it indicated that
two thirds of it is for staff
that's a recurring cost yet this
is also a one time only
appropriation with no guarantee
which means those people would
all be on soft money with no
guarantee of a job next year
based on what you said
typically yeah we've been warned
over and over there's lots of
non recurring money this is
clearly recurring.
Six million dollars how do we
manage that where people learn
on soft money and those things
go south next year or whatever
that you're not back next year
trying to get recurring
appropriations for what was not
a one time cost.
Mr chairman I do want to make
one correction to the two thirds
the two thirds includes graduate
student interns if you look at
our diagram we actually run
programs that are not only in
the university but that cut
across multiple communities
throughout the state a number of
these programs are run by
graduate student interns they do
receive funding on an annual
basis and they do understand
that these programs are not run
on a recurring expenses we have
developed a three phase budget
for your consideration
understanding the limitations of
recurring dollars
if any additional funds were
granted that we're nonrecurring
I promise you those funds will
be used as we have always used
are funding through our PS
Pierre other matters within a
year's time.
Thank you and again I it's it's
a wonderful program that's
that's not my concern but it's
much more on.
Yeah this is nonrecurring
funding that's being asked for
it's outside the funding the
general higher education funding
formula
go every universities got
programs that can have a room
full of people up advocating for
what a great program how good it
is for New Mexico and why we
need more funding than the
university put in the budget for
us those those are my concerns
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chair and and this is kind of
the dilemma that we're in is a
committee and I know in previous
years we basically have have
sort of kept all of these
funding bills that in in
committee and then as a
committee determines which ones
that we felt should go on to
Senate finance these are all
great programs we've heard we
just got through hearing one
from Senator Hickey we're going
here one from Senator Hamblen
this is a good program to more
grant programs down below you
know this is but the problem is
and so we send all these to
Senate finance with their
probably gonna sit and or at
least they'll be tabled and then
some of it may be rolled into
the budget most of them won't be
and so I don't know how we fix
the process and how we as a
committee
Move forward those items that we
really believe should get a
second look by Senate finance
because I'm sure all of these
great ideas have an opportunity
either be in the governor's
budget or LFC budget and here we
are trying to make decisions
about programs that that are
really good programs but not
being funded so I don't have a
solution you know we just passed
Dr Hickey so not you know I feel
obligated to go ahead and you
know pass all these out of here
but then they're going to sit
in finance people need to
understand that and I wish we is
a committee could figure out a
better way to really review and
determine which of the should go
on to finance so we're not
holding you off hostage you're
sitting there waiting till week
before the end of the session to
find out if you're gonna get
funding so Mister chair I
certainly open to suggestions I
hope we could think about this
but I'm not going to vote no on
this we've already established a
good program should move on and
but I think it's a it's unfair
to these people who are coming
expecting that we can really
make a difference so thank you
Mr chair thank you and I've been
advised the webcast is down so
we're gonna hold in place I. T.
is working on it so far as any
more formal of deliberations
were on hold until the web we
get word that the webcast is
back up so that the public is
able to participate so we're
we're kind of off line right now
as far as official business some
more just discussion you know
I've tried to pitch the on as
you well of imagine it didn't go
very far but that each committee
maybe get twenty the with the
budgets we have now twenty
million dollars for us to decide
how to spend it on what we think
are worthy projects from the
Education Committee as you
probably imagined that landed
with a thud but.
But it.
Judiciary ought to have a pool
where they can advance judiciary
kinds of programs that they
think have merit that they've
studied and understand better
than most of the the finance
committee people do and and
others but again that.
That usually lands with a thud
with the actual appropriating
groups.
So we're just standing in place
everybody until the webcast is
backed up.
Talk among yourselves or.
For the next couple years
Representative.
This call your but what.
But to the.
It's just.
Here is something that is is I
don't think is really well known
but John Hummer who is in the
higher leadership there at B.
com last year at our interim
economic development policy
committee had shared the story
of one of the students who is
actually able to talk a resident
of Southern New Mexico out of a
very serious crisis situations
where we're thankful that that
person is still here today but
the quality and the values that
are taught in B. com or
something that we certainly want
to see in all of our health care
practices and so the point with
Senate bill two thirty one the
governor has allocated seven
point five million dollars to
the Burrell college of
osteopathic medicine to build
and enhance several initiatives
that will be dispersed over
three years these funds will
recruit students into the
medical field develop much
needed medical infrastructure
and address the need of more
medical practitioners in the
state and those of you who know
me know that I don't like our
students our young people are
families of going out I prefer
the money staying in New Mexico
so that we can continue to
benefit the residents of the
state and to pull our Faulkner
who is a lobbyist for the
Burrell College and she is I
called her an expert
extraordinaire on ways that we
can build our medical profession
while serving the health care
needs of all New Mexicans at
that point Mr Mr chair and
committee I'm all open up for
discussion of the bill and any
questions that we may have.
Thank you of them first out to
the audience those in support of
this particular bill to have
seven five seven point five
million dollars towards become.
That.
There is there any opposition
first.
If not of people would like to
speak if you'll come up to the
microphone we do have a very
short deadlines so please keep
it tight.
Thank you Mr chairman Dennis are
representing loveless health
systems and they stand in strong
support of this bill is a
necessary step to address the
physician shortage thank you
ma'am.
To medical knowledge is my uncle
who was head of surgery at
Harvard and we would talk about
all kinds of interesting things
including nursing and assistance
and at thanksgiving so that's my
background and I live in Santa
Fe my I have a daughter who's
teaching in in elementary school
and I'm totally in favor of
what's happening down and the
rest of New Mexico I would like
to see a a coordination with I.
An office up here in Santa Fe so
that we can lend support
directly to this group thank you
very much I'm in favor of this
thank you.
Steve.
access to quality health care
Our list of their zip code have
services in order to accomplish
this we need to address the
shortage of doctors across the
state just be two thirty one
builds the builds upon the
foundation to address this issue
it's a solid stepping stone a
smart investment and a common
sense bill.
I thank the sponsor for bringing
forth this bill and we ask that
you provide reconsider a vote in
favor thank you.
Thank you and I believe we've
got one set up it's Gerald
online.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm cert sterile
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber and
calm timber of commerce a New
Mexico's health care provider
shortages not only well
documented but it's also
something many of our state's
residents have experienced first
hand struck up a conversation
with virtually anyone in your
community and you'll be hard
pressed to find someone who
hasn't had to wait six months or
more for an appointment
sometimes with horrific
consequences addressing our
state's health care needs
requires an all of the above
approach we need to keep the
providers we have with their
years of priceless experience
but we also know that huge
numbers of our doctors are at or
above retirement age and that
means we need to attract young
people to the field as well
Senate bill two thirty one would
find any number of programs to
incentivize and support students
entering the medical field we
are absolutely in favor of this
we also of course encouraged AGD
enter higher education
institutions including be calm
to use innovative and evidence
based strategies to make sure
these programs are utilized and
succeed in getting providers and
to New Mexico communities thank
you thank you.
Questions from the committee the
current thank you very much Mr
chair and senator so this is a
direct appropriation become
separate Mr chair Senator I'm
gonna let pull R. Faulkner go
ahead and give you a little bit
more background on that
Mr chair and Senator Kernan par
Faulconbridge lobbies for broke
college of osteopathic medicine
it is it's going to AGD it's a
special appropriation we work
with ATD during the in terms
session to identify strategies
and programs that would most
effectively not only get more
students in New Mexico
interested in going to medical
school and undergrad programs
but also keeping them here and
when possible pulling them back
from other states where they've
had to go to get residency
programs thank you Mr chair and
so I was going to ask you if if
this would include funding to
add residency programs that you
know we're limited in the number
of residency center lab I guess
nationwide and in that process
is done in a match of process
way so many times people that
might want to stay in New Mexico
might not match with the
residency so would this be over
in about would you be able to
fund some residencies to keep
some of the graduates to become
in New Mexico Mister chairman
Senator Kernan we are actually
working on another program
through HSD which is a board
become eight of.
Effort to get to HB four eighty
done in about I think it was
twenty.
Eighteen or twenty nineteen so
there's a board of stakeholders
including the hospital
association the medical society
UNM the broke college
The physicians of.
Primary care physicians
association we are working as a
team as a collective with HSD to
get more funding for that build
out of GME programs so this
program is designed to get kids
into jammies at these the funds
were talking about for this bill
are not going to bill GME
programs but we are working to
get more money on another side
issue.
For GMT programs thank you just
one final comment I certainly
support this we've got to do
everything we can but I will
tell you if we don't fix our
malpractice laws you're not
going to keep anyone in New
Mexico the quickest way to get
student medical doctors to rural
New Mexico is change the venue
laws so if you change can you
wear a suit can only be found in
the community the county for
that that practice potentially
occurred you'll see doctors
fully to rural communities thank
you.
Thank you senator Neville.
Thank you Mr I was gonna say the
same thing is Senator Kernan
just said
I have a bunch of work all
carved up my hand my doctors
talking about moving to director
just cross the line lives in
Farmington move to direct line
which is a medical malpractice
we gotta fix that the other
thing is residencies we need
residencies all over the state
and if you get people moved to
Farmington New Mexico with
fishing in the skiing in the
mountains and the archaeology
and etcetera etcetera the state
and they like it there because
the given time to acclimate
languages if you set it back to
the you know just looking at a
map you may not want to go there
but the facts are people like to
stay up there live there so
residencies and malpractice and
some of the other laws we have
in the state if you want to fix
I'm in favor of bills of
passionate but really issues are
not this the real issues or some
something more
something deeper so thank you Mr
Mr Chairman magmatic response.
And quickly I so Mr chair
Senator up you know when we look
at these issues that were we're
faced with as a legislature of
addressing in trying to solve I
look at them as well as a spoke
of a wheel is that you know
there are so many different
factors and it's it's a
challenge you know and we've got
community groups and we've got
organizations working on trying
to resolve those problems and
the point is all of us coming
together at the center of the
spoke to make sure that we does
all that and make sure that we
solve that so I do appreciate
your comments on that is like
and like everyone would like to
move to cool places like Durango
Colorado in Santa Fe New Mexico
is going to remember their
bottom line gets affected Mr Mr
chair Farmington's got it rock
and they're they're really doing
a great job out there especially
with their outdoor recreation
thank you Senator put.
Mr Chairman would pass.
A second thank you bye senator
Neville and then if you'll call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes.
Senator Kernan yes Sir my Estes
yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pope yes your soul yes I
have a deep you have in the past
thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee thank you us there's
committee and this committee
typically closed down about six
or seven minutes so if you could
be quick will we'll see if it
starts to drive we're going to
will stop where we are and have
to roll it over thank you Mr
chairman of the committee I will
be quick.
this bill
Fans soft drinks and soft drinks
for being sold vented given out
in schools.
When I saw the governor's
healthy food have a committee
separate yes with many sub so
first we need to move the the
committee so so thank you Mr I
move do not pass until two
thirty four and a do pass and
sanitation Education Commission
of two percent milk for thank
you.
The thing Mr Percy
so this is creates a universal
standard within our schools that
we're not going to you know
allow allow kids to be having
access to these drinks during
school hours I I this bill was
the kind of last minute idea
when I saw the governor's
healthy foods initiatives I
thought this fits in and it's
desperately needed if you if you
see from the FIR and LESC
analysis FIR says American heart
association American County P.
pediatrics show that the sugary
drinks are correlated with
obesity elevated cholesterol
diabetes heart disease it's
cetera
If I direct your attention to
the LFC analysis CDC is found
the same things the strictures
associate with weight gain type
two diabetes kidney disease
liver disease ma'am.
And then lastly to look at this
map we're we're one of the worst
you can use that unfortunately a
lot of these lists but you know
that LFC you know did a really
good job looking at this and
said that are prevalence of
intake of these sugary drinks is
among the highest in the nation.
I did you know I worked with
some of the industry's some of
the the people in the schools to
do some fund raising we did work
up
a change to the bill that was a
bit of a pun intended a
concession so the substitute the
only thing that it does is it
allows for after hours fund
raising activities in of chess
club wants to do a root beer
float fundraiser they can do
that after hours and it allows
concession sales at like a
football game or something like
that.
so for the sake of brevity Mr
chair I'll just say that we need
to learn from our mistakes in
our shortcomings from dealing
with the tobacco industry from
some of these other industries
to create products that are
extremely harmful to our health
we need to take action I'll
close with this and it's never
questions my my favorite
professor who is the chairman my
department and residency taught
me this he said when you have a
patient to sleep on the table
you to channel everything in
that room to that patient if
there's something going on
that's extra this not for their
well being get rid of it is the
most valuable lesson I learned
from doctor labor for my
chairman after working with five
years in my vision for our
schools is if there's something
that's present that's not for
their education other well being
let's get rid of it that's my
that's my vision walking to
school everything is channeled
for the betterment of our
students.
and so I will I will close with
that Mr chair thank you thank
you out of the audience for is
those in support of this
legislation.
Anyone in opposition.
Then Senator up again we are
very short and I guess I'd ask
the committee do you want to
continue on with this bill or
hear from the public and bring
it back Friday with the
preference.
Okay but we go past eleven
o'clock so it's going beyond
that we're going to shut down
right at eleven is that keep
your testimony to maybe two two
or something that if everybody
would would keep the other the
comments down first those in
support of anyone like please
come up to the Mike.
Okay we'll take two people
inside.
Again my name's Elizabeth west
I'm in favor of this especially
because of the concessions.
Admission I think that will help
the students and what what they
want also thank you very much.
Thank you we had three people
line up so.
But I was quick you were very
quick yes please go ahead.
Hello I'm Anthony Chizik hi live
in crucis and I I go to Rio
Grande preparatory institute.
I grew this bill because it's on
need it can brings kids out of
class often times they will ask
in the middle of class to just
go by either sodas or drinks got
to the point where rules had to
be implemented.
I agree with the fact that we
should focus entirely on school
it's not needed it's on helpful
not only to the.
Body but also to teaching.
Thank thank you.
Okay if you're very quick
please.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my pace see that with
the American heart association I
think we thank the sponsors will
bring this bill I think this
goes hand in hand with the
healthy school meals the
governor has proposed and you
know.
Sugary drinks are really really
detrimental to the kids health
you know childhood diabetes and
long term health effects you
know heart disease and other
illnesses and you know the just
like the tobacco industry know
the the soft drink industry you
know targets kids with cartoon
ads and you know all these feel
good in our commercials but
there are loaded with sugar
thirty eight forty percent sugar
and they're really really bad
for the kids health so we
strongly support this bill and
we
just this committee to pass this
bill.
Thank you.
Those in opposition thank.
We get what we had three on that
side will have three on this
side.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Adrian is this I am with
Pepsi Cola in Albuquerque New
Mexico that the whole the button
down but that's a call in
Albuquerque New Mexico was born
and raised pepsico Inc the
employees five hundred twenty
employees across the state
amongst many distribution
centers throughout the state in
all four corners today I'm here
in opposition to bills Senate
bill two thirty four because it
is not needed current USDA
regulations to limits beverage
calories and schools are already
in place and followed by public
schools across New Mexico in two
thousand five in two thousand
six we as a beverage industry
collaborated with the New Mexico
department of education
legislators and the Richardson
administration to limit the
products sold in schools to
students and reduce the calories
offered during school hours in
fact are voluntary guidelines
were so effective the USDA use
them to shape the beverage
component of the USDA snacks
schools and beverage guidelines
in twenty fourteen.
UST regulations are as followed
in elementary and middle schools
bottled water or carbonated
water low fat free milk and one
hundred percent juice in eight
ounce portions or ten outs for
middle schools only.
In high schools.
Twelve ounces of low fat or fat
free milk and juice mid calorie
beverages that are no more than
sixty six calories per eight
ounces and are capped at twelve
ounces total for example reduced
calorie sports drinks and
reduced calorie teas flavored
waters and diet zero calorie
sodas these restrictions begin
at midnight and extended till
thirty minutes after the school
day.
Since implementation these
regulations have read reduce
beverage calories in schools by
more than ninety four percent
please.
Senate bill goes much more than
USD regulations and aside from
the concerns these organizations
that with ninety excuse me with
ninety four percent reduction in
calories to schools since UST
regulations Senate bill two
thirty four is unnecessary and I
respectfully ask the vote no.
Then thank you.
The journal build of the shorter
Center just heard the USDA
regulations I was gonna refer to
we've already done this.
Is completed.
We do have not seen the
substitute we are an absolute
opposition to the original bill
we need to have an opportunity
to react to the substitute I'm
not sure it's not fixing
something that's not necessary
as you've already heard Mr
Chairman super kind of stand in
opposition.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
Good morning I'm very case and
I'm here representing New Mexico
beverage Association and coca
Cola bottling company of Santa
Fe a hundred for local hundred
four year old local family owned
business in this industry we
have given to our schools in our
community and feel like it's an
obligation and a privilege I'm
sure this bill's intentions are
good but this past there could
be some possible unintended
consequences currently the
industry gives to the schools
and school organizations in many
different ways these include
commissions to our vending
machines through donations as
well as scholarships to local
people that generated through
our funds given to the out of
the schools so as Adrian
addressed the ABA guidelines and
USDA guidelines all that can be
found on their website and I ask
that you guys please vote no
everybody here vote no for this
bill as we already have it and
the local schools can already
make this decision.
Thank you the quick comments
before we go to.
Mr chair pose rhetorical
question to you in the members
of the committee he gonna trust
more.
Beverage companies that bring in
tens of millions of dollars in
revenue.
Larger budgets than the state of
New Mexico or our own L. E. S.
C. to care for our kids.
The USDA which by the way these
companies lobbied heavily at the
USDA they spend more nutrition
research dollars in the in I. H.
and so what I would say is that
L. E. S. C. got right whatever
these people are doing is not
working look at the L. E. S. C.
data walk into a school thank
you Mr thank you.
Lessons from the committee
Senator Mestis.
No thank you Mr chairman thank
you centers committee the up
what was the.
The thought process.
Choosing soda instead of pop.
The but in all seriousness
chairman the appreciate the the
dialogue because it's I agree
with that it should be in
schools during school hours and
things like that I'm glad that
we all agree on that the and I
just want to appreciate the the
attempt at the sense to Mr
Chairman the but the sub two
doesn't doesn't change the
original bill.
For example of the baseball
field the football field the
gymnasium at seven o'clock at
night on a Saturday.
That's school grounds and then
choose to accept thank with one
exception and then you say it
has to be off and away from
school grounds so it's so you're
still so I guess like in out in
my town I guess it mill the
state in which is the collective
football stadium you could you
can get a soda but it would
still exclude school activities
on the school campus ground so I
think it's just a little bit a
little too much for me but thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
center it's in for thirty
minutes after school so baseball
at school no I.
Senator Hickey the Democrat I
got.
Of yes thank you Mr chairman and
senator Smith of the cat was a
long time ago but I used to be
involved in a lot of after
school activities we raised
money and so to you know whether
we like it or not was certainly
part of that
if for hitting those kind of
activities and the if if if it
what I read here in the is that
it cannot be on the grounds from
school and so
I mean that's they were sporting
events but also clubs and so
forth so I would have a very
difficult time supporting this
bill because I again and here's
a health component of it these
clubs the participation and
bringing people in we don't
emphasize enough in our
education system social skills
and this is where their social
skills really come together and
so I I would advocate not
passing this bill and allowing
those sales to continue to occur
after school on school grounds
thank you.
Thank you.
pope.
I move to table.
Have a motion to table it is non
debatable Marianna fuel for the
role please.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan Senator my S. yes Senator
Neville yes.
There two bills are my bills and
unless somebody just wants to
make a motion to pass both of
them I'd be happy to have those
up first and.
If not we adjourned until nine
o'clock on Friday Senate bill
two thirty six is Senate bill
two thirty seven research bills
