So they get the webcast up and
up in reading of having to drive
it.
I was having trouble logging
into the impact I had to log
into the public system.
I don't know if they're having
issues of shares and on.
I don't know I hope everybody
was able to get here safely
today with another couple inches
of snow here in Santa Fe and I
know those around the state
there's some places that are
that have issues so I hope
everybody is.
Thank you we'll get here
effectively.
With a branch into the capital
did you having trouble.
I have a mile away I can
practically see my my apartment
from my office but they are snow
packed but there wasn't a
problem with that.
No I drive like an old man
anyhow and so going really slow
just it's really well when
there's no.
I'm about.
Three minutes.
About three minutes away and and
they're pretty well maintained
Mr chairman.
That.
People don't have much when
there's snow when I'm driving
with a normally.
That just.
We didn't get this now in
Albuquerque.
The very ended I hear are we up
on the webcast New.
yes we should be Senator.
Okay
With that we will start printed
education of.
Morning of February seventeenth
couple of announcements as we
get started is Senate bill three
oh seven the daily school bus
driver salaries the Campos
you're going to roll that over
to Friday yet a fairly
Extensive or major amendment
that we didn't get killed just
about fifteen minutes ago and so
analysts haven't had a chance to
see that our deal with that SO
three oh seven will get moved to
Friday Friday I believe we will
back you back to a nine o'clock
start in less up more session
gets held for Friday but I don't
think that that is anticipated
at this time we do have a hard
stop today at about eleven
twenty so we can all yeah maybe
get to the bathroom the switch
over to the other it down to our
center branch you're shaking
your head is there.
I'm sure I'm sorry I did not
tell you at our last meeting but
we are having a caucus meeting
thirty.
That rumors but I hadn't heard
so I was hoping that was okay.
What do they Senator.
Mr Chairman.
Yeah I I have heard you know
that there was like maybe early
but hat recht slides out we're a
lot Hey your schedule today and
we'll try and finish that by
about ten twenty ten twenty five
or whatever but we will not go
into your caucus time and so
we've got a little bit tighter
schedule but we thought we had
any bills we don't here today
will get rolled over to Friday
that.
With that in Senate education
we're gonna start with Senate
bill two forty eight anonymous
reporting in schools out center
in the bill if you would take it
directly.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman if you recall a little
over two years ago there's a
serious incident happened at the
Aztec high school.
If you would have ask anybody
around the state where you might
be looking at having serious
of school shootings and and
serious incidents as tech would
have been on the lower half of
that list I guarantee it's a
very conservative.
middle class a bedroom community
and it's not the kind of place
for you to speak that this kind
of thing would happen but it did
we had the two students killed
the and certainly the whole body
was traumatized.
Representative bandaid myself
went over and met with most of
the students a few weeks later.
Excuse me.
And believe me the scars are
still there this bill seeks to
try and address
the possibility of that
happening again it's and I'm and
I'm I'm just reporting process
it rules out over an extended
period of time so there's some
concerns about the budget issues
we don't anticipate that's going
to be a real problem because it
takes awhile we we think that
the PED can resolve some of
those issues
early on and then know how much
money we're actually going to
need I have one expert witness
so Representative Chris
constitution superintendent
mastic schools and I'm gonna let
him go through the details this
is more his baby the money but I
would certainly strongly
encouraged the committee to
adopt this bill in some form or
fashion because we need to make
sure that we we keep our kids
safe and the.
I feel comfortable that they are
safe and having met with those
those kids a in high school two
weeks later.
it is a very traumatizing
situation and affected them
forever so if I could I would
like superintendent carpenter to
come in and fill us in on the
details of the bill and I can't
talk anyway so would be better
someone else's thank you Mr.
if you would please our.
Good morning Mr chair Senators
members of the committee first
of all thank you for for a
allowing me to be here thank you
for your service to our great
state
I just want to obviously
reiterate that you know we can't
allow school safety to take a
backseat in our state we can't
allow it to be a lottery and
we've done a lot for safety in
our state but I think he the
frontline defense of knowing
about things that may happen or
issues are affecting our kids we
all know the emotional issues
are happening in our state with
suicides even just this year I'm
not saying their system like
this will cure all that but I am
saying that the system like this
not only changes licensees
states we've had an anonymous
calling system since after
incident with we looking at one
before our incident
and I can tell you before we
even rolled ours out that we
literally saved a life.
We are getting a test to test
out the system and was an actual
incident student crisis and
during the conversation and the
testing that was occurring
between that student and the
crisis center which is twenty
four seven law enforcement
arrived at the front door and
that exchange from the student
was on in trouble now law
enforcement here but it wasn't
to be in trouble it was a safety
check and I can't tell you how
many incidents that we are in
fact ninety percent of the
incidents we get reported or not
about school violence it's about
emotional issues that our kids
are facing whether it's from
themselves or from other friends
with concern many districts
across the state have systems in
place that are.
Comparable with what we're
trying to accomplish with this
bill again the idea is getting
information to where kids feel
comfortable in reporting it's
mainly in the secondary schools
because it's usually done off
texts or emails that doesn't
exclude the opportunity for
anybody in the community to do
something that gets an app and
again they're different vendors
to do this I'm not I'm not here
to talk about the vendors that
are specific specific things
need to be included in our P. to
include things not just onerous
reporting system but things like
processed meats that could also
follow up so that all schools
are on board I'm in no way shape
or form which is meant to be an
unfunded mandate relicensing
cases coming forward without
funding is is somewhat of an
issue but I can tell you that
many states across the country
have implement a statewide have
done with federal grants there's
a huge federal grant that was
just recently awarded to one of
our REC in the state for the
specific program is called stop
grant so there there are options
out there the the other options
are out there agencies to work
with us to help us secure
funding
we don't want to put anything on
schools as an extra but when
you're dealing with students
life literally
we say educators say students
lies this is actual system that
does that and it has not been
labor intensive I can tell you
any notification we get I get a
call as a superintendent as do
other key personnel at the site
that it affects and it's a
teamwork approach it's a
teamwork approach between nine
one one Senators where we're
getting them information so as
things are happening real time
with students in crisis so real
issues that we have law
enforcement involved for the
right reasons to make sure we're
getting students assistance
saying eight.
People always worry about false
reporting with the systems those
are dealt with I can tell you in
the last three years we've had I
also reports we've had over two
hundred seventy three incidents
nineteen ninety percent of those
incidents are social emotional
it's in crisis
we don't know how many things
school acts of violence we
prevented because now we have
options of where kids can speak
out privately everything's
confidential and that's a that's
a keen there's a lot of things
probably that still need to be
worked out on this but I think
what we need to think about is
creating the boxes of what needs
to exist and then developing
over.
Period of time without taking
any seductive shortcuts and I do
realize there's a lot of work
just to be done but within an
RFP thank you need to be a place
can be fully described again
we're not reinventing the wheel
we're moving in will it keep it
rolling because other states
that have done this and I just I
just want to say that to safety
against not an extra we're we're
protecting the most precious
resources they're counting on us
those are kids and if not now
when it's not us who so I hope
that we can make a strong
consideration to get this bill
moving forward with I know how
legislation works so I know
there's always things we have to
look at amending those types of
things but we we need to move
this forward we need to do this
for every single kid in every
single district so the safety
against not a lottery for some
districts to have and some not
to have in a system like this to
have because it is again not
changing kids lives I'm I can
give you plenty of testimony
County license and say put this
type of system and so I would
open up and stand for any
questions and hopefully we can
answer those for you.
Thank you superintendent
carpenter Center develop.
That's the extent of our
presentation Mr chairman we
would stand for questions.
Thank you will go out to the
audience to Martellus you'll be
this to that please.
At this time I don't have anyone
from the public who signed up to
speak in opposition of Senate
bill two forty eight.
Are there any members of the
public that are currently with
us that would like to speak in
opposition of Senate bill two
forty eight please raise your
hand at this time.
It doesn't look like we have
anyone do we have any members of
the public who wish to speak in
support of Senate bill two forty
eight we are hearing statements
of support at this time we'll go
to Mr Joe again and then Mr
stand ramps go ahead.
Thank you chairman sos members
of the committee this is jokey
and with the New Mexico school
boards association.
we we support the intent of this
so legislation of.
Of keeping students safe.
and is it is well justified.
However as as it was mentioned
earlier this can be considered a
unfunded mandate we understand
that there have been funds
identified for this part of
program but it is a a
comprehensive program that calls
for implementation of a.
Over a twenty four hour.
Twenty four hours a day seven
days a week along with all the
training that is involved.
So we would ask the the sponsor
to consider making an optional
until the program gets up and
running.
Of the four make mandating it
across the board so again we
support the concept we just hope
that that we can identify some
funding for this of program
before it is mandated to all of
our districts thank you.
Thank you Mr Ken we will now
hear from Mr rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee stand around for
the state superintendents
association and educational
leaders as the heard from school
boards we strongly support for
this bill is going students
safety is the central
superintendent carpenters the
vamp was sobering for all of us
in New Mexico and reminded us of
the importance of putting in
place the kinds of support
mechanisms and identification
mechanisms the maybe would
preempt those kinds of
situations as was mentioned we
are concerned about the
potential on funded mandates as
could be we would ask that
consideration be given to modify
the bills moves forward to make
it optional as was mentioned for
a period of time we also have
would reminded committee is a
super carpenter stated there is
a at and ari C. one the program
and some timing that would run
parallel with this and so we
would also do finally suggest
perhaps you could look at
funding from junior as this
moves forward as a way of the
and open this out thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr rounds we wanna
hear from Akita Martinez go
ahead.
Good morning Mr chair committee
my name is Rick Martinez
lobbyist for public school
insurance authority as well as
farms associates we stand in
support of this legislation
we've seen it work throughout
the state we work with various
districts
launching of program like this
and we've seen the success in
districts would be happy to work
with PED in the implementation
and launching program thank you
have a great day.
Thank you Mr Tina's are there
any other members of the public
that wish to get statements of
support.
Thank you very much includes
public statement for Senate bill
two forty eight thank you.
Legislative Representative I
need the bill I always like to
give the sponsor chance to make
comments after public statements
I think that the concerns about
the funding are valid Mr
chairman but we don't anticipate
that on July one that there's
going to be a program that has
to be implemented so our thought
was as of.
Grants and so forth can be
applied for the PED has to
develop a program we think that
will take a number of months to
to come up with a plan and
program and put it in place and
then that would be further along
a certainly passed the next
legislative session and we can
be looking at funding from that
standpoint grants are available
excuse me other sources of funds
gifts and so forth and we
anticipate that that that would
be adequate to try to get things
running so we have no objections
necessarily making appropriate
amendments as we go but we'd
certainly encourage that the
committee to help us move this
along as we need to do thank
you.
Thank you senator and and just
we were up the L. E. S. C. met
up in Aztec that summer after
that incident and it was a very
sobering very powerful that
afternoon when we met with the
students who were right there
add the L. E. S. C. pretty much
just listen for a couple of
hours was it was very very
moving
is to see a deal with that event
so we will point that Senator
Kernan you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Neville and.
Mr carpenter you know it just
dawned on me after the last step
person spoke in support it
basically it's almost like an
insurance policy because I don't
know if there were situations
following the incident
Farmington where
Risks are.
The district was held
accountable in any way but it
almost seems like that schools
school districts would be much
better off saying well we have a
program in place and if
something should happen you
certainly have done everything
that you can add to prevent an
incident it's almost like an
insurance policy so I don't know
what the cost is no wonder Mr
chair and and not if Senator
Neville lower Mr carpenter could
it tell us that the approximate
cost of a program such as this.
Mister chairman Senator I don't
know the cost and that's one of
the problems as.
Dr carpenter may have some
thoughts on that and that
statewide it's it's probably a
pretty good size number
eventually but it's of a multi
year phase in the way of Allah
doctor carpenter talk about
that.
pretty there yes thank you Mr
chair Senator committee you know
that it's there's Representative
estimates I mean it could be
close to million dollars here
reoccurring cost a lot of it
depends on the model you set up
if it's a state run model or
that the state adopted or if you
go out and have a enter when I I
he deems Language Bender but
there agencies out there we
right now I have two main ones
and in New Mexico say something
which is what we use and stop it
those organizations have very
much to develop the anonymous
reporting systems to where they
have they they basically run it
contracting with them on those
models seen usually to be more
efficient and a little bit
cheaper to do but the services
are there because they're trying
to do that
doing a state that based one
could run more again not having
our numbers those are estimates
and a lot of it depends on what
you're doing with the system you
get I think what this system
allows and and like is that we
we've talked with the attorney
general's general's office I
know they're they're in support
of helping looking at this state
wanted to do something around
this to the police association
the state so funding absolutely
is an issue believe me I've been
one to speak out against
unfunded mandates over the years
for districts and we do not want
to do that to our school
districts and that's why again
we're not trying to build the
planes we go down to.
I think we're trying to do is
build the framework of the
getting things define but the
prices are it depends again on
what system and it would depend
on what the R. P. and how it's
written and I think that is
another critical piece to make
sure include certain things were
training up nine one one
Senators they're they're much in
favor I mean so there's a lot of
people that aren't David doing
this and and helping with the
call excuse me the cost and just
I think the biggest issue is
once the RFP straight more of a
better idea of the reoccurring
costs rental states that a
petition even states may be
larger than us the reoccurring
clashes between six hundred and
make to to make sure takes place
are states where it's been
legislatively appropriated for
like states like Colorado we
have this system had many many
years so there's different ways
in different application I think
it's a matter researching and
putting it in our P. what
specifically needs to take place
but that's a rough estimate of
biking I can not okay thank you
thank you very much I think
they're two things we need to
think about I would guess that
across the state and maybe this
is something that Mr can help
with going forward at to
determine if if systems are in
place across the state in
districts that maybe we're not
aware at I know that that I
believe in my district thank
thank you have a program in
place that may not be exactly
what you're talking about but
certainly a surveillance program
of some sort so I think first we
need to know what's out there
what are districts still
currently and then we need to
remember that not every district
is the setting we know that
we're very diverse state we have
small school systems we have a
large middle size maybe one size
doesn't fit all in this case and
that's why I'm really worry
about mandating at this point I
think if you go forward with
this bill as we need to maybe
set up a framework but I don't I
don't think it.
It appropriate this particular
time to do a mandate so I just
wondered if there was any way
you could address that but I do
need I do think we need to know
what's out there in the
districts before we say that it
needs to be one certain type of
surveillance or security issue
with regard to our state needs
so that's what happened it just
would hope the Sanchez would
consider maybe if this **** get
to make sure that we're not
mandated something that we're
not going to be sent to static.
Thank you.
Mr chairman I comment on
something Sir.
Please go ahead on the other
important thing I like I said I
I agree that there are a lot of
a lot of systems out there lot
of school districts do have some
systems in place and I think if
the systems they have in place
would fall under what is
required under this that is an
important thing to consider
I know we can play get
information back to you on on
the number of districts that
have for example to say
something apple would have to
stop it at the those again to
the most common and most I think
comprehensive so to your point
Senator Kernan which deeply
respect.
That is information we can get
out.
And I agree with you not one
size fits that all I think the
important thing is just creating
an opportunity for over a period
of time whether it's three years
to ensure that something's in
place for all districts for the
benefit students and again that
was a full intent of this so
thank you.
For
the next day had Senator pope.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator bill for bringing this
bill forward
Senator Kernan asked some of my
questions I was just wondering
wanting more information on what
this would cost but I do think
this is an important one of the
tools that we need to have right
here in our schools to ensure
that we try to avoid gun
violence and and any violence of
any kind of course and then any
students that find themselves in
trouble but we can help them out
The first question I have is was
this bill brought brought up
last year or was it brought into
any the interim committees.
Are you there is no bill last
year Senator Mister chairman
Senator I don't know Kurt did
you ever discuss this is only a
C. during the summer.
I I think of it was definitely a
conversation but nothing that
got formally introduced to
formally studied it's not the
last minute attempt to try to
get something new and it's just
the idea that you know we've
done a lot with.
Different requests it gone to
districts and funds from the
public education department and
and the two agencies in Santa Fe
to try to harden schools whether
you know we're currently and
finally completing it's taken us
three years of project as tech I
school districts to the front
entrance and so there's been a
lot of that work but there's
been nothing specifically around
this I think a lot of districts
have taken it upon themselves to
apply for different grants to
get this moving and you know I
think that it's it's a situation
where we are just trying to get
this introduced so we can try to
get it moving there about
fifteen to twenty districts that
already have an anonymous
calling system in the state I
can tell you that and
It depends on what progress are
you see one makes with the
funding they have they've
received the substantial amount
of funding and I know that that
looks that can affect many many
more with the type of system
that we're trying to introduce
here so already over a dozen and
with plenty more get ready to
come on board which would
alleviate some of it the initial
expense as well as getting the
rest of the school districts in
the state.
Going and I can't give the exact
number that that will affect the
the grant that they have but I
it'll be a substantial amount of
districts that will be and I
know you want more specific
information so we can try to
find that as we go forward.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Neville you know I'm going to
support this bill I guess we
suggest that we get more
information on those numbers so
that we can actually you know
being better informed and and
going forward on supporting this
legislation it sounds like a lot
of school districts are already
doing this and and and getting
that information getting the
amounts of what it will cost I
think I'll be right but what I'm
going to support the.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator in in
response to that that's part of
the reason why we're bringing
the bills so that we can have
PED start to put things together
so we can analyze some of the
districts and the system how
many need a system what the cost
might be what would be involved
and we can't do that without
some kind of a starting point
and that's what we're trying to
establish.
Thank you for the public what
you were on Senate bill two
forty eight anonymous reporting
in schools Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the appreciate the the the bill
The the intent behind the bill
I'm concerned as others have
said that about the funding
I I thought it was that our
servers just looking through the
FY are on the bill it has a
little bit of I do on the
funding I guess the North
Carolina recently did something
to put five million in the start
up cost and its cost of about
six hundred fifty thousand per
year to maintain it I believe
that statewide to give us a
little bit of an idea of what it
might cost
But I thought really interesting
in the L. it in the FIR is it
said that had did not respond to
requests for analysis on the
bill.
and that concerns me.
Wondering why didn't chime in on
the us and say you know they
have money the other thing I'm
thinking about when it comes to
the finances on this bill is we
have for the last several years
I'm not sure if it's continuing
maybe you would know Mr chairman
but we have put I think it's
either five million or ten
million your side for security
for schools for security
upgrades and I'm wondering if
this would qualify for that so
just some thoughts on where the
financing might come from.
Was that a question anyone or
just up by that there anyone has
the answer to that that would be
great
but I know for for a few years
we have been putting it using
the five million or ten million
in for security upgrades through
the schools I think it was going
through
This is thank you so.
That was part of our
when we have excess money we
that was nonrecurring dollars
that we used a general fund and
those dollars a of it simply
don't exist agency that there
may be some leftovers I don't
know if there's any remaining
funds are not but to those
dollars are not available Mr
brought in the the new to junior
that so conceivable possibility
to put so that we could have a
few people but some we don't
need much money for the next
fiscal year I think that's a
pretty much a given because
we're going to just be planning
and thinking and and
strategizing and then the at
that the next point when we're
looking at the next budget in
the LFC budgets and so this next
summer I think we're going to be
needing to ask for some college.
Think that Mr Gillian how the
cell on that do you know on that
Joe.
What comes to mind Senator the
Mr chairman and members of the
committee is the the Senate side
for from the public school
capital outlay fund for security
improvements safety improvements
and that was all for equipment
it does not cover any
operational costs.
I think it's a thank you Joe
really appreciate that I I knew
it was there I just couldn't get
my brain to to pull up exactly
how it was working
I think it's a good suggestions
server Bill of when we're
looking at junior money the
difficult part is we don't know
how much it be great if we can
get an answer somehow between
now and tomorrow since returning
your money in by tomorrow as to
how much so some of us could
give to that directly to help
fund the start up costs for that
so but thank you appreciate it
looks like John Cena might have
something on on the path side on
that I was just going to get us
a my questions I was get the job
done up from the bed if you're
on and are able to give us any
information.
Mr chair Senator thanks for the
question we did respond really
not quick enough we think we put
our our response in about ten
days ago but somehow to get
reflected FIR.
so yes so in our FIR and in our
in our analysis we did we did
cite some examples from Colorado
because they also have an
anonymous reporting system.
According to our research they
spent anywhere between in the
about seven hundred and seventy
five thousand to about hello
hello.
Point four million over the.
Three years and will provide a
safe to tell anonymous that they
use it sounds like they've also
spent additional millions on
just very a school safety
programs around their state and
so there's there is some some
indication about how much that
might cost wrong on supporting
system.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you Mr chairman that's really
all I had and this was.
Trying to wrap my mind around
this because you know I've been
pretty strong against funding on
unfunded mandates are building
forms of trying to and those
really important issue but we
also have to be really careful
about putting more stuff on our
school districts thank you.
Thank you senator Brett
and
the other hands up and let me
check one more time for I
started on my questions I don't
see other hands I to yeah we
worry about the cost and not
that we should be putting money
here but it's important that if
we put this out there that
there's money attached to it I
actually have a joint resolution
to make it a put it into the
constitution that you can't have
unfunded mandates for schools
and this would clearly be what.
I'm on the call also and and I
don't know senator bill whether
this is to.
Do you or your your expert.
But how I mean you used to be on
the finance committees yeah how
would you recommend a bill like
this that would come through it
does go to finance the that
justifies the cost when you get
in front of that committee.
Mister chairman Senator
it could could be the bank of
making appropriations that point
in time make a one thing that
finance committee can do with
house bill two is put in a
number anywhere they want so
they they could accommodate that
if they felt it was necessary
again I'm not convinced we need
money in the next fiscal year
and that's one of the reasons
why we did not include any
significant money I I grant you
there's gonna be some but
Probably you I think it would be
observable in normal operations
because it's a again we're just
planning and and looking at how
we would structure the the
system it might be involving
number superintendents on a task
force that kind of thing
Dr carpenter may have some of
the thoughts administered there
is to grant source there are
grants and other funds available
I'm not concerned about next
fiscal year I am concerned
certainly in the future if we
decide to to do this on a
permanent basis you are took a
million dollars or cell number I
don't know what that would be
she's just getting started the
first year of think it's minimal
cost that's my opinion and I'm
not necessarily a the the expert
on schools but it it seems like
just getting the concept put
together would be relatively
inexpensive.
do you have anything to add to
that no Sir I think you are you
covered it and you know again we
at the same concern coming in
with the it and at the last
thing this needs to be and this
is clearly tried to get stated
it wasn't at this would fall on
that the schools to support that
it would it would need to be
funded either through
legislation or through in kind
donations are working with
different agencies to get the
funding so it's it's not
intended in any way and that's
the last thing that this bill is
designed for and I was very as
much as you try to be careful
with language to make sure it
says that said it wasn't clear
it's it's never intended to be
paid for by schools it's
intended to be covered with
either legislative
appropriations or other other
ways to cope with this so.
Yeah I think and I I think we
should be I get from everyone is
everyone recognizes this is
important in our schools I don't
think there's any doubt yeah and
I see all kinds of heads bobbing
in Nadi and stop that if we all
agree with the intent the bill
as it's written is full of
shells
that within twelve months of the
effective date that the state
shall provide a searchable
database for all the reports
every school district every
charter school shall implement
the program in every public
school under its authority
the it's not written that as a
pilot whereas the study it's
written as yeah so this is going
to happen that the head must do
this within twelve months and
every district must have this up
and running within thirty six
months
that's a concern because that
clearly is an unfunded mandate
not a pilot or a study to
determine how to do that
certainly yeah and I think this
is incredibly important and
hearing yeah we just see this
next summer that we ought to
dedicate at least one of the
sessions that we have one of the
days to looking at this and how
would it get implemented but
this is indicates that by next
year twelve months this no of
the effective date July this is
going to be an up and running
program and system which means
you know if the drugs don't come
this also puts the burden on
finding the money in the
requests on the head of which
you know they struggle with
being under funded in the and
there are.
mannerism are there things all
the time and but it goes on the
program shall include operation
of a hotline.
Outlined shall be staffed by
persons with counseling and and
training we're we have a
terrible time trying to find
enough counselors social workers
and others now this is what
things shall how do we manage
that on on a bill like this
moving forward but we all agree
with the intent but no we get
passed legislation for shells
because we like the intent no.
Certainly raise that and in the
discussion prior to introducing
a bill how we do it but again
it's twelve months out
instruments from effective date
and we don't have to have much
in place until twelve months
from then and then the schools
have an additional period of
time if it's implemented one
year from July the schools and
have three years so we were
basically looking at over three
years of getting everything in
place so again I don't
anticipate a significant cost in
this next fiscal year
I may be wrong but I don't see
it personally I think the most
of this is planning and design
and and talking through the
system it can involve a lot of
people who are already on the
payroll and don't necessarily
Costas additional dollars and in
the future of the next fiscal
year we are going to be looking
at a million Bucks for cell
number.
Yeah.
If we approve it then of the LFC
is going to have to consider the
cost of the gonna have to look
at what it takes to and PED's
gonna have to approach him and
say we need a million Bucks your
cell numbers to to run the
program twelve months from this
fiscal beginning this fiscal
year.
And I certainly understand but
the next time LFC as an
opportunity to appropriated new
money is a year from now
and then yeah that money becomes
available by the time the
program has to be up and running
not by the time they get the
money just program and running I
I just worry about the date the
time lines on the funding.
We appreciate it you're you're
better at I don't insurance will
probably be a challenge with and
Senate finance.
Yes and again I.
I don't think anybody doubts the
doubts the intent or anything of
that sort but with everything
there's logistics and yeah we're
often tied to this system where
we're only here for a couple of
months where we can actually
appropriate money and and make
things happen.
And that often slows down good
things from happening right
away.
Any other questions from anyone
else on the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Padilla I move to do
past.
Have a motion for to pass.
Second by Senator Kernan million
if you'll call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Yes Senator Hickey you said yes.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes in about to explain about
the bracelet.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes and then back to Senator
Brandt.
No.
Senator souls so what I'll
briefly explain also okay but we
do have a due pass and Senator
Kernan would like to explain and
so with Senator souls so I thank
you Mr chair and just briefly on
I do hope twenty now and I I
think you go to Judiciary next
and then finance our district
finance.
All
right now so so there's time to
address the issue of funding in
and quite frankly we have done
this before in other committees
where we commit to fund things
anywhere from that ten years out
so this is been done where we we
know that there's going to be in
need that we want to go a
different direction we don't
need the money today or tomorrow
or next year that we're gonna
need it within the next ten
years so this is been done and
but I do worry about the and
then data do worry about the
differences in our school
districts and all of those
things need to be studied and
considered but I think the
overall intent is is positive
and hope you will work on this
going forward with regard to the
funding and the mandate some
flexibility there is very
important thank you.
And and just very briefly my no
vote is by no means that the
need for the program or anything
but I think with all of the
shelves in the bill and not
having the funding that that
that yeah that's why I voted no
we I will come get it will be
looking at this over the the
interim and superintendent
carpenter please make sure that
that communicate with me that we
do get that done that I don't
but that's that because we've
got a lot going on right now but
but I think it's important we do
need to look at it going
forward.
The.
I do pass Senator thank you Mr
chairman members.
Thanks
for the public moving forward
this is Senate education we just
in the Senate bill two forty
eight got it you pass it moves
on to judiciary will next have
Senate bill to sixty three beats
out almost program Senator
Brandt followed by Senate Bill
POP three changes change in
education retirement board
membership Senate bill three oh
sat will not be heard today
there was the amendment that
came in late it's as natural
changes to the bill it will be
rolled over to Friday and I just
got notice that Senate bill two
eighty nine at the sponsor
request is also been rolled over
to Friday will not be heard
today we will have a hard stop
at approximately ten twenty I'll
have you have a hard stop
approximately ten twenty we we
will be done by ten twenty so
that the Republican caucus and
that occur prior to the floor
session with that Senator Brandt
if you would please.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
want to say someone that last
bill just real quickly I I.
I agree that we need the the
program I just I've made you
know but I'm not gonna score
unfunded mandates maybe we can
find a mandate that is funded in
that we don't need to get rid of
it to fund this program because
it's more more needed so maybe
that's one solution we can get
rid of another mandate that is
not needed and we have a lot of
the so anyway
everyone will probably remember
a couple years ago our our new
members and the that we capped
the age for high school at
twenty two.
which was always surprising to
me that we went above twenty two
I didn't know that until it
became an issue we cap the age
of twenty two and and part of
that process was that I promised
to put in place an adult diploma
program and we did we got it
done the same here that we cap
the age of twenty two but
there's been some issues we were
very broad in that program
you're very broad on that bill
and quite frankly the the rules
that came out didn't really do
what we needed for adult
diplomas and so this bill is
going it comes in and lays out a
much stronger program it puts
the the language much clearer so
that we know exactly what is
involved in getting an adult
diploma.
the intent is is that students
over the age of twenty two who
still wish to receive a diploma
would have a pathway to do so.
This bill.
The core of Senate bill two
sixty three it's about creating
additional opportunities for
adults to earn their diploma it
is not meant to be competition
with already established and
successful adult basic education
program said existence in the
state to be clear.
The elbow diplomas is another
tool in our adult education
toolbox.
The.
The traditional brick and mortar
high school education program is
not one size fits all the adult
education landscape functions
best when students have choices
among programs that suit their
pre existing knowledge skills
and life circumstances best for
some that means getting a GED or
high school equivalency for
others English language
proficiency and for others it
means incremental progress
towards finishing what they
started by earning credits their
deficit and using a flexible
format we're student works as.
Really student works.
The last group typically consist
of last milers who left high
school a decade or more earlier
with only one or two years of
credits to go who would need
significant re teaching re
learning in order to to succeed
several states are received
recognized sorry the need to
focus on diploma completion
programs geared towards adults
the states have moved towards a
model that funds these adult
local programs using a pay for
performance model we're a
provider is only reimbursed by
the state when the student
completes establish milestones
during two thousand fifteen two
thousand twenty five states have
created similar performance
based programs for adult high
school completion Ohio Michigan
India Indiana.
Colorado and Kansas these
programs have demonstrated
alignment in outcomes that
matter among students providers
in the states that fund them
today I have Rebecca Richards
who is chief academic officer
and co founder of graduation
alliances my expert witness
graduates alliances worked in
these I other states to help
them create adult diploma
program that incentivizes adult
diploma providers to ensure
students complete the program
align the needs of the students
families and the state's
interest in helping adults gain
meaningful employment my purpose
of putting in the program.
at this time I'd like to give.
Rebecca the opportunity to talk
about the bill this.
Stephen through their.
Miss Richards.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
Richards as senator rand noted
I'm the co founder and chief
academic officer for graduation
alliance graduation lines
assistance are older states in
creating paper performance adult
diploma policy frameworks and we
have thirteen years experience
ring gauging youth and adults
and assisting them and finishing
our high school diploma for full
disclosure we are providers of
these other states are
interested in New Mexico is
making sure policy incentivizes
success while filling a
complimentary need for adult
deployments in New Mexico we
know that you've put in H.
capital place we're happy to
share expertise and experience
about what works and what
doesn't adults without a high
school diploma as you know have
been dramatically impacted by
economic consequences of the
pandemic and now more than ever
there needs to be path forward
for all students to western
their diploma and prepare for
career pathway.
Ultimately the adult high school
completion programs that we have
seen it grow in other states are
about giving students the choice
of a program that fits their
needs and their goals fast these
programs are characterized by an
open provider network and in
more mature programs this
network growth annually with
more traditional put providers
growing up capacity to function
a pay for performance
environment.
The multiple providers
methodology also allows for
different types of programs to
co exist students need
flexibility in how they complete
credits and get the support that
they need so providers use face
to face modalities others use
online and this gives the
students an opportunity to find
a program that fits their needs
best the pay for performance
elements of these programmes
puts the focus on outcomes that
matter for students for
communities for employers and
for the state and insurers and
effective use of resources
return on investment in fact in
a similar program in Michigan
the program resulted in nearly
seventy percent graduation rate
two hundred fifty for
employability skills
certificates issued two hundred
and twenty seven industry
credentials earned and further
graduates of Michigan and Ohio
programs reported in a pre
pandemic environment I twelve
percentage point increase in
labor market participation
a thirteen percentage point
increase access to employer
sponsored health care an average
of two dollars twenty nine cents
per hour increase in wages.
The program performance
standards including graduation
rate and average cost for
graduate in these incentivize
the highest performing programs
to participate in the on the
vote provider network.
Additionally one best practice
that we've observed is
supporting the implementing
agency C. by sharing practices
across states providers and
schools can also be good
partners in helping apartments
to get to program once I'm here
to answer any technical
questions the committee might
have about this proposed bill.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The the main thing to understand
is I made a promise a couple
years ago when we cap the age of
twenty two.
A lot of adults want to get a
diploma not a it's not a high
school equivalency they want to
actually have a high school
diploma.
I promise that we would create a
system that they could do that
the bill that I passed.
We're supposed to do that the
rules that were put in place
make that almost impossible.
So this bill will lay out a
program in law that will allow
for.
Adults to come back and actually
get a high school diploma under
the authority of the bill that
was passed two years ago and so
I hope that the.
The committee will will help me
to fulfill my promise to the
adults of the state that don't
have a diploma it is very
important to them that they have
a path to get an actual Diplo
thank you Mr chairman of that
ideal to questions.
Thank you R. Martel if you'll
take us through our community
input.
Absolutely.
Are there any members of the
public who should make
statements in opposition of
Senate bill two sixty three
please raise your hand at this
time we're only taking
statements of opposition.
And it doesn't look like we have
anyone we will now hear from.
Mr fitz Gerald speaking in
support.
Seri with us.
I see the year and muted but we
can't hear you.
Can you hear me now.
Yes if you could just speak a
little louder great all right
thank you so much Mr chair
members the committee Sir
Senator senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce.
Is in support of legislation
before you this morning and we
think senator Frank bring it
forward.
The checker believes that
education is still the best path
to success with billing and
stable life filled with physical
health healthy relationships and
let's participate Hey your
spectrum use prime that's what
we see or policies that
encourage students to stay on
that path this does because
policies.
For adults six path Rep I trauma
a lack of guidance it's the
trucks at that decision the
spiral of the criminal behavior
a young age it's critical to
have supportive options for
finishing high school diploma or
GED at strong these program
known for helping these people
take charge of their lives for
the better.
I'll be less likely to end up
back in the system and more
likely to find jobs that you can
see the lady at the committee
I had before central to sixty
three offered a second chance to
receive adults it the most it's
good for workforce our
communities setting up people's
futures appeared in the bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman will now
turn to Debra's I have I'm sorry
I don't see last name up there.
Okay Mr chair Deborah Condit
with public charter schools of
New Mexico.
We'd like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill and we
support the staff as senator
grant you mentioned the
legislature instituted an age
cap on students over the age of
twenty one to ten public schools
many charter schools enrolled
adults and successfully re
engage them with their education
and help them earn their
diplomas.
Despite the best efforts of the
legislature a more cost
effective programs provided
option for those over the age of
twenty one has not been
materialized and this bill would
do that and allow charter
schools that have historically
served drop outs to re engage
with those students and help
them succeed thank you.
Thank you.
Are there any other members of
the public that wish to speak in
support of Senate bill two sixty
three.
Thank you that concludes all of
our public statements for Senate
bill two sixty three.
I believe Senator souls a
stepped away Senator polka
believe that passes T..
Thank you Martel I will
open it up now to committee
questions and comments we are
now on Senate bill two sixty
three.
And we'll Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you
Senator rap for being in this
bill Ford
there is.
Yes this graduation alliance.
is a national program.
do you know if they work
together with our state
agencies.
Mr Chairman Senator thank you
for the question I think that
miss Richards could probably
answer that better than I can
I'm not sure if there's a
relationship in the state yet
but it is something that we
would definitely be trying to
address we did try to work
directly with PED to put
together this program they were
putting the rules together
on the so I think that miss
Richards could probably answer
that better me.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator tell
graduation alliance does
currently work with PED on their
initiative called engaged New
Mexico hi and we have been
working to collaborate with the
agencies are particularly the H.
U. D. on the higher education
department on this initiative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so we're just
trying to share.
The.
Adult well my program out of.
PED two eight GB.
Mr Chairman Senator I I think
that's actually pretty good way
of putting it
the PED has really just they
really want to focus on K.
twelve up to twenty one they
really don't want to get
involved in and it's kind of was
one of the mistakes I made two
years ago we were everything was
in transition we didn't have a
you know secretary it's and
they're just I didn't realize
that they didn't want to be
involved in the adults.
Education side and so higher red
is actually the one that
traditionally does that they're
the ones who are more involved
in that they wrote all the adult
education programs and so I read
we talk to them work with them
on the possibility of the well
on them doing this and and they
agree that they could do
something like this.
Looking at the graduation
alliance website and it does say
that they
pick up where K. twelve you know
drop order.
And we're gonna spend three
million to do and
something that probably would be
in place I guess my question.
This particular program is not
in place in this state
I understand that it wouldn't be
just graduation alliance we're
putting in a framework that
anyone that's why you're you saw
the charter schools supported
they could put together the same
type of program to be able to.
Phil.
The requirements of this bill to
be able to give adults the
diploma.
The way that things are set up
right now unfortunately and
wasn't my intention to years ago
the way things are set up right
now is is there it's impossible
or virtually impossible for
adult actually get a diploma in
the state now.
So we have to go back and re
addressed us so the adults who
want to actually get a diploma
there's nothing wrong with the
you know the other applicants if
it's someone's okay with getting
the high school equivalency
that's fine there's nothing
wrong with that but a lot of
adults want to actually get
their diploma in fact I think it
was just this last year we saw
someone I think they were
hundred that got their high
school diploma and so you know
we.
We would like to and they
actually had to go back through
school I don't have actually did
that under current settle lost
most of made some kind of the.
Allowance for that this would
allow adults bill to go back and
get their high school diploma.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator because it.
Yes I'm still struggling with.
You know putting money into
something that if there was
comparison I guess in that sense
of
In that sense but that thank you
Mr chair thank you senator
right.
I don't see any other committee
members of the questions I asked
her about.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for bringing me a bill for
Senator Brandt just a couple
questions.
It's so it sounds like you might
have answered this.
In the in the previous questions
so this is an actual high school
diploma and not a high school
equivalency.
Yes that's correct in in you see
that in the definitions section
where it says diploma it refers
back to the bill I passed two
years ago for a high school
diploma so that would actually
providing a real high school
diploma so.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Brandt and then the other
question kind of I guess
touching a little bit with what
Senator Pinto was saying I see
that the adult.
Education department what they
kind of do a higher if they kind
of have some programs now and I
just wonder are they are they
not able to fulfill the needs of
the people seeking this diploma
I just want to make sure there's
not really some duplication of
effort and and what we're doing
we all six right thank.
Many students and programs
your rate is on thank you Mr
chairman of the server pope
thank you that's great question
higher ed right now doesn't have
the ability to do it hello they
can do high school equivalencies
they can do different
certificates but they can't
actually do a diploma for adults
so it's it's not currently
available to them this would
actually change that and make it
where they can under the set of
guidelines no I I learned from
my mistakes two years ago and
didn't want to make this so
broad as we did two years ago
because that kind of backfired
on me.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Brandt so you probably
already mention this so so
really what this is is given an
opportunity for adults over
twenty two to actually get their
diploma and not have to only be
limited to the high school
programs that's what this
program was.
And that's a that's that's
absolutely correct servo.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator rand that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you anyone else on the
committee with questions I don't
see other hands up at this
point.
Padilla.
Mr chairman.
So just a quick question so if
we don't do these numbers get
counted in the graduation rates
well we're taking a look at
trends in performance and and
all of those things are they
counted as as the graduation
total school districts in the
state dollar.
Mr chairman Sir I don't believe
so but don't quote me on that
I have a nephew who had to spend
an extra year in high school and
his graduation didn't count in
the rate so I'm not sure they
would it really has to be done
within a certain time frame to
be counted.
For the graduation rates the
someone else I just see stand as
a stand up I may be totally
wrong on that stand can you
answer the question Mr chairman
members the committee knows for
your correct Senator we have a
five year period for graduations
and just remind you that if a
student receives an alternative
diploma like to G. D. that
actually counts as a drop out
and when we do our statistics so
this would not count nor do
those instances thank you.
I appreciate that Mr chairman I
just want to understand the
extent of that we're we're all
very focused on driving that
number North and I did not
discount so thank you very much.
So.
Anyone else on the committee
with questions.
I just have a quick question or
two and I know we had a
presentation couple years back
in the L. E. S. C. about the
adult the public program I
thought we implemented that
through the head you're
indicating it's not is is this
and I look through the the bill
is this a.
A company an organization that
provides this or is this just
providing a framework for anyone
in the state this is I did.
We had a habit or something like
that.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you
I did work with this company to
help craft language one of my
requirements with them though
was to make sure it was broad
enough that others could do it I
don't want to ever support
something that is specific to
one company like avid
and that brings up a very good
example that we've had this year
so I was.
I'm hoping that I complex that
you know sometimes the.
We don't even though we try to
but no this this is lays out the
framework of what we'd like to
see or a lot of I would like to
see it is pay for performance
which I actually like I think
it's you know we've seen a lot
of groups come in and do adult
education we get nothing out of
it yeah we've we we really want
to make sure that people are
getting their diplomas and
that's that's what this program
lays out but in the anyone can
submit the proposal to hire an
IRA would approve that proposal
and then they would be able to
run that program.
Senator how would students find
out about this program a what
the requirements are and what
they need to do in order to get
credit who oversees that process
for recruitment of students and
monitoring their progress as it
goes through.
Well Mr chairman my guess would
be you know the higher it would
have on their website you know
what what the.
Groups of applied and been
accepted for that that the the
organizations themselves would
recruit students to participate
in those programs
so that I think very similar to
what's being done now most of
these adults that want to get
the actual diploma we're out
looking for a program to do it
and and right now we're having a
struggle finding that is just
that that doesn't exist and so
this allows the framework for
that to happen.
And senator you know what we
passed an idea with the help of
palm of program or whatever that
is currently in Pat has that not
been functional that with the.
It's the time that that was
going to fill this need is it
not been able to provide
students is it not had support
why is that program not working
and and this needed to be either
added to it or in its place.
Mr Chairman you put me in a bad
place.
I'm trying to do that
I will tell you
the the rules that were put out
and Pat and I have I did reach
out to Pat when the rules were
done.
didn't look like the bill that I
have put in at all.
and so they didn't it's not
functional
They had told me that they were
going to review them but they
left in the way they were.
That's that's their prerogative
I put it in the bill that they
have the reins on it
that was my mistake I will not
make that mistake again so I I I
don't want to like so I'm trying
to be nice today it's a holy day
for me
but I I just that's where it
sits and that's why we had to
come up with us.
And if I could ask of the center
with hat yeah you may not be
prepared to answer but was that
program overview of how many
people have been participating
in that program and go from the
PED's perspective is this going
to help solve the problem of the
dope needing to get a diploma.
If I understand this move that
had that higher ed as far as
oversight.
Mr chair a Senator Brandt I I
appreciate that the question so.
We when we when we did do that
we did implement a rule that
says six point thirty point
three that would make it all
diplomas thank you madam cell
deployments.
Will the rule was written in a
way that.
Permissive actually we set up a
framework that would allow a
number of providers to be able
to to essentially apply to pad
as of as a provider for
deployments we work with higher
rate on the rule we did reach
out Senator right at the time
I'm sorry that the result didn't
didn't didn't meet with his
approval
Unfortunately we work with with
higher at around I would say
November December of two
thousand nineteen and we're
getting ready to roll out the
diploma program last spring of
course we all know what happened
that and and I think more than
anything what's happened is that
we just of late some of that
because we haven't been able to
to focus as much attention as
we'd like to.
I'm on the program we still want
to work with higher at to be
able to roll that out in a way
that would allow a lot of
providers any provider to apply
to pad and and then we have a
process by which we approve
those programs very similar to
the where we already do it this
and make it more permissive.
Thank you and Senator I my last
question when someone completes
just programming gets a diploma
are they getting of the plot
they're getting a high school
diploma so with that under
pandemic or is high right now.
Being given the authority to
give K. twelve departments.
Mr Chairman I believe that the
way the bill is written that the
that PED's still actually issues
with Walmart so higher it
carries out program the submits
a path that the person is
completed the program and then
pet issues the diploma because
the bill that we passed two
years ago only gives the
authority to issue the actual
diploma which is where we want
so this.
It's it's interesting to hear Mr
Senator.
Tell me that tell us that that
actually is willing to do this
because that is not been one is
been expressed to me last year
and a half
and so again I'm trying to be
nice today
but that is not the way this is
worked I think yes the direct
question of how many of these
adult plovers have been issued
in the last two years the answer
would be zero.
And so that's because they
didn't do it so hi read this is
really more there will house it
was probably my mistake in the
first place but you're right we
don't want higher it district
high school diplomas so it's got
to be a cooperation and that's
the way the bill is.
Okay thank you that that clarify
some of the things I had
questions
what is the will of the
committee please.
S. Riverview pathways center
Kernan I think it.
Thank you bye Senator pope a
million if you will call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
nouvelle.
Yes Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pope.
Yes and center self yes.
You fast.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you and as we're
transitioning into the next bill
which will be Senator Sedillo
Lopez just for the public the
is Senate education are we have
had a do pass on the Senate bill
two forty eight anonymous
reporting in schools Senate bill
two sixty three adult diploma
program you're moving to Senate
bill three oh three changes that
retirement board membership
Senate bill three oh seven will
not be heard today that is
rolled over due to a late of
amendments that came in that
need to have time for analysis
also Senate bill two eighty nine
special education division of
the department Senator Lopez
sponsor request has been rolled
over as well we do have a hard
stop at ten twenty eight so that
the Republicans can attend their
caucus prior to the floor
session with that Senator
Sedillo if you would the changes
to the EDD retirement board
membership.
Thank you Mr chair my own view.
Fine okay thank you
for some reason the screen is
extremely dark so I I have
difficulty seeing everyone I
apologize so thank you Mr chair
so Senate bill three oh three
a relates to the educational
retirement board and the
important thing about this bill
is that it adds up.
It adds to members to the board
that it that I think are very
important one is a member to be
elected for a term of four years
by the members of the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and the second is the
secretary of higher education or
designate who is a resident of
New Mexico is a current employee
of higher ed and possesses
experience relevant to the
financial are pretty sure
aspects of pension or investment
fund
So what this does what what the
best practices are with regard
to a pension fund are to make
sure that the people who who
fund the pension are adequately
represented and that's what this
bill does
Mr chair I have Stephanie Lee
who I I believe I just I didn't
so I I can't see whether whether
she's here
Chad to questions on the bill
and I also have
As rationalist.
I'm sorry.
To.
Melanie Meyers.
Who is available to speak on the
bill.
I don't know whether they want
to be available to answer
questions or whether they have
their own comments.
Senator it's up to you as to
whether they are your expert
witness or whether they are just
going to be in public comment
it's your bill right now their
my expert witnesses and will
help me answer any questions
about the bill.
Okay are you ready for them to
speak yes so please tell
everyone you would like to go
first.
Can you hear me OK.
Yes yes yes okay wonderful Mr
chairman and distinguished
members of the committee my name
is Melanie Meyers I work for the
American federation of teachers
as an associate director of
research and strategic
initiatives and in that capacity
I work with a team members to
serve as pension fund trustees
overseeing their retirement
systems assets on funds
including California state
teachers retirement system the
New York state teachers
retirement system and many small
and medium sized education and
public employee pension funds
across the country.
Existing research on pension for
government supports the changes
proposed in SB three expanding
the New Mexico educational
retirement board from seven to
nine members will bring it
closer to the public pension
funds industry standard national
association of state retirement
administrators reported in
twenty nineteen that nine member
boards were most common among
state public pension funds and
thirty three percent of all
funds had boards with eight to
ten members governance experts
recommend that pension fund
boards contains six to ten
members this is a size that
allows for adequate stakeholder
representation while still being
able to function efficiently.
Adding two seats to the New
Mexico ERP will encourage more
diverse representation of
viewpoints business leaders and
public pension funds a like a
from a growing consensus the
board diversity enhances for
performance and oversight which
can lead to improved outcomes
most of this research has
focused on corporate board
diversity but the lessons
learned apply equally well to
pension fund governance I'm
gonna share some of the findings
of that research to aid in this
committee celebrations a study
on public pension funds released
by Boston college's center for
retirement research found that
strong pension fund governance
structures correlate with better
financial performance two of the
Kedarnath structures the study
considered were board size and
board composition specifically
the share of plan participate
representation which offers
point an important form of
diversity and promotes for
legitimacy to plan participants
as be three oh three addresses
both of these important issues I
am for composition on
stakeholder representation
experts recommended that point
include twenty to seventy
percent active and retired funds
participants with fifty four
percent being the average.
Currently in the New Mexico ERP
participants account for forty
three percent and that's the
three oh three would increase
that share to forty four percent
slightly closer to the average
while adding important
professional diversity and both
the participant New Mexico State
of seats as a side note a third
good governance factors that
this study highlights is
granting a single fiduciary
board of administrative and
investment oversight well as the
three oh three doesn't address
this The New Mexico ERP maybe
better served by extending
investment oversight to the full
board as many other pension
funds to.
It's well documented that
documented the corporate board
diversity correlates with
improved performance and this
led to considerable focus within
that corporations in the
investment industry the national
business round table for example
states that quote America's
business leaders are increasing
their emphasis and commitment to
promoting diversity in the
boardroom diverse backgrounds
and experiences on corporate
boards strengthen core
performance and in turn help
drive long term economic value
and.
S. CI found the greater board
gender diversity leads to
stronger financial performance
and fewer governance related
controversies Furthermore a
Harvard Business Review article
found that demographic and
professional diversity are quote
those important for increasing
the diversity of perspectives
represented on the board and
quotes and for ensuring a
diversity of ideas that can lead
to superior superior performance
recognition of the importance of
course adversity lead line
public pension funds to petition
the FCC and twenty fifteen to
establish a rule on board
diversity and just four short
months ago the Russell three
thousand four diversely
disclosure initiative which is
promoted by twenty one
institutional investors called
on corporations to voluntarily
disclose diversity data quotes
given the correlation between
for diversity and long term
performance and its principles
apply equally well to pension
fund for governance this
research I shared which spans
both public pension funds and
corporate governance clearly
supports expanding New Mexico
here these point nine members to
increase diversity as proposed
in SB three oh three thank you.
Senator.
Eight thank you Mr chair
business we want to say anything
or just be available for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair Senators and
sponsor I'm fine just to answer
questions Melanie's really the
expert who knows also she would
be better equipped.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
without we're ready for I don't
know if there's public comment I
was informed whether there is or
not.
But if you would please leave
this to the public comment
phase.
No problem we don't have any
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition to Senate
bill three oh three is there
anyone in the room at this
moment who would like to raise
their hand in order to make
comments about position for
Senate bill three oh three.
it did you want to make a
statement in opposition this
one.
Now my statement wasn't support
I apologize okay.
Is there anyone else who wants
to make a statement in
opposition of Senate bill three
oh three.
Okay and we will move on to the
su Han ho go ahead.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
committee members and sponsors
my name is sue Han ho I'm an
artist in Albuquerque and also a
faculty member in the art
department at UNM I'm also
vested member of the Energy
enemy RP and a member of the
prison divest New Mexico
coalition as part of this
coalition of educators and
activists we worked on a
campaign to divest and I'm here
to be funds from private prison
companies this campaign was
successful and led to the
trust you vote on divestment
from for profit prisons in
October twenty twenty over the
course the two year campaign we
have had lots of interactions
with the board and staff at
enemy RP via emails letter
writing phone calls and
attending board meetings the
prison divest New Mexico
coalition strongly supports SB
three or three we believe that
introducing a member from F. T.
and from the secretary of higher
ed will make the board more
representative and ultimately
more responsive to its members
and beneficiaries we also
believe that the introduce term
limits are crucial to board
accountability and I urge this
committee to support the three I
agree and vote to move this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Hine we will now
hear from miss viola florists
miss Flores.
One more time for miss viola
Flores.
She seems and available
Francesco Beeler go ahead.
spieler re raising your hand.
Apparently not
that concludes all of our a
statement in support for Senate
bill three oh three thank you
very much.
Thank you mark out of Senator
anything else before we go to
questions from the committee.
Thank you thank you Mr chair of
we're ready for questions.
Thank you first Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you senator
just quickly can you tell me
How many members A. F. T. what
the membership this in New
Mexico for HSD.
I believe it's over ten thousand
but actually I let me defer to
my experts definitely.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Senator Kernan
we represent over twenty
thousand educators across the
state.
So let's just clarify Mr chair
how many educators are there in
the state of New Mexico.
Teachers.
Again I'm going to defer to my
experts definitely definitely.
Mr chair members of the
committee I can't give you an
exact number today I have not
brought that information I know
that the eighty has.
has about the same amount as
well and they have a seat on the
board.
So Mr chair I I wonder if that.
If we have the PED on line still
that could.
chansen center on yes Mr sent
online that could maybe answer
how many teachers we have in the
state of New Mexico.
Mr rounds.
I was gonna say the US rounds
like that thank you.
Mr chairman I'll be happy to
provide that to the committee
I'm sorry I don't have their
most recent data in front of a
side I do apologize.
Yes it is option that we
get out would be around twenty
two thousand.
Mr chairman I thought that was
right it was closer to twenty
eight thousand does not need to
track that that that's that's
just the that that answers my
question that when I looked at
the numbers the other day it was
twenty two thousand two hundred
and one so maybe that's maybe
that's fairly close but but I
think the thing that concerns me
and and we know that A. F. T.
certainly represents a
significant number of teachers
and in Albuquerque and maybe in
some other places across the
state but I think the idea of
representation of should relate
back to membership so I know in
my community.
We are not a collective
bargaining district we do not
have any eight we did not have
A. F. T. they certainly are able
to join either that we are not a
collective bargaining District
and there are not many members
at that A. F. T. that I'm aware
of it by district and many of
the districts that represent so
I don't think it it really.
Place out that that AFT
represents all the teachers in
the state I just don't think
they do I think that represent
the Albuquerque teachers very
well and I think that that is.
Probably represents about six or
seven thousand.
Members across the state based
on the research that I did but
certainly not twenty two
thousand
you know when we talk about
adding
members to four I think it's
really important to go to that
at the director and I I think I
see Jan good one is on on the
as a participant I wonder if if
miss good one would respond to
our thoughts that increasing
membership on the board if she's
available.
I believe in the for in the
first day of referred to
themselves as neutral.
Well Mr Senator I'm advocating
for miss good one to respond
yep.
Yes are you with us yes Mister
chair I am
on this.
At our last board meeting was in
December and this bill has been
introduced subsequent to the
last board meeting our next
board meeting is this Friday and
the board has is on the agenda
to discuss and develop of a
position one way or the other or
neutral about the bill.
Well thank you very much miss
good one and I appreciate that
information one bank and
wondering if the sponsors of the
bill have taken this to the our
pensions and investment
committee for consideration.
That is that would be the
appropriate interim committee to
have that discussion of prior to
submitting legislation to change
board members and so I'm
wondering Senator Mr chair
Senator hisses Bill been before
that interim committee this bill
was not again in this year's
interim however this is not the
first time this bill of this
bill was passed out of this
committee in two thousand
nineteen and I'm not positive
whether it went through interim
committee before that because I
hate that I was new to the
Senate at that time.
So Mr chairman and senator one
of the things I'm looking at in
the analysis that the governor
has the opportunity to make two
appointments and those
appointments are based on.
A background in investments
finance our pension fund
administration and so I guess if
if a member of the A. F. T.
holds those particular
background to I if they have the
the ability to to serve in that
way that they certainly could
submit their name to the
governor could be one of those
appointees so I I really am
concerned that we're adding and
member for the sake of.
Kind of shifting the board into
a different political arena with
regard to the.
Divestiture of of the funds and
I am very much aware of the
board's decision to divest of
private prisons and in fact that
the reality is the private
prison wasn't even eligible to
be at one of the places to
invest because they didn't
qualify but it really concerns
me
when our boards become so
political and and there's no
question that the A. F. T. is a
very political organization and
and they are about their own
website if you look at that so
so they are very political and
so if we move down that road for
we're making decisions on
investments based on.
Political viewpoints it really
concerns me that we're not going
to get the best return on
investment I just think that
next on the list after private
prisons would be oil and gas and
I don't have any doubt that that
would be the direction of of the
new member at it from a FTE so
so I just think it's a rocky
road we're going down I don't
think investment should be made
based on not on political views
because I will tell you if you
look at that the people that I
represent in many people across
the state of New Mexico that
would be very supportive of oil
and gas and that I thank you Mr
the representative that should
represent all the teachers in
the state Hey if he does not
represent the teachers in my
area in fact what I was doing
some research that indicated
that New Mexico has the lowest.
Unionization rate in the state
with only forty one percent of
teachers
Connected to you membership so
at the very a startling
politically involved and there's
no question with that I
understand that but I will tell
you I am very concerned about at
the board member that is going
to not few investments based on
the ability to return a good
that would make a good return so
for those reasons I certainly am
concerned about adding I thank
god I think Jan good one
probably yeah.
Needs to take this back to her
board and certainly it needs to
go before the interim committee
before we moved in this
direction so that's my comment
and.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
In the thank you senator Percy
eight to you bringing another
bill for committee you're right
this bill did pass out of this
committee two years ago
I voted no as I will do again
today
and I think several of us to so
it wasn't unanimous and that's
really no reason to pass bills
anyway.
out of the current members of
the board of there are two
members that have to have actual
finance and investment
experience.
everyone else is the nafta any
experience at all so the current
make up of the board is already
leans towards
well not making maybe the best
financial decisions thank
goodness we have a director
there that does make good
financial decisions and leads
them and they've mostly listen
to her.
So adding two more members that
also don't have any requirement.
For
any experience or any background
in those areas how is that going
to make this Fund more secure.
Mr chair indeed one of the
members of the now the added the
secretary of higher education or
the designating it's required
that that person possess
experience relevant to the
financial fiduciary aspects so
that would make three members
who have that experience and the
important thing about a board if
these the board that I've served
on is some of the best questions
about finances have been from
people who don't have the
background in finance and so
they pop out with questions that
really makes people think and
that's important
I think that having this
representation is crucial in
addition for communication and
responsiveness
It also increases confidence in
the pension plan when you have
representation I you know I'm
thinking about this oil and gas
COVID I really feel that that is
a manufactured crisis and it did
get me for my concerns about how
oil and gas dominates the state
I'm in so I I feel it really
isn't relevant to this to this
quest is in query thank you
gentleman that has nothing to do
with question I just asked you.
At the strategy is ace rabbits.
Please wait please make sure
you're coming through the chair
not back and forth at each other
thank you thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman would you please ask
Makita not to mute me.
What I'm talking.
Senator yeah when when people
are not going to the chair she
will let you quickly again but
that trying control with under
my direction we are back where
everybody is able to to speak as
need be thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
actually did say Mr chairman so
thank you Mr chairman Senator
right now you have already.
isn't the
NEA Hey you.
Yes Mr chair.
And what about the association
the American Association of
university professors that
consider you.
No it is not considered a you.
I wasn't sure about that service
and then the association of re
of educational retirement is.
Mr chairman you Senator are you.
Mr chair that is not you thank
you.
Mr chairman and senator I I did
not know on those and so I
appreciate that
so in Rio Rancho we have an the
interesting set up which I think
may work.
Because I know HSD wants a seat
at the table I get that I think
that they don't believe it's
fair that in the a has a seat at
the table and they don't.
in Rio Rancho they actually
switch every couple of years.
So Mr chairman Senator
what about doing something like
that we're every four years
since it's a four year term it
would switch to the other you so
that you don't have a
disproportionate number of
people on there that don't
actually represent all the I
think Sir current was very
correct that the you in our
state doesn't represent the
majority of teachers our state
so in fact we ought to look at
if we're gonna add anyone we
should look at adding a non
union teacher so that the other
fifty nine percent of the
teachers in our state are
represented by someone so and in
the field about possibly
switching that back and forth
every four years I'm Mr chair
I'd like to defer to my experts
definitely.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committees so actually I'm
part of Rio Rancho school
employees you and with all due
respect we do not switch off
every four years between the two
unions we actually are part of
both unions but I think we're
losing
site on what it means with the
any you we have a
responsibility that when we have
a school district that the
employees are unionized we
represent everyone in that
school district so we were
talking earlier about the number
of teachers I'm we also
represent the classified staff
that are in E. R. B. we also
represent very many higher
education staff and faculty that
are also in E. R. B..
Thank you Mr chairman Sir I I I
thought that that was what was
done in Rio Rancho my memory
must be lapsed I thought that
before the board it was switched
back and forth
could remember exactly but and
that may be a solution
I I will support adding more
membership to this board thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you is there anyone else
on the committee that is which
is that questions I don't see
other hands up but.
Thank you thank you Senator
Sedillo Lopez I think the public
comments were very interesting
and and good I just want to ask
one more time I apologize I
think lost you guys were a
little bit so I came back Mr
chairman but what did that miss
Goodman could win say about this
potential change to the sport
should be willing to give us a
thirty second where she stands
on this matter.
with.
You'll have to yeah I'd be happy
to defer to her and you'll heard
miss Goodman.
To review which is that.
Yes thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee
senators today a lot Lopez.
This the board had its last
regular meeting in December this
bill has been introduced since
then our board is meeting this
Friday item on our agenda is an
item to discuss this and for the
board to take action should they
desire on this bill.
So the.
Review the bill.
I appreciate that Mister
chairman Senator Sedillo Lopez
and and this could when have a
great deal of respect for you
and I just wanted to know if you
wanted a way and if it's not
something you're comfortable
doing without your board's
approval I can respect that but
I just if you're willing to tell
us what your vast amount of
experience within state
government of the role that you
hold down very interested in
your thoughts.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator video without
being able to get input from my
board I'm uncomfortable with
putting forward any sort of.
Opinion about the bill.
I understand and I respect that
thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman that's all.
Thank you anyone else on the
committee I don't see other
hands up.
I have a couple of questions and
kind of focused on the other
member of the being added to
this board the secretary of
higher education of the
university faculty do we have in
the state of New Mexico.
Right we.
I I'm actually not sure about
the total number I know that
there's over two thousand and
just at the University of New
Mexico where you to serve
I don't know if the if the if
anyone here has that answer but
they're quite a few.
I love those technical terms
quite a few when I used the
statistics by students I'd ask a
question they tell a lot I'm
like yeah that's real precise on
my guess is probably New Mexico
state has similar and you know
get is up to four there might be
a similar total among the others
around that we're talking
somewhere around eight currently
the education retirement board
already has representation on
higher education.
this adds another the two higher
education which is a minority in
total why is higher education
getting an additional weapon
they are much smaller portion of
the total education retire
hi res represented by the board.
It is my understanding of
wanting to have and the
secretary of higher education is
because the secretary of the PED
secretaries on the board and so
it's just important to bring
both of those together.
And I understand but yeah we're
they're a minority compared to
public education yes they're
gonna have a point about twenty
five percent or so of the total
seats with this when they of the
total number of people there
representing somewhere around
ten percent of the total people
represented by.
The the.
B. R. A..
Association
I guess I'm not following the
American Association of
university professors and and
the secretary of higher
education positions would be
representing higher education
and who else Mr chair oh sorry
so that in.
That that's to live somewhere
just under twenty five percent
are higher education yes the
numbers that we come up with is
that of the total number of
employees what we're talking
about all the employees in
public education that are under
this retirement board is.
Probably substantially more than
that is probably about ninety
eighty to ninety percent yet
there are over represented by
doing that you know is is there
a purpose or reason for doing
that.
My understanding is that as I
said before is the purpose would
be to bring the secretary into
this and to because the
secretary would have a broader
perspective.
I understand that we have but
we're talking about Here
Representative a board that
represents the people who are
being represented
higher education is now overly
Representative as far as the
total membership I'm also you
know it seems like yeah and let
me clarify up practice this a
little bit.
Boards they get over seven to
nine members get and we'll be
needing to get hard you can't
make choices and decisions are
everybody wants a seat at the
table but the tables only so big
and pretty soon there's not
enough Turkey for thanksgiving
yeah you you want to make
you can add that to your list of
us hold them yeah I keep track
of your sometimes
But yeah you don't want to board
the gets overly go to many
people because you can't get
anything done yet everybody
wants a seat at the table are a
request that possibly someone
like the superintendent
association not have issued by
the school board association of
apathy they are the ones that
are putting most of the money in
on the employee side of things
out I'm pretty sure we're up to
a sixteen member board and so I
no doubt yeah another year to we
may have another group that's
coming and say well yeah we've
got all these we want our State
to out and pretty soon portent
good what is they're just trying
to organize a meeting let's
let's get anything back
I'll just leave it there but
just concerns when boards trying
to add members because somebody
feels like their voice isn't
being heard that pretty soon no
voice gets heard because
everybody that the table once
out of
With that I guess often
promotion.
Thank you.
We have a motion to table it's
not debatable
if you'll call the roll please.
Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
I guess we'll pass out of
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Senator pope.
No.
Senator Pinto.
I mean I'm excuse me I'm sorry
Senator Padilla.
No.
Senator soul.
No.
Okay and Senator Hickey Senator
Hickey are you yet yes can you
hear me yes I can.
Okay this is the motion to table
that correct correct.
No.
Okay.
It is not okay with it Roshen to
table failed we are now back to
some would like to make an
alternative motion.
Okay do has no record right no
Representative excuse me.
Thank you that I was gonna say
you can't have both ways of the
motion is currently for a no
REC.
If you'll call the roll we are
we need a second please.
Prospect it.
Thank you I think that was under
pope Marianna's you'll call the
roll for a no REC.
Well I yes Sir and that no
recommendation would be a
referral on to the Senate health
and public affairs committee.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Kernan.
Senator Neville.
So Senator Padilla yes explain
my vote.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
And we have a due I mean excuse
me without recommendation it
will pass and back to send for
Padilla thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr.
Senator Sedillo Lopez I I made a
motion for no Representative
because I want to see your bill
continue I am very interested
that's why I asked the question
earlier what the current board
has to say about this so I
wanted to help you move on but I
would like to know that at some
point yes this bill should make
it to the floor and you can
follow up with me appreciate
that thank you.
Thank you and we will probably
have that information by the
next committee thank you members
of the committee thank you Mr
chair thank you so the the bill
moves on with no recommendation
we are now at our stop where
very close to it we won't have
time to do an additional bill
for the public watching we added
you pastor Senate bill two forty
eight anonymous reporting in
school that you passed the
Senate bill two sixty three the
vote over program and they know
recommendation vote for Senate
bill three oh three changing
educational retirement board
membership other bills will be
rolled on to the Friday agenda I
did with some other things on
Friday so it may have a longer
agenda some of these moves
quickly and some don't I'm not
always very good at predicting
which what so while will move
forward as we're able to we are
in the early today to
accommodate the Republican
caucus prior to the floor
session we will be back at our
normal time on Friday at nine
o'clock first up will be Senate
Joint Memorial Fund one as
amended by Senator Pinto and the
bureau of Indian education
followed by Senate bill three oh
seven Campos three thirty I drop
out prevention program by idea
Senator Lopez asked for a hold I
think that was just till Friday
so we will put that back on and
then Senate bill three oh two
employee educational why the
PTSD with secretary the a Lopez
and then we'll move on to you
want added to our list any
questions comments from anyone
on the committee before we close
for the day.
Single hands go up
how do we are adjourned until
Friday nine AM thank you very
much committee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
He Stephanie are you.
