I just to start off I would like
to introduce I've got two
shadows with me from the a loss
a program and Jordan put us
and we're which will be here to.
As a high school so they're both
in my district and the then then
Samantha Venditti after is with
me today and I'll be following
and I'm not being a teacher I
love to have students around
that I get to teach Intel maybe
thing that's going on around and
help them understand
Representative the civics and
how the government works for you
are we hope works for.
Senator if you would please kick
us off with Senate bill three oh
seven licensed teacher prep of
portability I believe this is an
L. E. S. C. endorsed bill or no
but was not okay.
I know we talked about it some
yes thank you Mr chairman that
I'll just have a comment for you
once a teacher always a teacher.
For.
So.
Senate bill three oh seven men's
our teacher preparation
affordability scholarship that a
to widen the eligibility
criteria.
At this we started this in
twenty twenty it's grown sixty
percent it's just an amazing
program we currently have one
thousand and eighty teachers in
this program
so this removes the requirement
and help eligible student has to
be enrolled at least half time
what we're what we're doing is
it including licensed teachers
who are working on a graduate
degree so this isn't at at a way
for us to enhance the education
of our teachers the reason for
the half time is that many
graduate programs are designed
for working teachers and so you
you're working and you take
maybe not a full half but you
take two or three years to do so
the scholarship continues as
long as a student maintain
satisfactory academic progress
and is available for up to five
years so that's pretty much what
it what it does
you know we now have average
teacher salary at sixty four
thousand five hundred which is
just so incredible only a few
years ago that was a license
three that was what you got for
three yes yes yes so but the
average student loan debt for
New Mexico teachers is over
forty eight thousand dollars so
this is a significant program
that doing that just a wonderful
job and now we just want to have
the ability to have a teachers
to further their education and
get graduate credit so that's
what this says so I have with me
R. secretary of higher ed
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
and I'd like her to talk a
little bit about this we do want
to talk perhaps about the
possible amendment.
Thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee as you
can see there are very simple
amendments in this bill that the
madam president has eloquently
discussed with you all today and
some technical cleanup what I
will say is the teacher
education workforce task force
which you all supported
bipartisan Lee a couple of years
ago identified challenges for
licensed teachers to go back to
school and earned a graduate
degree to go to level two and
level three licensure so through
that committee in that working
group we had worked together to
make amendments to the spells so
teachers can go back to the
classroom and receive a
scholarship and that average
salary you saw that can go to
their communities and their
families and they can continue
to thrive but with that Mr chair
I am done with my remarks and Mr
chairman your one of our
analysis analysts
suggested that we might need to
amend this and it's pretty
simple we did not prepare
anything because we only heard
about this this morning so if
you look on page two this is
where we're expanding the
definition of eligible student.
And we say is pursuing a
teaching degree or is a licensed
teacher and is pursuing a
graduate degree we want this
graduate degree to enhance their
educational experience so we're
suggesting that before the semi
colon and after degree we add in
education related to their
teaching special to.
So stem teachers no people that
want to a graduate degree in
mass that are already teachers
and if you just say in education
you just kind of leave out all
that other stuff so this would
make it easier for the secretary
for rulemaking also
Representative it is usually
relating to their related to
their teaching specialty.
Yeah okay.
And we're fine if you do your
usual things before we adopt the
of them like us Pete.
The.
Everything is something we've
been handled now.
Question.
Well the motion.
The.
That.
All the.
The focus of my mic are centered
about just to clarify we if
we're talking about a science
teacher something that
Wants to get his master's degree
in chemistry.
That's permissible up but it
wouldn't be and what sort of now
is that what you're are you're
concerned it might not be so
Mister chairman we're we're a
little concerned that you leave
it this vote.
At it then it falls totally on
the secretary through rulemaking
so we want them to we want to
pay for a degree that continues
their teaching practice we don't
we don't really want to pay to
go get a law degree or to come
out of education and
cease all.
Other questions center can help
Mr Chairman Senator Stewart so.
In the rural areas it seems like
a dual degree would be would
help because he can then teach
multiple areas but if it's going
to affect our men are they're
seeking a different endorsement
I I know I don't know if it
needs to be worded differently
and with that prohibited I mean
do we.
As I think if we're talking
about the content area and
especially when we're trying to
keep the teacher and one of the
criteria we have is that they
actually have a master's degree
in that content area.
If they chose to a different
content area
you know I I don't feel like
we're good we're trying to hands
in a way
especially if there's a high
need.
So Mr Chairman
we could change the amendment.
Just want slightly to address
the Center pintos concern and
say in education or related to
their teaching specialty.
So we certainly don't want to
restrict anyone from any
endorsements or even yell it's
fine to switch specialty
for is the school as they
continue to be teachers.
And I think Mister chair I think
that's
I don't know if that's the right
way because I understand the
broadness of what the bill was
sitting like you were saying we
don't want them to come out of
the education sector I don't
know if that's because I would
see it seems like it would still
allow me to.
You go into another.
content area.
But if that's what.
Senator.
No Is I think the rules that
will be developed
will help make sure this is
flexible enough for everyone
The.
I have a question about the
amendment as I look at I I think
it absolutely helps in some
areas but what about somebody
wants to go into administration.
Good if it's just talk about the
special the that really is a
whole different area of but it's
an area we have a tremendous
shortage also of of people going
into building principals and
others and how can we get words
in there that make it inclusive
of people that are going into
administration for instance or
even education finance working
central office types of
positions and jobs and so Mister
chairman I I think that is the
purpose of the or so you're
going to have a licensed teacher
pursuing a graduate degree in
education for related to their
teaching special so that could
be administration that's not
necessarily education national
inspiration.
Two and education special the.
Instead of just teaching because
admins not but.
That we're all in agreement we
just got to get the words right
so that it's inclusive of all
the fields we want to be
included that's all Mr chair I
think just the term education is
encompassing of somebody who
would like to be an
administrator within our public
schools so therefore that's why
we put all our so it's education
which would encompass an
administrator relating to their
okay correct thank you Mr chair.
Okay.
This and we're doing the for yes
if you'll please read so that we
all agree we were talking about
the same wording okay.
This is on page two.
Line eleven after degree before
the semi colon we're going to
have a Inspur going to insert
this new language in education
or related to their teaching
specialty.
Mr chairman that's I think that
would be a great that any any
questions concerns so with the
what about bilingual education
that still but with.
Well that I think.
Okay we have a motion and a
second I think already we got
the word.
Oh I'm sorry so I Senator thank
you Mr chairman madam president
madam secretary I I know that.
I get the policy holder stand it
And I think the rulemaking will
probably fix this but you know
we don't want to just have the
executive just doing stuff
that's not in the statute if
someone were to get Mr chairman
madam president if someone were
to pursue a career in up.
Public administration.
It wouldn't fit like if they
wanted to be a principal or a
superintendent or whatever so up
you could put in rural that yeah
their plan is to go into public
administration education
So I would suggest you know in
education or relating to school
administration for their public
teaching special.
And senator I I think what we
did by saying in education that
that certainly would be late to
education administration the
reason for related they're
teaching field as they may be
taking courses in chemistry as a
chemistry teacher but that's not
an education class but that's
expanding their chemistry
knowledge they're teaching field
hello thank you Mr chairman
successor and about to present I
I know we're trying to do but it
just says a graduate degree in
education of the graduate degree
does not state education isn't
that the statute but but I
understand that it is clear has
will cation I'm sorry it
ministration is education.
Public policy wouldn't public
administration areas would not
but okay administration
certainly is.
Thank you.
You're you're still good with.
Okay any other questions about
the amendment.
Not if you'll call the roll
please Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my S. as senator Neville
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
pope yes Senator souls yes.
Bill you have an amended bill of
back to the main bill any
anything else for we go to
public comment I don't believe
so Mister and I'll go to public
comment those well first to show
hands those in support.
Those in opposition.
If some supporters would like to
come and speak please come up to
the microphone and some so I see
how many there are so please
don't.
Join the line afterwards so I
have some ideas to how many.
Mr chairman Stan rounds for the
school superintendents and the
coalition education leaders.
We believe this is a great step
in helping us attain the kinds
of continuing relationships with
teachers administrators and
others and removing this dat is
something that we provide is a
stymie as the pro tem indicated
those debts are very high this
gives us an opportunity to weave
through that's we want to thank
the sponsor bring this forward.
Voice are
support thank you stand Clayton.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee quite happy with New
Mexico State University.
Of the store.
For this bill alongside
secretary.
We stand and support.
Legislature's investment and
that when the teacher
preparation and additional
efforts like this.
Shortage and we know our role as
a higher education and for that
reason we are so this bill and
we.
Your support of thank you thank
you.
Morning Mr chair and committee
members with the following
president eight to New Mexico on
behalf of the educators are
Representative across the state
Armstrong says.
I'm a first generation college
student myself and know the only
reason I was able to receive my
master's degree was because my
school district has resources
finances to pay for it this bill
would remove barriers for
educators like myself and would
go a long way to recruit and
retain and hard to staff
positions thank you.
Thank you.
What is your members of the
committee my name is David bush
I'm with the university of New
Mexico and I want to think that
Senator Stewart pro tem um
president Ford bring this to the
legislature for this important
issue for higher education
leadership for supporting this
as well I want to highlight just
to comments from the UNM FIR the
UNM analysis
so the funds receiving TV A. S.
have been critical to support
the UNM students whiting
eligibility would be valuable
for students who do not who do
want a teaching degree that left
a halftime Development or for
licensed teachers percent after.
this bill without positive
fiscal implications for human
students and for the college of
education sciences scholarships
would be available to students
seeking licensure analyzing
future seeking master's degree
so we really appreciate your
support and that thanks for that
was some of that good stuff.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is money on this I'm the interim
cabinet secretary for the public
education department I'd like to
thank the sponsor and the higher
at department for bringing this
bill forward this bill is
critical to allowing us to
elevate educators and the
quality of education in our
classrooms and also supports our
efforts to build the pipeline is
important pipeline of educators
and charter schools I also
support this legislation because
teachers deserve the opportunity
to advance their careers not
only for the benefit of
themselves and their families
but also for the outcomes of
students and for their community
as a whole thank you so much
thank you Secretary.
Please Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico I
think of I'll just highlight a
piece of the conversation that
happened earlier the legislature
and the governor did a good
thing when they raise teacher
salaries but we need
corresponding policies just like
these to to help people get into
the profession we support any
good idea that helps make a more
robust talent pipeline for
public schools we think the
sponsor.
Thank you that.
This the the yes good morning Mr
Chairman said members of the
committee marks rather the
director New Mexico council
university presidents we sense
part of this Senate bill three
of seven want to thank Madam pro
tem Stewart and secretary rod
Regus working on this work with
higher at support to licensure
the council representative seven
universities and also in the
verses have teaching programs
and we status Shani's part of
this legislation thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you.
This time good morning thank you
chairman souls Committee.
I'm Vanessa Hawker the executive
director for New Mexico
independent community colleges
and we think madam pro ten we
think secretary Rodriguez for
bringing seven Senate bill three
oh seven to you many of our
independent community colleges
have alternative teacher
licensure programs we have a
need for many qualified good
teachers in our classrooms for
our students for kids for New
Mexico and we thank you very
much thank you.
I think we have one supporter
online.
May par Sanchez if you would
please.
A good morning Mr chair members
of the committee any a New
Mexico stands in support of this
bill It is another half to
excellence for educators and the
students at the server would
like to thank the sponsor Madam
pro ten and Secretary Rodriguez
thank you thank you.
There anyone in opposition.
No one in opposition okay then
questions from the committee.
Their master's.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
president massacre just for the
folks listening back home we
what we did is we amended the.
The bill in two places page two
line eleven in page three line
one.
Thank you.
Okay.
Representative.
Senator I think you may be
correct that we need to modify
it another place but we did not
do that with the initial one.
And and so yes I okay so we do
not it was a licensed teacher it
is pursuing a graduate degree
then I misspoke Mr president we
only a minute on page two line
eleven.
Thank you Mr chairman we don't
need any we don't need we don't
need elsewhere okay.
Okay.
Yes thank you guys I'd like I
didn't think we did it to places
of okay.
Anything else senator.
White white.
So Mister chairman it's a
licensed teacher pursuing a
graduate degree.
That's who we're expanding it to
we're sending it to teachers we
want to the scholarship the
scholarship is.
Right conditions for eligibility
of section three.
Okay.
Other questions.
It's not
we were open for a motion but we
do pass Mr chair the move by
Senator pope second by Senator
Neville if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan center my Estes
Senate Bill yes Senator Pinto
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes we have a compact system and
they do pass as amended on the
sixth two to that's not to leave
excuse not no no negative votes
thank you so much appreciate
thank you and let me turn over
to vice chair will go back up to
the top of the agenda for this
B. two thirty six and two thirty
seven which are ones that I'm.
If you want to.
Thank you.
For those online in the audience
we're now on Senate bill two
thirty six Mr chairman you have
the floor.
Thank you and this is sort of
higher education day in the
Senate Education Committee we've
got lots of higher ed types of
bills this one also comes out of
F. score which is the establish
programs to support.
We see if I get that thing
competitive research is whatever
score stands for in discussions
with them the I've talked about
when faculty are coming in and
trying to set up a research
laboratory so that they can
apply for grant money and bring
it in universities don't have
money to help set up that
initial laboratory there is
substantial research that
indicates that when new faculty
have the money to set up their
lab to set up the research
facilities they're more likely
to stay in New Mexico their
career gets off to a faster
start they bring in more
requests at a quicker rate than
if they have to do it slowly and
piecemeal and try and put it
together out of the available
resources what this would do is
it provides funding through the
department of higher education
to
help establish some of our new
hot shot faculty at their
universities the reason it does
not go directly to the specific
universities is we don't know
where those new research
programs are going to be coming
the vice president of research
the VP ours from the
university's sit down regularly
and would review that yes this
is a worthy one to do this so
the funding would flow through
higher education but it would be
F. score the vice president of
research that would be the ones
to review an application if you
will from New Mexico state or
from UNM for say a hundred
thousand dollars to help set up
the laboratory for their new
quantum physics professor and
that money then with hello to
the university of to buy
equipment to prepare space to
get the various pieces needed so
that they can start their
research right away rather than
having to spend a year to
developing all of that as they.
They come online and so that's
what this bill does it set up a
faculty research grant Fund in
higher education to support new
faculty setting up the research
laboratories.
All right.
Our center so for those out here
in the committee room do we have
folks that support this bill we
get a show Ms.
And do we have any opposition.
All right if I could have the
folks who are in support if they
would come down to the middle
and will allow you to make a a
COVID and you have two minutes.
Members of the committee thank
you centers are you holding
excuse was are you holding my
but but turned it on just hold
it is all about.
You know for university
Representative this complicated
thank you again Mr chair
also Mr chair souls for bringing
this forward we've been highly
appreciative of his efforts to
support research in the state
the higher education department
secretary Rodriguez in the same
vein we recognize what an
important economic tool this is
what a important tool it is to
attract quality faculty that
will stay in this state and to
his point having supports
through grants and funds like
this we believe we will have a
better chance at attracting
grants and other contracts from
the federal government which
again as an economic driver so I
don't want to beat the dead
horse but we are certainly in
support of this bill we think
Center souls again for being
such a champion for research
thank you.
Mr.
What Mr Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Megan bush
I'm with the university of New
Mexico want to.
Thank certainly the committee
for hearing bill Senator sold
chairman souls for taking this
bill forward we also want to
extend sincere appreciation to
the sponsor for working with all
the higher education
institutions UNM included in a
collaborative approach this year
on a range of bills are intended
to support research support
faculty and provide funding for
gaps in our systems that frankly
do not have the resources to get
the necessary research done to
get products to market and
improve economic development in
New Mexico so thanks very much
for bringing this forward and
look forward to supporting bill.
Thank you.
Yes Mr chairman members making
marks right of the New Mexico
counts university presidents
represent the seven four
universities claim or three
research universities New Mexico
State University New Mexico New
Mexico tech percent support of
this legislation we want to
thank the sponsor for working
very closely with our research
institutions and with our
comprehensive schools and with
that score these the grant
process is a highly compared
process when it comes to higher
education not just within the
state not just nationally but
internationally this helps New
Mexico compete with that with
with those other schools
nationally losses well and we
really appreciate and the five
million dollars towards this
fund and I was wanting to
sponsor for working with us on
this legislation thank you Mr
chairman members committee.
Hi there I am Stephanie
Rodriguez and I am the cabinet
secretary of the New Mexico
higher education department and
I want to thank Senator souls
the sponsor for prioritizing
research at our institutions
here in New Mexico and just to
note that the senator did call
me and consultants on serving on
some technicalities so therefore
we're appreciative that he
called us before this bill is
drop so thank you senator.
Keep this separate from shore
but our our brief I'm ready so
major from New Mexico tech
university and we stand it one
hundred percent in favor for
this bill we really appreciate
the Sanchez thank you.
Thank you.
And we have one person online
very par Sanchez.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I merry par
Sanchez packed as a bit of the
NEA New Mexico representing the
higher educators across the
state while also want to thank
the sponsor for bringing forth
this bill we stand in strong
support research spurs economic
growth and oftentimes leads to
better quality of life so please
support thank you.
Thank you.
And with that there's no
opposition so any comments or
questions from the committee.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator for bringing this bill
forward so.
This is SB thirty six created
the university faculty research
grant Fund which consist of
appropriations gifts grants and
donations and investment income
to explain a little bit about
gifts.
Mr chairman and senator I think
that's fairly boiler point
boilerplate language for these
types of things that if somebody
would like to gift additional
money into this fund to support
these things they're able to do
so thank you thank you Senator
cells and what is been the.
Up two or three years of and
keep hearing about the tribal
remedy framework and all those
I know there's quite a few
listings in their.
So if this is amended because
one of the things is in to
higher ed was to have some
funding put their especially for
bilingual education for Mike
that multicultural education.
This would eliminate that kind
of requests and sets that it
would cover that.
Mr chair and senator I don't
think or the intent was for
those types of things this is a
bit more when universities are
trying to hire new faculty to
come in and they need to set up
their psychology lab to do human
testing on reaction time that
requires a specialized types of
equipment this is more an
incentive for those faculty that
the universities are able to
help set up those labs this
might be bakaly coming in you
know and I'm just that yeah
think about the top of my head
but coming in in a multi
cultural area where they need
some sort of specialized
equipment laboratory in order to
start their research but I think
most of what you've talked about
in the social sciences don't
necessarily required to set up a
particular equipment and
laboratory types of spaces.
Thank you senator Senator
because in the past what I've
been told about liked in a
college in and do you expect
that they're not read search
colleges so this wouldn't apply
to them so they couldn't take
advantage of this if somebody
was coming in the needed
research dollars dollars to help
set up their space there for
their particular area of
research they could.
Thank you and with higher
education I think there has been
some.
News I don't know how to say it
positively issues with how they
direct their money's
within their budgets because we
keep getting these requests.
For all these specific little
things but yet we spend millions
and millions of dollars on
intercollegiate Act that exports
I know it's a different entity
but if we're trying to
prioritize education and
and I understand the social
factor wanting to have something
like that here in the state but
you know I if if I read still
gonna be the entity that decides
to oversee this
Eight.
That's.
How to how do you make sure that
it's really going to get what
needs to be thank you senator
Senator did you want me to
respond to just okay.
Center my sis thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator souls
and just want to think of all
the work that went into this and
all the thought process that
when it is someone at bank the
the collision of university
presidents and its director we
had a hearing in economic policy
this summer on the externalities
that would that would happen as
a result of this
And it it was a the present of
western I think talked about his
experience in Florida where they
did similar things to Florida
Florida state and I think
central Florida or one of their
other research institutions but
it had a ripple effect in all of
their higher in schools just
you know normally Mr and I'm I'm
against up.
Non revert language you know I
think everything should revert
because but it but ninety nine
times out of ten I'm against at
this is that tenth time which if
the money is not spent there's
no point in reverting there's no
point in that with the the
system is you is you know right
now it's I mean dollars a year
we can and we can make it more
in the future but but the the
dollars the state in this Fund
parlay into more dollars that's
my understanding is can you
elaborate on that Mr in their
souls can get up can this I me
and be up.
Be matched by other entities
federal government department of
defense or anything like that Mr
chair yes and this is not five
million dollars a year this is
money that's put into the fund
if this is affected and the fund
gets quickly depleted because
it's being used very effectively
hopefully will add more money to
it into the future the reason
for non revert languages if it
doesn't get all use this year is
still there next year for the
next group that comes certainly
if there are outside groups that
want to put additional money
into this the federal government
a pirate funds other places it's
like Hey we really want to
support faculty standing up
research labs we've got a
mechanism to accept their funds
and put it in there and then it
it essentially just spins off to
the universities as it's needed
very specifically this was not
directed to New Mexico state two
U. N. M. because it needs to be
broader than that it could be
all spent by UNM because they're
setting up a brand new program
as we heard earlier in quantum
materials and it might all be
set up to set up that lab this
year and be a great success and
will ask for additional money to
to stop into the fund in the
future for others it might get
spread across the research
universities in the for your
schools in more equal amounts if
they each have some of those so
it is specifically set up to be
flexible thank you Mr chairman
thank you centers all the up
that I don't anticipate.
Business entities or federal
government necessary putting
money into the fund but but it
will be part of the grant
process that you know with if a
college could say if you give me
a million dollars how to get to
million from this entity to do
this particular research
businesses want to locate next
to successful resources to shin
so it'll have a wonderful ripple
effect I'm so grateful we have
this the money because five
years ago this would have been
kind of unheard of but we but if
and when this money is spent we
should consider up up in those
upping the ante in years to come
thank you Mr chairman.
Any other questions or comment
is made members business setting
and and Senator on money into
the my question just regarding
at the and to set mine fiscal
year twenty important subsequent
fiscal years provide grants so
you clear that up for me that
being said do we have a motion
for.
What is the will of the
committee I do pastor center my
assistant we have a second.
Second from Centerville.
More if you could take the role.
Senator Kernan.
Yes this yes Senator Neville yes
Senator Pinto yeah Senator post
yes the full yes.
For the six.
And you have a do pass Senator
sixty zero we will now move on
to your next bill Senate bill
two thirty seven.
Thank you Mr chair and this bill
is similar in some people when
they first reddit said this
sounds exactly like the last one
it's not there are some very
specific differences this also
set up a fund in higher
education.
But this particular one is to
provide money for state agencies
who have research questions and
to contract then with our
institutions of higher education
to.
So all those reserves questions
to answer those to do surveys to
do all of the other things so
rather than a state agency
contracting with some group
outside the state in order to
get the the information that
they need this is an incentive
for them to go through this
mechanism and our brain power
that we have it higher education
here in New Mexico so it's
keeping those state agency
dollars and their research needs
within the state instead of
contracting out of state there's
nothing that would prevent an
agency from contracting out of
state but that would then come
out of the agency budget rather
than out of this research
budget.
The in for instance yesterday I
had a bill to research or to the
study whether the feasibility of
a high speed train we can go out
to some national transportation
expert group to do that.
But it would be better to
contract with bureau or economic
development people of New Mexico
state or others in order to to
get the same questions and
answers and the money stays
within the state it also has
some other important pieces New
Mexico state a few years back
lost its research one status and
that requires that you have
research certainly in the
science and technical fields but
also that there are research
projects and grants that come in
the in the humanities and the
social science areas there is
typically not the same large
National Science Foundation
grants available in those
departments this would provide
opportunities for those
departments to do research
published research and just
surveys that support graduate
students might be a sign of the
Indian Education area a research
project to determine whether
superintendents in the state of
New Mexico what what's causing
the lack of longevity and that.
My contract with one of our
universities for fifty thousand
dollars to answer that question
to put out the surveys tally all
the the information really good
practice for our graduate
students who don't always get
those kinds of opportunities so
with both helping to train them
of those social sciences.
Excuse me and humanities areas
of research are important for
maintaining research one status
as well as the more technical
science field and so helping New
Mexico state get back to that
but also you and them and take
maintaining that research one
status levels and so it it's
again providing a Fund in higher
education for agencies to tap
into provided they're using the
brain power of our higher
education facilities in the
state to to answer their
research questions I hope I made
that understandable.
Thank you senator up for those
in the audience we get a show of
hands on the those who support
this bill.
And do we have any opposition to
the bill.
All right those in support if
you would make your way to the
microphone and I will allow two
minutes of public comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee thanks again thanks
again the Mr chair souls for his
support again of research and he
spoke more eloquently in New
Mexico State University than I
can so I I will not be redundant
but we this in support we think
this is a good mechanism common
sense in that we should be
utilizing our research
universities for a studies that
affect the state so we once
again thank the sponsor and ask
you for your support.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name state in
Boston with University of New
Mexico thanks for hearing bill
thanks to the center for bring
this forward good work of the
sponsor I also want to point out
the University of New Mexico is
a little unique in this in the
sense that we also have a an
academic health sciences center
and that is a huge need for the
state to do better analysis on
these really big moving parts of
your state budget frankly that
you know small tweaks important
policy decisions could be better
informed right here in in New
Mexico by higher education
institutions and also UNM
specifically thank you very
much.
Randy Senator with the New
Mexico tech university and where
you stand and support with this
legislation thank you thank you.
Thank you.
And Mr chairman members
committee marks of other I want
to Mexicans years presidents I
thank the sponsors for working
with us on this piece of
legislation I also want to point
out that also when it comes
accountability higher at in this
legislation within the bill it
does mention during the time
that the universe is using
university now says and research
grant money members shall report
Ellen to the department the
report shall include the
following so that also that if
the bill in terms of that
accountability which in some
cases when it comes our reserves
were not required to report to
the department we do have
mechanisms with an institution
or with those kind of contracts
so I just wanted to just point
that out that creates more cat
more counselors in the bill in
regards to research we do have
the resources to help provide
support to the state agencies
whether it's water energy our
health care our health care
mission so we really look
forward to working with the
center and support funding for
this process also want to just
put to the committee that our
research mission with the New
Mexico in our requests we
generate by almost a million
dollars in expenditures that
come to the state doesn't mean
expenditures from that the
legislature funds that's what we
spend because of the tax coffers
with the New Mexico like you
hear from your labs Sandia Los
Alamos send with our research is
because we're an economic engine
for every dollar you give dryers
Titian's we generate away from
what for that dollar five to
seven dollars back to the state
of New Mexico so this is helps
enhance and support for us to be
able to do that thank you Mr
chairman members committee thank
you Mr sponsor for bring this
legislation.
Thank you.
And we have one supporter online
merry par Sanchez.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and every par
Sanchez national education
association of New Mexico the
president all right we stand in
support of this bill
and like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill this
inspired of bills forward we
encourage support of it thank
you.
Thank you.
now what Senator of the wanted
any comments I think they're all
in support of noted for that but
they were all in support and
just one of the things in higher
education and research kind of
one of the savings is reserves
we get to research funding for
research projects additional
funding for research for New
Mexico state getting back to
level one level brings in lots
more of additional requests this
helps bring them back to a level
one Research University and
helps keep the other ones here
and so whatever we as a state
put in for research brings in
lots of outside research and.
Places that have a large grants
are looking to see how active is
the research at the university's
already and they want to put
more money in whether it's
active research happening.
Thank you center comments
questions from the committee.
Senator Kernan thank you very
much Mr chair and senator
I'm just trying to kind of
figure this out secure indicate
you're saying that any agency
within state government that
would like to do a study of some
sort would be required
regardless of where the money
comes from for that study would
have to go through the higher IT
department to have that
application review this is just
for the five million dollars I
don't understand Mr chair
Senator no they can still have
the study done where ever they
wanted to be done however if
they don't go through this
mechanism it would come out of
their agency budget if they go
through this mechanism the risk
that funding comes out of this
research grant because it's not
funded through the state.
And so Mister chairman Senator
so it would be I guess they
would choose which university
that would want to do that study
men who would decide who does
the study and what are the
qualifications for that
institution to be able to to do
a quality study I mean it would
that be to hire IT department
that would make that
determination Mister chairman
Senator those are great
questions
what the agency we do is
essentially put out an RFP.
Through this mechanism.
That universities then would put
in their proposal.
Provided it's an in state one it
is then funded through this
mechanism but the agency would
decide whether the university
meets the requirements for that
proposal if there's only one
they would contract with that
one if that meets the
requirements that there are
multiple ones they look and see
which one appears to be the most
appropriate for what their
question would be okay that that
helps a lot because I I don't
want to restrict
the ability of an agency.
You know to get a study done
wherever they think the best
study could be done and
certainly it is an opportunity
for students to learn how to do
these the this type of research
that the end of the day you want
an outcome that is helpful and
is done well so so I I think I
understand no requirement they
have to go through this but if
they do.
Us university to to do a study
if they want to use the the
money included here they've got
to go through the process of
higher ed approving it.
Mister chairman Senator yes this
is an incentive for them to use
the brain power of our higher
education institutions because
then the money doesn't come out
of their agency budget it comes
out of this fund.
All right thank you very much.
Senator Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir souls and that is this up
please getting better thank you
I'm looking at up at the last
page on page four and it's
essentially where it deviates.
From the previous bill that
it's.
To assist state agencies with
any analysis and research needed
have a course the outline is on
page three the
You contemplate Mr.
Mr of Mr chairman center souls
that eight that the legislature
is defined under this these
magic words state agency.
Mr chair and senator
I would think they probably
could use this mechanism also
the legislature typically
doesn't have direct funding for
doing this council service might
and Council Service might have
some questions that that could
fall under this but the
legislature really isn't a state
agency with the budget.
Ask research questions lots of
the questions that we ask
through the interim or even
request studies here are
actually through state agencies
to do that research we passed
several out of this committee to
fund hundred thousand there's
actually one hundred thousand
dollars to of look at
sustainability of the higher
education models.
That that wouldn't could be now
that we would be a little weird
having won the university study
the university's for Ben to fund
the universities and so that
would probably would go to baby
an outside agency but it would
be things of that sort that
could be very much the studies
that we request either through
resolution memorials or direct
legislation to be done could
very well get funded through
this mechanism rather than be a
burden on the state agency
that's tasked with the thank you
Mr chairman thank you Sir so
because I think of because we
definitely need this as a
legislature for gonna do big
laughs of so I have a
relationship to kind of get back
to Senator currents question Mr
chairman I have related with the
youth you in any kind of
parliament and I I have a.
Appropriated junior money to the
university con Department to do
certain research projects most
of the money goes to pay
graduate students to do the
research and stuff but it's up
but it's they did a wonderful
research on a.
On the on the brewer tax
incentive that we did a few
years ago whether that's going
to work they're going to do
research on up the the supply
side of cannabis and what you
know what whether that whether
that's doable or not we so we're
gonna do big laughs in certain
major policy initiative that the
backing of a of a white paper or
research project by state
universities would would go a
long way so I think up.
I know this is taking a lot of
thought but I I would ask you to
consider either now or in the
for the next hearing on page
three line line.
Between the word agency and pass
it would read the name I propose
the following motion the name of
the state agency for legislative
committee asking for the
analysis and research.
And then of and then on page
four line eleven between
agencies and with in providing
state agencies or legislative
committees with any analysis and
research needs.
So we put in we put in the magic
words for legislative committee.
That we theoretically Mr
chairman Mr cells we this
committee could vote or whatever
or the check to write a letter
and say pay consider doing this
research on our behalf because
we have these big bills coming
up that we need more information
on.
I don't disagree I I'm just
trying to think whether there's
any problems with doing that
Because I I had I haven't
considered that particular piece
and I might ask you know even
some of the the universities
that would be doing this with
which where are you guys what
you all think.
At I want to let us Senator
Kernan make a comment on that as
well.
The other one step in front of
anybody that Mr chair you know
it that may become too broad I
mean I can imagine every single
committee during the interim
would say well I need you and M.
to to do some research on this
I'm not sure that they have the
capacity to to be able to do
that I think in who would who
would pay would would Council
serviceable after that grant
money or would they have to
provide some funding I think
maybe what you're doing is maybe
a beginning step and then we
need to figure out is the
legislature maybe how we need to
get the information we need as
well I worry about that just
becoming more than any
university we have a lot of
universities but not all of them
do research and that that would
be a concern for me I think
maybe keep it a little tighter
initially and again I your tend
to think up what Senator Kernan
Mr chair with with saying I
don't disagree with where you're
going.
I think I would rather it try
this out for a little bit see
how that's working and
potentially have another piece
of legislation or broaden this
to include those kinds of things
but yeah I can see every
committee going home we now can
request research from all these
different things and without as
much vetting as to whether you
know what level of need this is
okay thank you Mr at the but I
like the way you're thinking now
I'll withdraw the motion to
consider it think of I have
more.
Despite the powerful and
wonderful executive
representatives in this room I
think of.
I think the legislature's more
long term thinkers of sometimes
But and then to answer the
question the university could
say no.
We have a second say no
but I think I think we should
continue to build relationships
with with professors in that
department heads and deans
provosts because the more it
because we have the brain power
here in New Mexico to give us
the information we need to make
really smart decisions in the
future thank you Mr thank you.
Any other comments or questions
from the committee.
All right the what what's the
will of the committee on this
movie I'm sorry.
It was the second there was a
pause.
The recognized me a second to.
But I think it's all right
because it finishes COVID went
to see if there was anyone else
that wasn't so now the floor is
wide open.
Well the committee.
These are these get.
Over the past year.
Do we have a second also.
To take the role.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator Campos.
Yes Senator full yes.
Thank you yeah would you pass
center.
The pope's.
Senator I know you have an
amendment to one of.
You want to deal with the
amendment first Representative
the bill and then talk about the
amendment what works best for
you Sir Mr chair I think we'll
talk about the bill and then
we'll.
Okay as they're handing it out
for the people watching we are
now on Senate bill two eighty
three reducing suspensions and
expulsions that and then we'll
do Senate bill two eighty nine
point twelve outdoor education
programs three oh four C. N. M.
short term training programs.
And.
Of them three twenty five school
counselor teacher loan repayment
just a reminder we also have a
hard stop at ten forty five and
so with people talk too long on
different things are too much
public testimony on things we
start backing up our calendar
will get to the bill you might
be interested in.
Senator if you're ready thank
you Mr chair Senate bill two
eighty three prohibits expulsion
and eliminates most out of
school suspensions for children
six weeks until age eight it
also contains reporting and data
collection requirements to track
and prevent suspensions and
expulsions the bill also
includes an exception to the
prohibition on suspensions and
this is when a student presents
an immediate risk to the health
and safety of other persons
within a facility immediate risk
is when a student or child
willfully causes or attempts to
cause bodily injury or just
written seriously body bodily
injury to another person except
in self defense the maximum
suspension allowed under these
circumstances is three school
days per incident.
The bill also includes an
exception to the prohibition on
expulsions
and this is any violation of
NMSA thirty dash seven dash two
point one the unlawful carrying
a deadly weapon on school
premises a couple additional
points on this
We're doing this because that
you know we want to ensure that
there's a planned transition to
a better setting for child's
needs is not an expulsion.
there's also a partial day
removal for disciplinary reasons
is consider a suspension this
several months under related to
a child's behavior or discipline
are still permitted and a
child's parents or legal
guardians may still voluntarily
withdraw a child.
This bill will apply to publicly
funded community based pre K..
Public schools and charter
schools licensed childcare
facilities that receive child
care assistance funds as well.
We're also going to be as I
mentioned four data collection
and reporting the bill includes
requirements about data
collection reporting beginning
in twenty twenty five each
facility shall maintain
demographic data on the facility
child's grade child's race and
ethnicity what the child
receives special education
services and whether child is an
English language learner.
Additional data to be collected
includes discipline data
including the total number of
annual out of school and school
suspensions experienced by
students and the total number
days excluded from educational
setting.
the for a passes over to the
secretary and and my experts
we're really doing this because
of the disparities in expulsion
and suspension we look at the
numbers students in child care
and preschool programs are three
more likely to experience
expulsion or suspension but K.
through twelve students native
American preschoolers are
suspended one and a half times
greater than their share of the
population.
Black preschoolers are two and a
half more times more likely to
receive one or more suspensions
than white students and two
times more likely to be
expelled.
Preschoolers served under the
individuals with disabilities
Education Act arts bills two and
a half times greater than their
share of total preschool
population.
With that Mr chair I would like
to allow with the secretary
present ski of some time to talk
about this legislation thanks
welcome center that thank you Mr
chair members of the committee I
want to also thank senator pope
for agreeing to sponsor this
important piece of legislation
with us the devastating effects
of suspension and expulsion on
toddlers preschoolers and early
elementary students as well as
the inequitable impact on young
children of color Dr the intent
of Senate bill two eighty three
there's significant body of
research that demonstrates these
early life events can last a
lifetime and we can positively
affect this by now today by
passing Senate bill two eighty
three exclusionary discipline
negatively influences a child's
academic and social trajectory
impacting their capacity for
healthy social development it is
imperative that the impact of
the suspensions and expulsions
is understood from the larger
developmental perspective from a
community and cultural contexts
there is a connection between
these early suspensions and
expulsions and multi system
involvement of youth such as
child welfare special education
and juvenile justice in addition
to suffering academically early
exclusionary discipline and
later criminal justice
involvement of youth and adults
are connected other documented
outcomes include increased rates
of school grade repetition
school drop out and Poverty
viewed from a community and
national perspective the
negative outcomes for children
for children places significant
and preventable cost and social
burden on whole communities and
our nation significantly
reducing suspensions and
eliminating expulsions are the
crucial first steps to then
build upon and provide nurturing
and safe spaces for our young
children we recognize that our
educators also need that safe
space that same safe space a
learning environment that is
strength based and a continuing
education process that promotes
their professional identity
commensurate with the
responsibilities just.
Lying to them by our culture and
our society with strong support
and respectful engagement
educators and the early
childhood and K. two system can
address the challenges of
preventing and mitigating the
impact of suspensions and
expulsions we all seek the same
positive result for our children
by curtailing suspensions and
expulsions this allows some of
our most vulnerable to become
confident resilient better able
to manage their emotions and
have the capacity to connect
with their educators in a
healthy way this approach
supports early relational health
including the use of
disciplinary techniques that
promote a teaching environment
rather than a punitive stance
that may be a precursor to
suspension and expulsion I want
to end by thanking all of our
supporters any A. A. F. T. The
New Mexico head start
association growing up New
Mexico the New Mexico
association of young children.
New the children's equity
project Ole voices for children
The New Mexico pediatric society
save the children action network
parents reaching out at that New
Mexico the New Mexico
association for infant mental
health fathers New Mexico and
that
parents of Indian children with
special needs facility that Mr
chairman I will stand will stand
for questions.
And anything else and and and
that'll be it Mr chairman so
we'd like to introduce the
amendment and possible okay.
All Mr Chairman would you like
me to explain the amendment yes
please and I think I direct this
to which pages and things of
that sort would be helpful chair
Mister chairman so
it's kind of some minor cleanup
language on this so on page two
line I we're gonna strike
January and change that to July.
On page two line line will be do
the same thing January and
insert July because we want to
allow more time for this
implementation.
On page three line sixteen
we're just correcting the
section so it's in section
thirty dash seven dash twenty
one it's actually thirty dash
seven dash two point one.
So that was a mistake on that.
And then on page six line two
we're gonna strike twenty twenty
three and make it twenty twenty
four.
And those are the changes Mr
chair.
Many anyone make a motion to for
this these amendments for
discussion.
The native and seconded
discussion on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair this out is
that concerned about the
original statute because that
was so false reporting and I
can't imagine a three year old
making false reports so I'm glad
you caught that this makes more
sense thank you yes Mister
chairman Senator Kernan I I was
a little confused.
When I was trying to understand
what I was going to bring this
and explain that.
Thank you anything else on the
amendment.
The end of your call the roll on
the amendment please.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my SS
said Novell yes Senator Pinto
yes Senator pope yes Senator so
yes we have so we are amended
now anything else where we go to
Madam you know I I I would just
like to say Mr chair you know I
was happy to to bring this
forward and sponsor this and I
just think this is an example of
us really being proactive in
dealing with some of the issues
that we could possibly see a
coming so.
This want to emphasize that
thank you Mr chair thank you
other the audience first don't
have those in support of this
legislation.
Thank thank you any opposition.
And a couple of we'll start with
the opposition so.
Then if you would please.
Sharks or.
In the thank you Mr chairman
thank you Stan rounds for the
school superintendents on the
cost of education leaders we
appreciate this bill and point
trying to go.
Often it's the it's the the
particulars the become difficult
the additional of students in
public schools is very complex
we believe that enabling this is
likely to create an unfunded
mandate as an example as we look
at our training in retooling
that would have to occur we
understand the concern about
early childhood pretty early
childhood students and so Mister
chairman to turn our opposition
to support.
Words mean everything we have
three words Mr chairman on page
two lines eleven and twelve if
you were to strike through
second grade.
We would stand and support.
Thank.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Bonnie Lightfoot and the
president of the superintendents
association and well we agree
that the intended this bill is
definitely honorable we are
responsible for school security
is stand just mentioned that is
a definitely a at that delicate
and difficult job I'm I'm.
Pondering the reason that that a
law that already existed as ten
days in existence already why we
had to have ability to do just
three it just kind of perplexes
me just a little bit I guess
moderate motivation about that
would be I would also like to
remind the
We know our communities we know
our staff and our kids we know
their families and making that
decision to require some elected
some instinct I use the coin
that kind of coined the phrase
the other day that sometimes you
have to use some common sense
and there's a restorative
justice practice kind of taken
leap these days I want a fair
bit of restorative justice come
approach for little that might
make more sense and finally.
It has some data about the
numbers of particular districts
and students who have been
suspended I definitely agree
that there are some problems
that they need to be addressed
for sure it's almost like one of
the kiddos messes up in the
class and you get after the
whole class or your whole staff
messes up one staff member
messes up a new kind of
ridiculous recommend whole staff
seems like it there some
training and support needed
definitely that should be
offered to those schools and
districts thank you thank you.
What.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico we
agree with the vision of this
bill what we have two issues
with that one is the current
environment and the the second
is just the mechanism and of
itself so the current
environment is is such that we
don't have the capacity to have
the counselors and social
workers on our campus is to be
able to intervene in the way
that we'd like to in response to
a policy like this that largely
has to do with the way we're
funding our schools right now we
are able to get social workers
and counselors funded for
students work they do for
students by peace but there is
no funding mechanism to provide
for those staff members for the
general it student population.
Secondly and so with that
without those resources it's
hard to see how will respond to
a policy that's implemented in
this way secondly there are
three people here that I trust
when they see the data and see a
problem they're here for a good
reason I did talk to
a number of administrators who
have been working in schools for
over a decade and said I've
never done this before.
There's reporting requirements
in this bill for good actors
that we think are burdensome and
we think a targeted approach for
the schools districts charter
schools that are actually a
problem would be more
appropriate in this case I
haven't seen the data that that
that is being referenced here
but if there's an issue there
should be some intervention and
some legislation that focused on
that we provide more more
appropriate so thank you to the
sponsor and the secretaries.
Thank you Matt anyone else in
the audience in opposition.
We have one opposed online the
Maureen maker.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is differing
maker and I'm speaking to you
today is someone with over
thirty years of experience in
early childhood in New Mexico as
well as serving as a local
school board member I'm opposed
to this legislation for multiple
reasons frankly not all
preschoolers are ready to be in
a large group setting through
the years I've seen this from
both sides of the aisle as a
private child care director and
is a preschool instructional
coach in public schools for some
children their lack of impulse
control combined with their
inability to focus in a large
group is not productive to any
child in that ring.
Section three C. says planned
transitions to settings that are
better who determines what is
better that can be highly
subjective and I have seen on
more than one occasion where the
community provider encourages
families to enroll their child
in the public school program
because they have the ability to
help them.
While hopefully well intended
the end result is that the
child's behavior is exacerbated
by moving them to yet another
classroom and the family is led
to believe that their child will
receive extraordinary support
when we know that is an
unrealistic expectation given
the staff shortages in every
school staff turnover in fall
early childhood classrooms both
public and private is it a all
time high and money well
certainly appreciated is not the
complete answer to addressing
the issues I know multiple
preschool teachers who are not
only highly qualified but also
passionate about working with
young children who are currently
looking to leave the profession
the because they feel that their
hands are tied finally the
documentation component will be
challenging for both community
and public programs I I don't
have the immediate answer I
discourage the committee
supporting this initiative thank
you for your time thank you for
those of us close to two minutes
as I've ever had somebody
perfect
Now to those in the room in
support if someone would line up
over you're actually with the
expert witnesses you'll get to
talk as much as you you want or
need don't worry.
Please try not to say exactly
what everyone else is set and
keep your comments tight and
concise please yes please thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Alice limit quite
executive director of
developmental disabilities
council we also house the office
of the special education on that
and on behalf of the special
education on bad we strongly
support this bill as you've
heard from the secretary of we
see that students with
disabilities children with
disabilities are the biggest
population that's affected by
suspensions expulsions
especially early childhood and
we're setting up a lifelong
issue when we start this early
with this kind of at with this
kind of treatment of our
students not only do we see
problems of the students who are
not receiving the support that
they need at that young age this
that the services that they need
but we also see that effecting
the entire family so we see
parents having to quit jobs with
it putting the family into I'm
horrible situations that they
really can't get out of and so I
hope that you'll hear from some
of our family members today who
wanted to call and and speak in
support of this bill we also
want to thank at the Senator
Senator pope the sponsor and the
secretaries for bring this
forward and we hope that the
committee votes yes and you pass
thank you thank you really
meant.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee lily more tease
the legislative liaison for the
New Mexico school board
association and we certainly
appreciate the intent of this
bill to keep our children in
school learning we do have
concerns regarding the phone the
implementation that could be
prescriptive of for public
schools and could be very costly
so we agree with the
superintendents comments
regarding eliminating those
three words in the language if
that would help alleviate that
but we we thank all the work
that's been put into this bill
and we look forward to your
recommend.
Thank you in may.
Then secretary welcomed the
Senate education.
Good morning at.
Senators souls chairman members
of the committee on behalf of
the CYFD we find that of many
young children who are touching
our system of care our children
who perhaps started to exhibit
adverse.
Experiences that they are having
in their home and the US
began to exit at behave in
manners that are difficult in
the school setting we believe
that to the extent that children
can maintain their relationship
in their school and stabilize
them that that is likely to have
much better outcomes for them as
they need that care and
attention so we strongly support
from our position from children
youth and families position we
strongly support the bill as
maintaining eye health healthy
relationships in a school
setting as much as possible for
these young children and thank
senator pope and the secretary
for bringing this forward thank
you Sir thank you.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee respect Aaron
report about.
The whole get told about thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee Rebecca Baron Rees
director for policy and growing
up New Mexico we also run and
early learning center here in
Santa Fe and we're here today to
stand in support of SB two
eighty three we since two
thousand six of a long running
policy never to suspend or expel
children in our early learning
programs and I think the
secretaries and senator pope for
bringing this issue forward
thank you so much.
Thank you.
If I could be for before you
start I've had a number more
people and support online I did
had to earlier Molly Swank and
Emily will that we'll hear from
them the others element that's
your names but I'm not going to
hear from the others online so
please go ahead good morning
chairman souls.
He's development incorporated we
operate.
The whole time we get to talk
about hello we operate thirty
head start centers in Rio Arriba
Bernalillo county and Butchofsky
county I am here representing
the New Mexico head start
association in support of Senate
bill two eighty three we must
stop the practice of suspending
and expelling our youngest on
our most vulnerable children and
families when we push out
children we push out parents an
entire community expelling and
suspending the our our youngest
children disproportionately
affects our children of color.
These formative years are when
children are instilled with a
love of learning during these
early years children learn
through play and through
building positive relationships
with their teachers and with
their peers we must stop the
practice of suspension and
expulsion however with
appropriate and timely supports
for children our teachers and
our families additional help in
the classroom for
individualization yes mass
workers creation of behavior
modification plans parents
volunteering in the classroom
early intervention services
parent and child a parent a
teacher training child provide
services and coordination of
home visitation services
essentially embracing the child
the teacher the parents with
additional resources and help
our children deserve better
thank you senator pope thank you
Secretary Groginsky think I'm
that.
Then we have three more here yes
ma'am thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee but in
Holland president of AFT New
Mexico I stand in strong support
of this bill as we have heard
the suspension and expulsion
practices disproportionately
affect students of color
especially early education
students of color throughout the
course of the legislative
session we've been focused on
modernizing and improving our
public education system that
discussion should add absolutely
should include modernizing and
improving student discipline
practices as well thank you
thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
Luna Tetreault and I'm a
provider of four centers in
Farmington over the past twenty
two years and I am the policy
chair for the New Mexico child
care and education association
so there isn't a school or a
provider in the state that would
make a practice of descend
rolling children from Senator
most of us have missions to
serve the children who need us
most that includes children who
are medically fragile and who
have special needs it is hard to
support a bill that is simply an
unfunded mandate we need
solutions that protect
vulnerable children and our
staff from harm harm that some
children effect on themselves
and others over the term of four
governor's countless secretaries
and every legislation bodies
this childcare association has
asked for differentiation
differentiated reimbursement
rates so we can accommodate
children who need special care
we have asked for educational
assistance when children require
one on one care it costs money
please provide this passing this
bill without providing us the
solution compounds the risk of
liability it will increase the
probability that children will
harm themselves and others and
will only grow grow the child
care desert in New Mexico
childcare providers and schools
work within the boundaries they
are given through the regulatory
and statutory environment the
state must invest in the
solution to stop the problem
thank you thank you with that in
support or in opposition that is
in support understanding that we
do need to fix this problem okay
thank you.
Yes Sir.
Good morning yep to hold the
button down.
Good morning.
Members of the committee
chairman members of the
committee and sponsor Senator
pope I'm Frederick VI he'll
former governor from the public
to suki on behalf of governor
Melton her on the twenty three
twenty twenty three tribal
councilor we are in support of
the S. B. two eighty three we
are the first tribal community
that have been involved in the
early child care program and
truly within the infancy of the
program we seen our children's
prosper I have a daughter that
is running the program and is
academically moving forward to
obtaining her bachelor's degree
that's where in my own
community.
And we did have a head start
program and that's a pass Policy
Council member you know these
are very bowl interesting
children that we have in our
community one of the things
we've done in our community is
creating a Linux X. language
Latin just to wear again
incorporating tradition and
culture so I encourage the
committee to respond to support
this bill thank you very much
for your time and your
attention.
Thank you Sir we will hear from
to online Molly Swank and Emily
will that'll others online who
were in support Ellen Byrne
Steen miles to note go
New Mexico and that's what New
Mexico ed and Lisa deal all have
expressed their support but
we'll hear from Molly Swank and
then Emily will about.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning committee members my
name is Molly Swank and I'm the
campaigns and program director
with the center for civic policy
I'm here today to speak in
support of SB two eighty three
just this past November voters
overwhelmingly show their
support for education and
children across our great state
I voting to increase funding for
early childhood education in our
public schools SB two eighty
three complements these efforts
by ensuring that our children
are not unfairly punished early
in their lives and can continue
their schooling and education
without fear of reprimand
retaliation or falling behind SB
two eighty three will ensure
students of colors students with
disabilities and English
language learners are not
disproportionately targeted or
given harder punishments but are
instead treated with dignity and
respect while their teachers and
school administrators work with
them to determine the root of
behavioral problems to increase
their likelihood to increase
their likelihood of success as
they grow thank you so much for
your time and I hope you'll vote
yes on SB two eighty three.
Thank you miss white Emily will
doubt.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily well
Dallas New Mexico voices for
children we are in strong
support of SB two eighty three
and we like to think Senator
poke for carrying this bill I'm
you've heard today about the
disproportionate impact of
suspensions expulsions on our
black and native American
students and students with
disabilities and we'd like to
thank Senator pope for requiring
that data collection and
reporting mechanism in this bill
it's really critical to address
racial equity by continuing to
shed light on it and seeing how
these sorts of policies are
causing disproportionate impacts
among our students of colors and
students with disabilities I'm
this bill would prevent this
type of discipline for very
young kids instead promoting
opportunities for alternative
solutions that support early
childhood mental health and
social emotional learning and
apply trauma informed practices
so we ask the committee to join
us in support of SB two eighty
three thank you.
Thank you.
Up in just that before we go for
with questions from the
committee I will remind people
we have about twelve minutes
until we we hit what is our
deadline for this so I think if
we can try and get through this
bill for the other bills on the
list today we probably will not
get to them so Senator Hemphill
request a Hemphill
there till then if he's around
and then my other bill we
probably roll those over to
Monday and we won't on Monday
but Canadian be prepared next
Wednesday if we are falling
behind we maybe start at eight
thirty but I'll let you all
know.
Mr chair
if it be possible if I could
have the secretary address some
of those comments are made
publicly.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
I'm I I just want to emphasize
that this bill is really about
protecting children supporting
their families supporting
educators and building capacity
within our early childhood
system.
went children behave in ways
that are challenging and and
challenge their adult educators
these behaviors are not out of
the blue there's a reason for
these behaviors we know that
children in New Mexico have some
of the highest rates of adverse
childhood experiences in the
country and our educational
settings really should be
supportive and reflective of
this of this fact we also know
that in reserves when a child
experiences expulsions or
suspensions early in life this
has impacts in the rest of their
educational experiences and
beyond.
I would like to share some data
that will within the public
education department for our
kindergarten through second
grade teachers from last
academic year of these of
students within these eight
grades over there were over nine
hundred suspensions Ezzell say
that again last second academic
year for students kindergarten
through second grade there are
over nine hundred suspensions
six hundred and twenty and sixty
two of those were among Hispanic
students and sixty four were
among native American students.
the early childhood and public
ad budget requests include
alternative solutions such as
infant early childhood mental
health consultation trauma
informed professional
development and social emotional
learning and safety we do have
these things that will support
educators and administrators
through this process within our
budgets I'll also add that an
effort on the part of the public
at department and Human Services
department for the last several
years has been to expand our
Medicaid
services in schools this will
allow us to provide more direct
services to all students are
eligible for Medicaid this will
also allow us to expand our our
school staff related to
counselors and social workers
which further supports this
effort.
And I just want to really
emphasize as well the piece
about families removing a child
from a safe educational
environment can put a family in
an impossible so the situation
as we've heard other people say
our goal should be to support
children as early as possible
this bill will allow us to do
this as well as making sure that
our educators are provided the
training and support that will
allow them to intervene and
positive and effective ways so
that we will set our students on
a path of success not only in
early childhood but throughout
the K. twelve system thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Okay questions from the
committee and were fairly short
time and so just what you know
we may not get this done today
that.
Senator Kernan I know you have
questions thank you madam chair
I did not have quite a few
questions so just beginning on
page one of the bill when you of
described or defined the and
rolling into T. means a public
funded community based pre K.
program
when you talk about child care
centers and just curious are all
child care centers in New Mexico
accepting state funded slots for
for child care assistance Mr
chair Senator Kernan and no not
all of them so my question Mr
chair and and secretary with
those particular schools that
don't X. except state funding
fall under this bill.
Mr chair Senator Kernan no they
would not so they would have the
authority Mr chair to handle
those things anyway that they
see fit okay question.
On page two.
I agree with with Mr rounds on
the exemption at the removing
through second grade
I think that in my view hurts
the bill I think that we have
situations in our public schools
and I think we already have
regulations and guidelines that
that they must follow and I
would encourage you maybe to
take a second look at that piece
of the bill.
another question I have with
regard to
Defining what it means bodily
injury what give me some
examples of how severe that
would be an example of what
would constitute a reason why
you you might be able to the to
descend roller suspended child
what does that mean.
Mr chair Senator Kernan it would
be if they were a danger to
others so it would the behavior
would have to result in that it
was going to harm other children
or other people teachers to
included in the classroom so so
Mister chair what an example of
that be a child biting another
child.
Mr chair Senator Kernan
depending on the age of some of
that's typical behavior for
children of different ages so
that's where the social supports
the social emotional strategies
that an educator uses to help
children learn how to be in
groups together so again this is
the period of development where
we learn how to be with other
humans and how to interact and
have that so I think it would
depend on the age of the child
and the that so I I would I
can't I would not think that
would count as a danger to
others on one do they bite a
child.
It's typical in early childhood
settings where you that's again
where you're working to develop
the child and their social and
emotional skills and
competencies so.
So Mister chair and secretary
who makes that call whether
the bite is significant enough
for not significant enough for
hitting or striking a child it's
not clear to me and who makes
that call Senator Kernan the
director the administrator would
make that call and they would
report it so at the end of the
year they would say this was a
suspension for three days it was
a result of a child biting
another child so I think that's
the idea behind the reporting is
that we can understand better
and again in the early childhood
through second grade what are
the situations that are
resulting in out of school
suspensions in more detail so it
would be the administrator in
that building who would decide
it was it Representative rose to
that level so Mister Mr chair
and and secretary at the end of
the day when those reports are
ours collected and reviewed by
us and the department of early
childhood who.
Who this looks at the data and
decides whether that was an
appropriate call.
Mr chair Senator Kernan the
public education department
would receive that reports from
that K. one two and early
childhood would receive the
reports of up up through pre K.
that's our purview and I would
say that we that is the
administrators call and that's
why getting the data and
understanding it helps us
problem solve together and
develop strategies and
clarification there be a
consequence Mr chair.
If you determine that the end of
the day.
They're not no Mr chair Senator
Kernan there are no consequences
in in the bill if it is a.
A limitation and reporting.
So Mister chair if if student
hasn't in.
School suspension.
What are the guidelines and
safety mechanisms for that child
to be somewhere under the
watchful life cell one how do
you vision that in school
suspension what do they do now
in the child care centers in
particularly you have a three
year old that is miss behaving
creating a problem for other
students may be biting them or
hitting them and so you're going
to you're going to keep that
child away from their classroom
and put them somewhere who who's
responsible for keeping an eye
on that child during that time
Mr chair Senator Kernan the
Center director that's in our
regulations they're responsible
for the overall health and well
being of children along with
their educators but the director
of that center would be
responsible for that watching
them and keep it and with that
Mr chair Senator Kernan for
deciding how that was going to
be handled there would be the
responsible party and I'm not
trying to be difficult I just
think the details are important
I mean if you're going to tell
center director that you cannot
send a child home for miss
behavior and harming other kids.
You have to keep them at school
someone's gonna have to watch
that child and so when you have
us on that child to have eyes on
the other twenty fifteen that
are in the classroom I just I'm
not quite sure why we need to be
it where is the problem I mean
is head start says they don't do
it we've had policymakers say
that childcare associations
don't recommend it have had
where's the data that says we
have a problem we're going to
collect data so this we don't
have enough data so where is the
data coming from that has
created the need for this bill.
Senator
Mr chair Senator Kernan that
you're exactly right we don't
have the data and so we don't
know the prevalence of the
situation in our six weeks up
till they get to kindergarten
PED does collect data in the
kindergarten through second
grade and as secretary Padilla
shared that was over nine
hundred children in just one
year of that word is suspended
so the bill does not limit out
out of in school suspension it's
it just defines what a child can
be suspended for and that it
limited to three days we want
our children in the learning
environments that's where
they're benefiting from their
social emotional their cognitive
their overall health and
development so we the national
research has shown that children
expressly in childcare pre
school are expelled as senator
pope shared at a much higher
level than even earlier later
grades like K. one two so we
already know we have nine
hundred.
then we can extract from
national research that we
probably do have an issue in our
child care facilities we just
don't know because we've never
asked for them to report it so
Mister chair it makes sense to
me that maybe the part of the
bill you have to start with this
section four and collect data
and then come back next year if
there is a problem then we
address it but when you look at
the percentages get nine hundred
students out of how many
students in that PED a
particularly great I mean are we
talking about kindergarten
through second that nine hundred
and so when you look at the
population of the school and the
data in percentages of rules
children that are of the people
of Mexico students of color what
what the hell off is that
percentage in in out of need to
know that now but I I'm I'm just
curious if if we have a major
problem with this and I'm gonna
be real honest with you the idea
of safety in the schools it goes
both ways me we've got kiddos in
in and I'll just tell you right
now and I've got permission for
my daughter to talk about this
that my grandchild was suspended
actually expelled from her pre
K. school.
And probably was the best thing
that ever happened she was in a
profit pre K. and it forced her
mother to take her somewhere
where she could begin to get the
services you need needed we
don't have services and I've
told Mr brands I was gonna kind
of hammer on anvil you know you
go into the public schools and
and you have the situations in
kindergarten and first grade
where there are absolutely
reasons for that behavior asus
and yet district after district
school after school they will
not do the testing that they
need to do to find out what the
problem is that wait till thirty
fourth grade and then it's too
late so you know I don't know
that that it's a suspension that
causes the problem or the
expulsion the problem is we're
not addressing.
The training that needs to occur
you're going to you're going to
make childcare centers and
schools did keep the kid there
and do all but you're we're not
doing anything to promote aces
in training for a system Senator
souls I tell my school district
health report it is with these
teachers to recognize that and
do something about in there
we're not doing it for not
providing the training to take
care of these kids I don't think
it's about being might my
granddaughter did not why she
had to go to a new school that
has been impacted heard all she
went to new school.
That didn't even help wasn't
into she got to the right public
school where it made a
difference because that public
school address the issues.
And so this is not about whether
you spend a child in the school
or outside the school this is
about.
Identifying children that need
help providing the training to
teachers to be able to do that
we're not doing that even in
this bill.
And so I'm conflicted because I
want children to be safe in the
other kids in my grand child's
class were not safe and she was
biting inviting inviting in its
that's not safe for those what
about those bonds they come to
school they find out that their
child has been assaulted
basically.
And we're not doing anything to
protect those kids so I'm really
not sure what to do about this
bill because I don't think it
really solves the problem you're
going to collect data you're
going to tell administrators
what to do step by step you know
nobody wants the trial suspended
or expelled.
But that really doesn't solve
the problem so I'm gonna listen
to the debate I I'm not
convinced this is the answer
Save I have some more questions
were at a time I hope we have an
opportunity to continue to look
at this bill because I don't
think it's ready and I would
love to sit down with you and
let's talk about what really
works you probably have the
votes stigma that on and that's
fine but
you know I I I don't know if
we're really helping kids it
some point I tell my daughter
this all the time she's
listening.
The child has to be accountable
at some point to I mean they
they serve really serious
situations and and I I just
really would like to sit and
talk more about it
I understand the intent that I
don't know that this really soft
problem thank you thank you
questions thank you senator and
and again we're getting short on
time and so we're gonna shut it
down at five till eleven so my
guess because I've got some
questions as well that we
probably are going to pick up
with this on Monday morning
and so just kind of let people
know and people watching that
yeah we are not going to be
taking a vote on this at this
time that also may allow for
some additional conversations
between now and then if there
are concerns that can get worked
out prior to us taking a vote so
there might just this and we
will shut down at five to also
be about six or seven minutes
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator pope's secretary
generally the this out that that
I know the lighting around stuff
to think about between on Monday
one is up on page one that the
the what's key is the definition
of enrolling entity.
As you have a publicly funded
community based.
Pre K. program and then down
online twenty five you have a or
you know a licensed child care
facility paid for by the child
care assistance program is
doesn't that what's the
distinction isn't that a
publicly funded.
Committee based pre K. program
in other words is there a
distinction is that need to be
there
also
We are on the exception to the
rule on page three says nothing
in this section shall prevent
out and rolling into the on on
line fourteen through sixteen on
page three Mr chairman nothing
in this section shall prevented
rolling up the from expelling
spending a student who has been
found to have violated the law
as it relates to of deadly
weapons so what you may want to
say is so it says nothing in
this section shall prevent but
then you jump to page two lines
five through eight and it
prevents it not gonna it's not
gonna prevented in its entirety
but but I would suggest to speak
to the bill drafters to see if
you can say online eight shall
not be expelled from the ruling
entity in less they violate
section thirty dot one dot two
point one.
And then also with regards to
collecting data
the Mr chairman Sir pope you
mentioned the data which was
very persuasive to me I'm not
sure where you got the data
we're not collecting that data
but I would suggest that we
start collecting data now.
Is what you're doing is in this
bill you want to collect data
after the bill I don't see why
we can't start collecting data
now
now meaning July first twenty
twenty three
start collecting data folks are
moving in that direction and
then the following July the law
kicks in thank you Mr.
Thank you others.
I have a couple and just kind of
some quick comments because yeah
that that we might be dress and
I'd certainly be happy to to
check with you between now and
then
I guess one of the first
questions of the nine hundred
suspensions over the last year
what were those for what kinds
of things.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't have that
information in front of me now
but that's something that we
could get to you and I think
that's very important I've had
many years is an elementary
principal and I've been trying
to rack my brain whether I've
suspended any tender through
second graders and I don't
recall that I did we did expel a
third grader who brought a
loaded gun to school and he and
his friends out on the
playground we're showing
everybody and that was the worst
two weeks of my life as a
principal because there were
fears concerns because it was
students of color and whether
this was suspending them and all
of those kinds of things I
believe we have about cohorts of
about twenty thousand each grade
level is that right.
Mr chair actually let me we
think or do you have those I
think it's okay Groginsky isn't
about twenty one or twenty two
thousand births in each year in
New Mexico so just under the
extrapolating up that's correct
Mr cohorts maybe somewhere
around twenty thousand students
at sixty thousand and with nine
hundred that's a suspension rate
of about one point five percent
it sounds really awful when you
say nine hundred one point five
percent is your of elementary
school of three hundred students
are so.
Only half of them are going to
be in those early grades that's
one child a year.
That's not very many at when you
take a look at it in that
direction and I'm really curious
as to what for it says in
section three.
That the suspension only if it's
been determined by the enrollee
entity that the student has
willfully exempted.
I'm not sure that any child is
getting suspended that hasn't
had the support or the the
principal or others looking at
that this was an appropriate
reason for suspension and so I'm
not sure what problem we're
trying to solve when it's a
relatively low number and it
already the principal or the
person in charge is determined
this is a problem at least where
we've got data already and I
understand we don't have data
prior to the K. twelve schools.
The the other big concern that I
have is this is almost looking
at the suspension is being the
problem where the suspension is
the symptom of the bigger
problem.
And we don't have well.
Where I'm coming from that is.
The child is in acting out
because of the school there are
underlying things within society
and community and when we talk
about this bill doesn't talk
about ensuring that the services
are available to help the
parents in the family deal with
the underlying problem of yeah
we can can indicate you have not
suspending.
Our future trajectory but we
have to have the counselors we
have to have payment services
and those are under
Under resource in every
community I know the data
specifically for Dona ana county
and in almost every one of the
the ten types of sectors there
are huge gaps in our society of
having those sources resources
available and if we're going to
be doing this where they can
stay in school or at the center
there have to be resources for
the parents for the children for
the the the kids in order to do
all of that not just keep them
there without the resources and
and the Senator Kernan is point
of training in trauma informed
but then also the social work
resources to to prevent the
problem upstream rather than
just deal with the symptom later
on
I'll get off my soapbox right
now.
But then we had many
conversations about some of
these in there some chicken in a
did you have to know what the
problem is in order to provide
the services but if you've got a
problem the services have to be
available and.
We've got a lot of build out
still Mr chair back to the the
the bills that with the bill is
not seeing what right now in
public schools you can suspend
up to ten days so this is a
thing that's limiting it to
three days and the idea that
you're right that nine hundred
may not be a lot but for those
nine hundred families we're
worried about the ripple effect
and for that student who may
disengage and have the negative
for performance those become
people in our communities those
are people in our communities
and so this bill is meant we
have the supports we have our
input early childhood mental
health consultation we have
trauma informed professional
development CYFD is doing and
much a great job rolling that
out across so this was meant to
limit suspensions that three
days it's already suspensions or
something so they're still out
it's not the solution to the
problem it is what you and
Senator Kernan are talking about
the supports in communities so
the coalition's that we funded
all the work we're doing to
better coordinate all the
services families and children
need and educators need in the
classroom that and certainly we
are working on building about
they're not all available now in
all situations a particularly
not in our smaller did
communities and and school
districts where there is almost
no family support services
available in many cases so.
Lots of work to do in many
realms you know thank you for
your department and all the
things you're working on because
there's a huge number of balls
you got there to try to get all
of these things done like
yesterday so thank you Mr with
that we are going to close down
for today we will be back on
this topic on Monday with the
hopefully additional discussions
between now and then thank you
everybody who participated today
and everyone online the bills
that were not heard today will
get rolled over to Monday and
I'm anticipating we may start
moving to eight thirty on
Wednesday just to keep up with
the backlog as of bills are
gonna start coming over from the
house as well we probably are
here our first house bill on
Monday to depending on how
