require of course for units and
social science that would one
half unit in ethnic studies and
it is it what is essentially
does also to is it reduces the
elective requirements to seven
units
these changes are for the high
school would be applicable for
its ninth grade entering in the
school year to twenty twenty
three to twenty twenty four
and of course is a mention it
does create the ethnic studies
council that again will
identifying study and develop
the curriculum the public
schools Mr chairman members of
the committee we don't have to
go back to the drawing board
member looking for curricula
with regards to ethnic studies
there are many examples that are
currently being used here in our
state I know Albuquerque public
schools is utilizing
and several of our high schools
and I know there are some other
school districts here in our
state that are already beginning
this implementation so we don't
have to go back to the drawing
board but it's an opportunity
with the council to put things
together and it look as to
When I call in in looking at New
Mexico's history looking at the
diversity within our state so
that we can get a real good
picture as to who and what makes
us B. here as New Mexicans so
with that Mr Chairman I will
yield of course to my co sponsor
house co sponsor Representative
Cavaleiro but I also Mr chairman
members of the committee have
for expert witnesses after other
representative speaks who would
also like to say a few words if
if that would be fun.
Okay with the schedule but if I
could Mr chairman
Representative at Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator majority whip I
appreciate being here I just
briefly and I'm one of the
I'm gonna date myself here but
I'm one of the original founders
that you gonna say to come on to
kind of studies we head back in
the sixties and when we
introduce dungeon gonna studies
back in the sixties it was in
keeping in mind that our
objective was to create
social movements of reform in
order to be able to uplift our
communities and so.
This bill Mr chair members of
the committee
this how we envisioned ethnic
studies as part of the whole
restorative justice education
which we believe David and we
believe now that it's key to
finding racial inequities
institutional racism and we also
know that culturally relevant
and community center education
Mr chair members of the
committee are critically
important to uplifting our
communities that have been
subject.
To histories of exclusionary
structures so.
In in closing I want to just
account real quickly I teach the
introduction to to come say you
guys gonna studies at UNM.
Countless times Mr chair I've
been told by those students had
we known about our culture had
we known about our history it
would have changed the
organizations we chose to
participate in high school it
would have changed our
professional career path it
would have changed the decisions
we made in terms of going to
higher education or trade
schools it would have made a big
difference Mr chair they said if
we had known that.
It was about helping our
communities move ahead that
would have made a huge
difference in their lives and
and what what they chose as
their pathways in the future so
I can't stress enough Mr chair
members of the committee how
important it is for us to look
at the current educational
structures that we have so that
we can.
Change them and attempt to
somehow undo what happened in
the past and create real
systemic and institutional
change so thank you for giving
me these few minutes thank you
Sanchez sponsor the Senator
Lopez thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative and Mr
chairman members of the
committee I will now yield to a
doctor ho said Louise not Hebbe
is an assistant professor in
Chicano Chicana studies at the
university of New Mexico yes
talk ethnic studies also in Long
Beach unified school district
nocturnal Heda.
Thank you Senator Lopez good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee
I'm here in support of this bill
because it provides
institutional framework for
statewide implementation of
ethnic studies in K. to twelve
schools in addition the bill
will establish a statewide
ethnic studies council I also in
here supporting the bill because
of my understanding of the
positive effects of ethnic
studies on student outcomes in
the K. twelve system programs
like these can contribute to
raising graduation rates among
students of color for instance
in Tucson Arizona before the
program was terminated students
participating in the Mexican
American studies program
demonstrated a ninety three
percent high school graduation
rate the program consisted
predominantly of students of
color its largest ethnic group
was that the non I which
nationwide has historically had
some of the lowest graduation
rates moreover ethnic studies
programs encourage higher
college enrollment for
historically underrepresented
students the CCS program out of
your name is already inspiring
New Mexico high school and
community college students to
seek a higher education as such
implementation of ethnic studies
can help raise graduation and
college enrollment rates in New
Mexico also education scholars
have demonstrated the positive
impact of culturally relevant
teaching on the success of
diverse student populations
throughout the United States
this work stems from examples
established by ethnic studies
scholars stating back to the
civil rights era within the with
ethnic studies young New
Mexicans would be better able to
as you navigate puts it use
cultural knowledge prior
experiences frames of reference
and performance thousand
ethnically diverse students to
make learning more relevant and
effective.
In a state like New Mexico where
the population has remained
ethnically diverse since early
foundations of the state the
statewide implementation of
ethnic studies research pedagogy
and curriculum K. through twelve
schools could help position the
state as a national model ready
for the twenty first and twenty
second century's where
ethnically diverse populations
will be the norm in the entire
United States as such with the
input of an ethnic studies
council the New Mexico public
education department can develop
a model that best prepares young
New Mexicans to critically
understand the past present and
future significance of
ethnically diverse populations
thank you for your time this
morning.
I thank you doctor not had a
next Mr chairman members of the
committee we have doctor Timothy
Nelson he's a historian of
graduated from both of state
NMSC when you tap or he taught
and it by students was a racial
justice director at the YWCA el
Paso the north the region his
work addresses foundational
issues in African American US US
west borderlands African
diasporas and New Mexico history
through his in depth research on
black amendment which challenges
the tri cultural narratives of
New Mexico Dr Nelson place hi
thank you for having me I'm and
independence to historian
educator and New Mexico resident
for over twenty years the lack
of a comprehensive curriculum
and instruction feeds the
violence of on going
intellectual genocide.
I continue to silence the
liberating voices to stop the
perpetual racialization taking
place in these borderlands.
Most vicious our children are
subjected to intellectual
displacement erasure an over
simplification of their humanity
at the next studies will provide
the necessary space and time for
students to explore their
ontological selves here's a
warning.
The lack of ethnic studies is
currently doing serious damage
avoid of knowledge has been
replaced by poor representations
of culture and stereotypes a
quick survey of Santa Fe public
schools social studies textbooks
reveals the deliberate silence
if not for altruistic reasons.
Consider.
Is the Netflix and all of the
other major companies that are
in dire need of new content.
Without ethnic studies New
Mexico will lose the soul that
makes it profitable in the
intellectual economy aside from
the perpetual devaluing of
ethnic people.
With oil and gas can no longer
pay the bills in New Mexico
troll production and value will
also be reduced to cheap
imitations of itself.
Ethnic studies is an investment
in the new economy that is
revolutionizing this digital age
Yazzie Martinez.
Begin a conversation about
career and college readiness as
we have seen with the infection
of our public with conspiracy
theories we also have to prepare
our children for world filled
with alternative facts that may
come from elected leaders sadly
the books curriculum instruction
supports continued mental
slavery thank you for your time.
Thank you doctor Nelson next I
have Mike a bit cine.
She is the name of from monument
valley Utah she received her BA
degree and her master's degree
in native American studies from
UNM as part of the first cohort
for the native American studies
master program she teaches
indigenous history at the native
American Community Academy which
we all know it's not gonna.
Mistassini.
Thank you good morning.
Process and Education Committee.
I am sharing the UNM native
American studies endorsement.
I have years of teaching
experience and local indigenous
studies global indigenous
studies social stresses academic
writing social studies.
We have seen the
transformational effects of
ethnic studies courses and
content ethnic studies directly
correlates to positive student
outcomes ethnic studies inspire
and challenge the minds of
students and also in rich
traditional school subjects
through unique pedagogies that
draw in students social and
cultural capital ethnic studies
approach develops necessary
critical and civic engagement
that benefits local and wider
communities using a strengths
based approach is necessary in
public education yes they help
recover and nourish the
unilateral education this
addressed our rich diverse New
Mexico communities extend he's
reinvented students back into
local communities in ways that
restore local ways of learning
transmission of knowledge and
sense of belonging and extend
his classes students and their
communities are viewed as
sources of knowledge.
In our local schools colleges
and universities.
They are in effect the
foundation for greater learning
in addition ethnic city teachers
collaborate with local community
and stakeholders to collectively
support student learning and
development.
And finally ethnic studies
curriculum and programming is
rooted in real world issues
experiences and problem solving
students will have a
relationship with New Mexico and
many feel they belong to the
places where and and people are
learning from there for we'll
come back you always help our
communities thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Tunney.
Next Mr chairman we also have
Dr Mathew Martinez he's a former
associate professor of pueblo
Indian studies at northern New
Mexico college and lieutenant
governor at okay we came on his
received his PhD in American
studies from university of
Minnesota a doctor Martinez.
Mr chair of Senator members of
the committee of things one of
the US.
This legislation is timely.
New Mexico is positioned to be a
model for statewide ethnic
studies instruction.
Considering the tumultuous times
of current and past elected
leadership.
A long national protests and
movements topping of statues I
miss global pandemic.
Communities are engaging and
really struggling with the
language to understand current
affairs.
The field of ethnic studies
lends itself to understanding
complex issues and serves that
tool in our toolbox to build
awareness and consciousness for
New Mexico students who to will
one day serve as local national
leaders and parents.
Mexico is a place that already
has a logical textbook to draw
upon indigenous knowledge
systems and geopolitical systems
to inform students about issues
ranging from climate change to
storable relations of bass trade
networks across the Americas.
We already have the stories
reflected in art culture
politics that uniquely define
who we are as a state.
Adding an ethnic studies
component would not be seen as
an academic bird and but
contrary as a way to honor the
diversity of our state.
Most recently as an example what
better way to have a a unit
lesson plan on debt Holland as
an indigenous person coming from
a veteran family and a woman and
national leadership.
That is ethnic studies at the
court.
Our students need material that
reflects who they are and what
they will become.
Many K. twelve teachers referred
to this model as windows in
mir's.
Ethnic studies is that more to
see yourself in classroom
curriculum and as a window to
see out in the world.
We can point to statistics that
student drop outs often do not
see themselves.
Or relevance and school
curriculum.
Ethnic studies is that one
solution to student engagement
and making schools relevant.
Personally I'm excited about SB
two ten because I have a six
greater a son who will this
directly affect him as he moves
forward to to middle school and
high school.
What he like many young boys and
girls continue to observe
current events and are seeking
important to understand an
underpass complex issues and
understandings.
As an educator formal tribal
leader and parent I strongly
support the passage SB to ten.
Thank you for your time because
no one.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
I just wanted to again notify
the committee I want to
apologize to Senator Lopez and
and Representative were about
coming at I need to join the
rules committee for a
confirmation for the secretary
of the department of information
technology I will return as
quickly as possible thank you
Senator Lopez and Senator Mr
representative about coming in.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Claudia and Mr
Chairman that is of the end of
our FY expert witnesses for this
morning.
Right for questions.
All right so four of the folks
in the storeroom and the folks
on the webcast we are on Senate
bill to ten make studies
education we will now move
forward of public comment but
just a reminder public comment
are you will have two minutes to
speak for public comment.
so more Calif we can start with
anyone who is in opposition to
this bill.
Good morning at this time I
don't have anyone listed as
opposition market would have
been a little trouble hearing
you.
One moment.
Might be a little bit on my end
but you can try again I'm sorry.
I think you're not sounds like
you're on you right now.
And I still sounding very quiet
to bills your call I can hear
you now you you can hear me now
okay right.
we did not have anyone signed up
to propose Senate Bill to ten
are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition please go ahead and
raise your hand at this time.
Mr cheese did you want to speak
in opposition.
You need.
Good morning can you hear me now
yes ma'am thank you apologize
that.
senators
This technical aspect is that is
a challenging I am the linear
Taecyeon the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico school board
association and those Mexico
school board association
maintains a membership of eighty
nine school districts throughout
the state of New Mexico with
four hundred fifty strong school
board members and it's a
pleasure for us to be here today
and voice our support for this
piece of legislation New Mexico
recognizes the value and
importance of provided our
students with multiple
perspectives to build critical
thinking skills through the
examination of social at the
cultural and gender based
historical experiences New
Mexico scored Association also
supports legislation that funds
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum and
materials that will allow our
students to gauge to engage in
the work necessary to address
education should disparities
among our racial groups we also
support allowing districts to
develop at the next studies
curriculums which would satisfy
social studies credit
requirements.
We support this legislation and
we think the sponsor for making
it fourth and Mr chairman
members of the committee on a
personal note I would just like
to add as a child I attended a
public elementary school in
northern New Mexico that forbade
us to speak Spanish little
Spanish speaking students on the
playground and punish those that
did so Mr chairman I have so
longstanding memories of that
time kind of environment and I
believe it is critical that we
embrace the ethnic background of
all and thank you Mr chairman
for allowing me to speak.
Thank you Mr teas are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition.
You could raise your hands using
the reactions there at the
bottom of the screen.
Okay we will now move on to
supporters first you here for
Mister Joseph Esposito.
Just.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and so Senator
Lopez thank you for bringing
this bill forward Albuquerque
public schools does stand in
full support of this bill we've
continued to build teachers
capacity is we have these
courses and half of our high
schools we want to expand these
programs and need support and
professionally developing
teachers who are interested in
teaching these courses as well
as developing pre service
teachers and postsecondary
institutions so I really
appreciate the Senator really
working on this over the next
few years she's been a champion
of this for several years and
that just are for all her life
but for several years of
practice bill for it and I just
want to thank you for this
morning.
Thank you very much we will now
hear from Mr Robert bait.
Yes Robert Beatty with Robert F.
Kennedy charter schools are
chairman and members of the
committee I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward at the studies is been a
long time are part of the arcade
curriculum are we're adding it
at the middle school next year
and we stand in full support of
this piece of legislation and
believe it should be adopted
statewide thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
doctor Irene Vasquez.
Dr Irene.
Hello I chairman hope and
members of the committee I stand
in support of SB two ten I am
chair of the Chicana and Chicano
studies department at UNM and
have twenty five years teaching
in offering ethnic studies
classes in high school community
college that sorry about that
and university contexts I am
also a member of the New Mexico
statewide ethnic studies council
a council made up of high school
and college educators from
Albuquerque public schools not
gonna and M. S. U. N. M. H. U.
at WMS you EMS you and you
amendment that was established
in twenty twenty and we stand
ready to participate in the in
the construction of a statewide
ethnic studies council thank
you.
Thank you doctor we will now
hear from doctor Jose Serrano
Nishihara my apologies if I
mispronounced your name.
I already gave my testimony
thank you okay no problem we
will now hear from Esther Garcia
Mr I don't know of these.
Miss Garcia.
Okay we will go ahead and move
on to Mr leroy status.
Hi everybody I I want to I thank
everybody for having me here I
want thanks stay in New Mexico
in the Education Committee as
well my name is the right size
I'm a doctoral student at the
university of New Mexico within
the school of education in
language literacy and
sociocultural studies.
I want to begin by defining what
ethnic studies is ethnic studies
is an interdisciplinary approach
to the humanities that takes
into account the multiple
perspectives that exam in real
life experiences with
relationship to race class and
gender ethnic studies up focus
towards understand the
historical socio cultural
political experiences in a
student's individual family
community state national and
global position already in the
process of student working
towards the completion of ethnic
studies curriculum students
develop critical thinking
strategies social emotional
growth and communication skills
that allow for the articulation
of the world in a way where
collaboration community
development and civic minded
mindedness informs their future
life and career pathways
for the more ethnic sizes not
only beneficial within the
students academic career it
provides the community with
future leadership in areas of
business social services
education government and
community stand billet
sustainability it creates space
where community of care and
relative making is at the
forefront of learning where
knowledge acquisition includes
the experiences of every person
in every community in New Mexico
and all perspectives are honored
again I'd like to thank the
community for the time having me
here.
Thank you very much.
We will now hear from Mr Gustavo
Garcia.
Great thank you good morning
members of the committee my name
is Gustavo Garcia I am a PED
student in the department of
Chicano and Chicana studies and
I also teach lower division in
upper division courses in the
department I strongly support SB
to expand because ethnic studies
provide students with the lenses
to diagnose the social political
cultural and economic challenges
of all people it shows students
and by extension our families
and communities that there are
other ways of relating to one
another one that does not
continue cycles of violence and
the humanization as made evident
over the last couple of weeks
with the events surrounding the
inauguration of the new
president the United States is
deeply divided and many many
people promise their existence
on the hate and disposition of
other people ethnic studies at
all levels provide students with
the opportunity to understand
the historical and contemporary
context that would otherwise be
unexamined and ignored I
strongly support the
institutionalizing and
continuous funding of ethnic
studies across all levels we
need new and creative ways to
tackle head on the social
problems of our society ethnic
studies like Chicano Chicana
studies and working on at the
last thirties native American
studies and African American
studies provides us with the
tools to transform local
national international and
global challenges ethnic studies
teaches us to actively and
critically participate in all
levels of society historically
analyze the history of the
United States in a national and
global context to center the
experiences and histories of
marginalized communities the
second offer creative and
comprehensive solutions to build
compassionate relationships with
everyone and more importantly to
see the humanity in everyone
especially those that have been
deemed as having less degrees of
humanity ethnic studies is one
of the many steps that our state
needs to take to ensure that we
are moving toward an equitable
present and future thank you.
Thank you Mr Garcia we will now
hear from Mr Gambino Noriega.
Thank you Markkula
a good morning chair and
distinguished members of the
Senate education finance
committee my name is gonna be no
not a gun I'm an educator in
Albuquerque and I PTA candidate
at U. N. M. college of New I
supported think studies Bill SB
to ten because it provides our
students with the much needed
curriculum and content which is
both culturally culturally
relevant and culturally
sustaining the ability to hear
their stories and narratives is
crucial to our students lives
and learning as the expert
witnesses stated ethnic studies
provides opportunities to
perform better academically as
well as meeting the twenty first
century skills like critical
thinking and others brought up
in various educational
legislation such as no child
left behind and race to the top
many of the courses provided
students with the dual credit
opportunities as well just PED
our core requirements and going
back to the educational reform
and stuff like that like those
are brought up but they're never
addressed and ethnic studies
offers the ability for those
needs to be met for our students
of color it is also important
because it provides students
with opportunities to learn how
to navigate the university and
community college system being
that they are dual credit
courses are offered in some of
those in in in light in the end
that right as well makes it
crucial for them to be able to
understand how to navigate those
systems and understand how they
play a role in them and that
they can achieve and access
a higher earning and so for
those reasons I totally support
this bill and I thank you all
for your time.
Thank you very much now we will
hear from Mr Froling.
Result call I apologize if I
mispronounce that.
Mr speaker morning Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is for our school and I'm a
PhD student in the language that
are scanned social studies in
the college of education at the
university of New Mexico and I
also support SB to ten making
ethnic studies as an integral
part of high school make sense
in the state of New Mexico as
our state is home to a diverse
student population and given the
growing diversity is especially
important that students learn
about the various racial and
ethnic groups in our state and
and they're sure components and
identity.
A research by Stanford
University so that studies
courses help high school
students increase their
educational outcomes attendance
and credits and researchers
found that students GPA improved
by one point four great points
attendance rose twenty one
percent points and class credits
earned increased by twenty
three.
And I also stand in support of
SB two ten so thank you.
Thank you very much we will now
hear from Mr Robert fresco.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak
today Robert froze still I teach
Mexican American studies as an
elective at highland high school
in Albuquerque is also dual
credit class three you went out
in addition I'm a PhD student
into government you go those
studies that you want to we
created and that the studies
program at highland high school
to address our high drop out
rate among Hispanic students in
the seven years we've had the
program the graduation rate for
students to take the class is
equal to or higher than the
state average of those the
demographic and essential part
of that success is due to the
collaboration with the to kind
of Chicano studies department
the department is probing to be
an invaluable.
Invaluable in their support for
my students to our collaboration
we've shared curriculum and
strategies and by students have
been able to participate in
conferences another college prep
activities the programs and
curriculum we created shared and
implemented have help students
achieve success in school and
become more engaged in our
community research has shown the
efficacy of ethnic studies
programs and the should be a
required part of a comprehensive
curriculum thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mister Chris falls on.
Mr chairman members the
committee on crystals on on the
register lobbyist for Los crucis
public schools we stand in full
support of this piece of
legislation we appreciate that
the sponsor brings that apt and
I'm not going to go into all the
reasons I think the previous
public comments clearly states
the the importance off what this
bill is
open the path to that and some
of us already have those
programs in the already
implementing that in our
community and our school
districts
We we have a few considerations
that we would like that Sanchez
to be aware office as this bills
proceeds through committees and
we this again supporting and
working together with the
Sanchez if need with any
feedback on that the first one
is that we would appreciate if
we could work on a special
appropriation to address the
need for professional
development off our coasts
district administrators
teachers and all local
communities are as you all know
Monday it's without
appropriation and like any
investment right it requires two
things time or funding one of
the other sometimes requires
both so we we again we support
this but we ask that the Sanchez
the consideration that and we
are here to work side by side in
making sure that this piece of
legislation moves through
committees and and and work on
that then that the second one
that I what we would like to
share it is the.
We would like to sponsor
consider out timeline I think
going to Tatian to ensure that
teachers have a solid
understanding studies and how to
effectively demand ethnic
studies thank you Mr chairman
and again we stand in support of
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you and now we will hear
from miss Erika robbers Erica.
This struggling with my mute
button.
Problem.
The morning Mr chair committee
members my name is Erica Rovers
and I'm here on behalf of New
Mexico first I'm speaking in
favor in support of Senate all
to time sponsored by senators
Lopez and rubelcaba you know I
New Mexico First convene a town
hall this summer made up of
hundreds of health care
providers administrators state
agencies and others to discuss
the state of our health care
system in our needs as a state a
theme that emerged throughout
our discussions was that
unfortunately standards of care
continue to be determined by
factors such as race culture
class language and other
demographics beyond our control
as such many New Mexicans are
calling for programs to grow
attract and retain a health
workforce that's culturally and
linguistically competent and
that can create culturally
responsive practices come out
culturally and linguistically
significant and appropriate
policies services and programs
that prioritize resiliency and
protect and promote promote of
factors throughout people's
lifespans ethnic studies would
support creating this culturally
competent workforce and improve
all services for all New
Mexicans by limiting racial and
other biases and promoting
healing from discrimination this
model can help create an
educated workforce that will go
on to build health literacy for
all populations using the
languages of different
communities and all
communications to meet people
right where they are and just on
a personal note as a former
Chicago high school civics
teacher with a master's in
social cultural foundations in
education I personally think the
difference it makes in the lives
of youth when their histories
and cultures are on in your in
the curriculum as such with the
backing of over four hundred
individuals from throughout the
state.
We had New Mexico first fully
support SB two time thank you
Senator Lopez and Roybal coming
into for bringing this critical
legislation forward.
The.
Thank you miss robbers are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill to tighten.
Mr Isaac almost did you want to
speak go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee I want to
first say this is an impromptu
speech I'm speaking on behalf of
another bill today but I feel
like it's my civic duty to be
speak on this bill as well I am
a senior editor school heritage
academy high school repping my
ethnic identity cities jacket
currently and I want to shout
out to Mr Metis miss Priscilla
Ramirez along with my peers for
teaching me culturally act
accurate history and I've always
felt white washed in my high
school and now I feel like
approach you got no and I'm
proud to admit that.
I feel like it be a disservice
to not pass this bill amongst
the youth because we are in
desperate need of this bill.
I just can't help but say I am
grateful to everyone here
fighting on behalf of this bill
and fighting on behalf of the
students.
It means a lot to me and it
means a lot to us to be able to
shed those tears among each
other and sent and bring those
bonding experience that we never
have before in such a class we
have read so much material
together.
And been able to share our own
experiences and how we can
relate to the material.
Again thank you for everyone
here Representative in this bill
today I truly appreciate that
and that's all I really have to
say thank you again really
appreciate it.
Thank you we will now hear from
miss Emma Jones miss Jones.
Good morning my name is Emma
Jones and I liked him up there
what also and had intentions of
speaking later on and in
different bill the decided to
speak up on this one I am a
member of them of the need for
education and also a mother and
myself I personally I at one
point in my life was a drop out
I was fortunate to get back into
school but ethnic studies and
learning about my identity and
my culture played a major role
in helping me to feel connected
and see myself in academia in a
way that I never really thought
before that's why stand in
support of this bill today thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Jones we will now
hear from Isabella Baker Mister
Baker.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee an inmate is the
Ella Baker and like others
before me I'm here for another
bill today but wanted to speak
up on this bill because it is
important to me
I and with youth voices in
action or via which is program
in Albuquerque that empowers
young people and teaches them
leadership in community
organizing skills as part of our
curriculum and what we teach
young people we like to place an
emphasis on ethnic studies and
personal identity and I believe
that this bill does both of
those things and so because of
the youth that I work with and
the community that I grew up and
I think this bill is super
important to the development of
our young people and I think in
support of it today and asked
that the members of the
committee do as well thank you.
Thank you miss.
We will now hear from Mary par
Sanchez.
The morning chairman hello
understand committee members my
name is merry par Sanchez and
I'm the president any in New
Mexico and a veteran middle
school social studies teacher
any a New Mexico stands in
support of Senate bill two ten I
would like to thank the sponsors
major with Lopez and
Representative Roybal at really
calling I don't serve reinforce
the bill.
This is what a sufficient
inclusive.
Equitable education looks like
we know that we must fund
programs that help students
connect with who they are and
who they are meant to be this
bill speaks to supporting the
students that attend New Mexico
schools.
Our students are uniquely gifted
with ethnic diversity and New
Mexico should be a national
leader in creating curriculum
and organic student teacher
developed assessment that honor
ethnic studies Senate Bill to
ten would be a right step to
fully re opening our schools
safely and quickly after the
pandemic with the much needed
emphasis on respecting and
valuing what our students bring
with them into our schools which
is the core to any a New
Mexico's foundational beliefs
thank you.
Thank you Mr personages are
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak in
support of Senate bill two ten.
This Julie been court go ahead.
Hello like many others here I
was going to speak on behalf of
another bill today but being it
black history month that you and
the black history month in
general I think that this is a
really exciting time for this
bill as well to the passenger
Committee I'm in high school I
received no education about
indigenous or black people aside
from that the perspective of
colonizers and white people I'm
just glad people aside from
slavery and civil rights
movement and there's a lot more
history that comes with it it
wasn't until college that I got
a full understanding of indeed
what happens with people that
all of even more about black
culture and this bill is
extremely important for going
forward and making sure we don't
repeat history making sure
people understand their cultural
identities and ethnic identities
so I urge you all support Senate
bill two ten thank you.
Thank you Julie we will now hear
from Lisa de L. Lisa and mark
Taylor yes Senator will be and
and this will be the last public
comment absolutely thank you.
I thank you good morning
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lisa deal
and I'm not turning with the New
Mexico Center online poverty the
member of the legal team for the
Ozzie plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit this New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty stands
in support of this bill this
legislation is consistent with
the Yazzie Martinez ruling which
calls for the full
implementation of the bilingual
multicultural Education Act the
Indian Education Act Hispanic
Education Act I had a prepared
other comments that I was going
to make but I will
actually leave it at that the
experiences that have been
related here today because I
doubt that there is anything
more persuasive or will be in
that I could possibly say we
urge the committee to pass this
legislation thank you.
Thank you and with that we
conclude public statements for
Senate bill two ten thank you
thank you mark Taylor we are on
Senate bill two ten ethnic
studies education I just wanted
to give the floor to the
majority whip if there were any
comments or statements you
wanted to make before we went to
welcome any questions.
Mr chairman I appreciate just
want to say thank you for those
who are here in support
appreciate your time and we will
stand for questions Mr chairman
thank you thank you so so I will
now turn it over to the
committee they have any
questions or comments Senate
Bill to to.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan you muted.
All right I'll start over Mr
chairman thank you and that that
that was a very impressive
presentation I have to
compliment all those to
students support of this
initiative and and I certainly
don't disagree with the need to
implement curriculum across the
board beginning in kindergarten
on this issue I think for us to
understand one another we have
to know one another we have to
add to the exposed to many
different cultures and
specifically in New Mexico we
are very for state so I do not
disagree at all with the
initiative I I think going back
to I think it was in two
thousand five or six I'm trying
to remember It Senator Lopez you
may remember when read more at
Representative more at I need
she added the high school
redesign in at that time we get
very extensive study into what
our students need to have in
order to graduate and those
graduation.
Requirements have been in place
for the most part throughout
that time since two thousand I
think it's fine with the
exception of.
Electives which at that time we
students had nine electives and
going forward it over the years
we've reduce that from nine to
seven and a half so that's where
they are now with regard to
electives I'm so I think you
know I I know that there was no
response from PED and I don't
know that if they're on it would
like to make Madam I do think
that the time has come and I
know that there initiatives
going on right now the house
with the chairman of the house
education to do pretty massive
change and and high school
requirements and I know that
that we're going to hear a bill
soon on financial literacy to
make that a requirement I think
there are a lot of initiatives
that are out there it is time to
do a total revamp of high school
graduation requirements and so
this bill is very timely but I
think it's a little too early
enlighten the I think what we
should do going forward yes
began over the interim next year
and you're very deep studying
black did in two thousand five
what's really necessary for our
students with regard to
graduation we also have to begin
to include the CTP effort we we
know that that needs to be part
of it financial literacy needs
to be part of it this obviously
needs to be part of it I have no
objection going forward to
making this part that
requirement.
I just think it needs to be up
to you overall rather than a
single sign low effort I think
it needs to to to be part of the
overall and.
To look at what we need to do
with regard graduation
requirements I don't know where
this bill goes next I don't I
don't know if it has an
appropriation
That that I do think that I I do
think that we need to really
take a deep look into the into
the big picture so
Is it possible now without this
piece of legislation legislation
for the public education
department
to begin identifying curriculum.
For kindergarten starting in
kindergarten going all the way
through.
How can school districts it
begin to incorporate that even
if this bill doesn't pass how
can they begin to incorporate
high quality curriculum at
beginning next year and I wonder
if the senator has any thoughts
on on who makes that
determination does it come from
the PD at today director school
districts to make that part of
their plan I'm not quite sure
how that works since those are
requirements for graduation K.
through eight how can that be
implemented with without this
bill so if the Senator could
answer that it would help me
understand how this process is
gonna work going forward.
First of all thank you Mr
chairman and senator I
appreciate and yes I remember
when representative we have when
we did do a of.
All of the overhaul of our high
school requirements of back in
the day and it is time that we
do update and change because of
you know.
You can stay static in what we
do in our education system we
have to continue as
the students had mentioned is
that we have to grow with the
needs in our communities.
And
what I like to say it Mr
chairman is that I think had
could do this anytime I I don't
think any direction for us but
there has been no movement over
many many years especially when
we're talking about diversity
the issues that are brought
forward in in the presentations
from the public supporters with
regards to ethnic studies and
what this bill is attempting to
do
should it pass of course through
both chambers etcetera is
putting together a council we've
talked about this for so long
we're gonna do this we should do
this but nothing has come to
fruition this press together the
council and gives them two years
in which to put together the
plan how we're going to do the
curricula you know K. through
twelve and there are many
experts in our communities that
can work with that but if you
notice also in the council it
does include higher education
which of course is where we
train the teachers
Mr is it their teachers are are
critical to this also is to help
the inclusion is that how we
train teachers over in the
colleges of education what could
you know credentials they bring
with them and then of course at
the school level given that the
membership does include.
Sorry
it does include the department
of higher ed institutions as
well as working even with our
own committee the LCS season
that we're included making sure
that we have this conversation
because it the longer we wait
you know and I'm super I hope
depend would come with some
suggestions at some point also
but
You for the curricular between
K. through eight again that.
The direction can be given of
course what we have in statute
but it can also come I believe
with some suggestions as to how
this could be done but when
we're looking at a statewide
endeavor I believe with this
council they can begin to put
the plan in place so that when
we start the school year as
mentioned in the bill we can
have a unified approach as to
how we're doing this across the
board.
Thank you very much and and up
Mr chair and senator and I would
not be opposed to the
establishment of the council to
work along with the LA yes the
public get Department in in
we're talking about a two year
time frame there I think the
problem I have is trying to make
a requirement with regard to
this without looking at all
requirements we know we're going
to hear from financial literacy
we're gonna hear from there are
some decisions that need to be
made with regard to altitude
it's a big package that I could
I could support going ahead with
every part of this legislation I
just don't want to put in
statute that we are going to.
Make that a requirement to which
looked at everything across the
board and and make it a more
Collaborative effort to bring
all of these issues together and
and it forward so I don't know
if you have any consideration to
maybe postpone.
The part about making it a
requirement without a deeper
study to make sure that that we
do it correctly and so that
would be my only concern the
council I think is the right
place to start to include
everybody to begin the study
that jumping ahead to the
requirement at this point I
think for me it's just a little
France that I certainly
appreciated all the support you
gonna
very pleased to hear that and I
don't disagree that this is the
direction we need to go that's
all I have thank you.
And Senator Kernan you mentioned
someone from PED I think Mr
center from PED would like to
recognize which like to hear
from them.
Thank you Mr Mr center.
Thank you Mr chair of members of
the committee Senator Kernan and
Senator Lopez as well thanks for
recognizing that we need to be
part of this work of the the
department has of the last year
so started a to look at our
social studies standards for
that for the entire state I'm
not personally involved in that
effort I can certainly follow up
with more details but I think
there is a recognition that the
that the standards for some
social studies for K. twelve do
need to you need to be looked at
make sure that they're inclusive
and that they include culturally
and linguistically relevant
materials resources training for
teachers I believe maybe maybe
somebody on the call today on
the meeting in meeting today it
was part of that process but I
just want to clarify that we
have been.
Actively thinking about this and
and working toward re revamping
those standards to make sure
that they are
Relevant and appropriate.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank you John.
All right next we have Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Lopez for bringing this
bill forward
my main question was just
answered but I also want to
commend you for bringing the
bill forward I think this is
very very appropriate and will
go a long way to helping the
state in multiple areas.
Early as the students will into
their future and our into
understanding their culture and
the pride in their culture so
thank you very much for bringing
four thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Hickey now on
to chairman souls.
Thank you Mr chairman and first
I apologize I was over at the
New Mexico school board
association meeting this morning
and addressing them and so I
apologize if anything I ask was
already covered and just up I'm
sorry that I missed the public
input and and the other
presentation get that I have a
couple questions and some very
similar to to Senator Kernan
concerns about what we're doing
with with all of it but first if
we were to implement this who
would be certified to teach this
class what kind of credential
certification with with that
require.
Mr Chairman.
Senator souls are L. Mr
Chairman.
guess what I wish I could just
be called bill what I'm up here
but.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that is what I'm
hoping that course the council
will be able to come up with
just the electors to how you do
the implementation of the
curricula which is why the the
council including higher ed
because there is training that
has to happen you can't just
have somebody that comes in and
says oh I can change I can teach
this you do have to have some
training and I know the colleges
of a cation and other
departments at the different
universities of course are also
talking about this Dr buscas
thirty is part of the council
and I know you are not here for
that but she mentioned the
council that does include all of
our higher ed institutions as to
how they're moving forward with
ethnic studies so I know that
they're already planning their
moving forward in this is to how
to train it over for those who
have an interest and are we
willing to teach in this area
with the expertise needed so
that again Mr chairman that's
what I'm hoping that this
council will continue to move
forward is it to your council
that will put some ideas forward
and
that that's the intent thank
you.
And and thank you Mr chairman
and senator this is gonna be a
requirement for every school you
know and so clear out in Maxwell
or
Doro go any of the other little
schools they have to have
somebody who's going to be
trying to teach this there are
thousands and thousands and
thousands of high school
teachers and how are we going to
get them the appropriate
training are they going to be
required to go to summer
programs at universities
certainly it's not going to be a
problem in Albuquerque Los
crucis the court I mean we've
got universities right there
close where it's much easier but
for some of the outlying
districts to have their first
you can be and how would that
work if we put this requirement
in.
Mr chairman again that's the
purpose of the council I know
there are many experts in our
community who already I think
have some plans that can be
brought forward to share as to
how we do the professional
development in fact the
gentleman who is representing
Los crucis public schools also
mentioned about looking as to
how we put funding in with
regards to of funding for
professional development looking
at the timeline but again that's
all part of what the council
should be doing as they look as
to how to implement and you work
with the curriculum as it's
implemented a two years is
sufficient time there's a lot of
people out there who've done
work now it's just about
coalescing and you know Mr
Chairman right now we're using
this venue
and you know for virtual and I
know that's an opportunity that
I think will continue to develop
as to how we can provide
professional development in many
of our school districts here in
the state especially rural New
Mexico who don't have can't just
drive over to northern or they
can't drive to eastern or other
places in our state to.
Mr chair and senator I certainly
understand as far as the betting
ethnic studies within all of the
curriculum
but we're also talking about a
specific class which means you
have to have a teacher dedicated
to that that has a curriculum
that is qualified whatever that
the whether it's a social
studies teacher as additional
training or whether there's a
particular endorsement for
ethnic studies I'm not sure how
that's going to look again I
just worry when it's required
across every district in every
high school is where we gonna
have the qualified staff are we
going to give waivers red
districts says it can't get
somebody to teach better to beat
those criteria credentials those
are all practical pieces on how
do you go about.
All of this
With our new teachers coming up
certainly.
But let me back up a little bit
I'm gonna be chairing the LFC
the summer one of the things
that I want to do is and I think
it's very important because we
also have some bills coming over
from the house that at a half
credit of financial literacy
that change the credits for high
school graduation year there of
what we've got is yeah what
agenda out of power that's about
all over because we just added a
piece here we taking something
out there and it's unstable.
Is as part of of one the main
initiatives of the LFC over the
summer is to take a kind of
blank slate look at high school
graduation requirements and then
start putting in what do we want
it to look like what should it
look like it kind of doing a
total revamp of all of those are
credits with the understanding
of what's required to get it
universities are there some
things that are non negotiable
because other outside things
are.
And I think it I mean I think
you mentioned it it's time we do
that it has been done in a while
and what we've got is a
piecemeal approach to everything
and so that certainly is
something that I'm going to push
as the LFC chair is one of our
main initiatives over the summer
so yeah I'm I wonder if we would
all of these things in as
requirements.
You know that we're likely to to
change it revamp it before they
would take place in in two years
I do have one very specific
question on page seventeen.
And up in section be about wind
for Representative talks about
the council.
And it says the secretary public
yet shall appoint the members of
the ethnic studies council which
may include representatives from
the following.
Does that have to so the
secretary could appoint a
council of himself and one
person in Pat and beat the
requirements.
Am I missing that.
Mr Chairman if you'd like to
change it to shell I am very
open to that.
If your bill Senator I'd I'd I
don't want to pull up with some
of our other members you all the
time but
I when I read that I think that
was probably an oversight in
language that you didn't really
mean that yeah we could point to
everyone but it could come from
this group of people with the
rather extensive list of people
and you want to include one
person from each of those groups
or those are the ones you can
choose from or how many total
people with what the word says
may include it's kind of
completely up to his discretion
what that council's gonna look
like.
Mr Chairman you know what we
were looking at is in the
secretary shall appoint from
this list Ste we could put maybe
How could I say it may include
or shall include but not be
limited to just so that there's
an opportunity if there's a few
others that maybe the department
would like to include on this
Council also.
We're just trying to at least
give some leeway to the
secretary for what to you would
like to do.
This Mr chair if I may.
Representative.
This represents you may thank
you I am and I think that
I I look at that and you know I
think the flexibility is very
appropriate and I think the
inference when you use language
such as may and then you turn
around and you list suggested
selections of the may I I think
that offers the flexibility to
either go from that list or add
to it that's the other side of
this is that there may be some
that we may not have been able
to list because of those
processes that you just
mentioned on chair souls that
you know this is an evolving
studies so to speak it's
evolving we're looking at the
and Senator Kernan also mention
we're looking at the entire
system system and so this gives
flexibility so I I would I would
hope we keep the NMAA and
perhaps just be open to
revealing any additional
Bodies that they may consider if
you say shall I think it just
sort of changes the nature of
what we're wanting to make
statutory and I'm not you know I
I I always like to from my
perspective given that on there
the fact that we have an
administrator on that that will
have that.
not only option but we'll have
that professional
insight and oversight to be able
to do you know select an act so
that's my my in input.
Mr Chairman representative and
senator you know as we all know
what your words matter out and
that's not what it says it says
it's highly up to the discretion
of the secretary of to choose
from that list and quite frankly
include meetings and any others
the the if include is an
expensive apartment in legal
types of things and so it's not
limited to that by the word
include but when it says may
indeed after it can be anyone as
big or small out of that group
as he chooses and anything like
that and so you know I.
That yeah that work needs to be
changed if in fact you want to
have someone from each of those
different pieces on there are
putting together a group like
that is add some administrative
costs to our schools also
because here's another group
that the secretary has to have
meeting on a regular basis in
order to do things and and that
might be a good thing is we're
developing this program but.
Mr chairman if I may add if you
would wish we could do
On page seventeen line.
Of let's see let's just read the
full paragraph here so the
secretary of public education
shall appoint the members of the
ethnic studies council.
And we could put and of.
It is requested to include
representatives from each of the
following.
Mr chair and senator.
Requests still is a wishy word
that doesn't mean they have to
and so if you wanted to those
people on there you might put
something like the secretary
yeah shall appoint members of
the shall appoint ten members to
that we tend that burst in the
ethnic studies council from
among this looks.
I that would work if you could
decide which hand but even that
were with me any good point
Alton from university at public
school the first group and so
from at least ten of these
groups or something of that sort
but the words as they are now
have no meeting it leaves it
entirely the size and the number
of people in which people up to
the secretary and and again
we're just getting into words
matter and this is becoming wall
where yeah with the highly up to
work for someone to interpret
whether the secretaries
following the law.
Mr chairman senator David if
you're willing to make a motion.
I'll accept your amendment.
I'm not making that
I I tend not to be one who does
that type of stuff I'm happy to
have the sponsor make it or
other people I know I don't see
it as my role to fix other bills
but the point out where I see
that there are some concerns.
And I'm not sure exactly what
the lake would drive me because
I don't know that and I
apologize Mr chair
because I'm not sure if the
intent is entirely clear that.
Mr Chairman maybe if the
committee is willing also if
this measure does get out of
committee before going on to
finance maybe we could sit and
talk and work on some language
to present to have it amended
and finance.
Mr chair at yeah that may be the
best thing is to come out of
here with a commitment to the
kind of thanks that concern
because the words really do
matter as to who's on that.
That committee or what the
expectation would be.
And Mr Chairman representative
I'm willing to do that.
The bills able to move out then
we'll work on amendment and I I
see your point and I appreciate
it thank you.
Mr chair and thank you secretary
I'm not trying to be difficult
but what I make sure that that
it's clear what the intent is on
things because I don't think it
is at this point.
The thank you Mr chair those
were kind of my my concerns with
this as well as understanding my
commitment to deal with the
whole issue of graduation
requirements and stuff the the
interim at the LFC.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair we will now
move on to Senator Pinto.
Yes Mister chairman members of
the committee thank you Senator
for bringing this bill forward I
think one of my concerns when we
study start adding
Extra requirements for
graduation when it seems like we
were trying to decrease them.
But I do believe that this is
many issue that needs to be
tightened not just into a half a
credit but throughout the whole
curriculum that it's related
To math to such to science
there's there's very many many
different avenues that it can be
plugged into instead of just
one.
Special class I think that's
very important for our students
to understand is that it does
touch on all aspects not just
one specific
thank you well if if that
student doesn't get into the
class
you kind of to me it's it's not
not as effective especially if
you have don't have enough room
in the schedule for the high
school
classes that you end up having a
delay on it and in that manner
but I think that when we talk
about curriculum it gets tied
into all aspects of all the
classes and I don't know how
Versus adding a half credit.
That's a half.
Thank you Senator Pinto.
Looks like we don't have any
other questions or comments from
the committee so I will go ahead
and close on my and
I just want to thank the
sponsors of this bill Senator
Lopez Representative caviar
this is this is important you
know I'm one of those students
that until I went to college I
really didn't get any African
American history in my
curriculum going to school being
the only African American
student there and the only other
African American students were
my siblings so I think this is
so important you know there's
that phrase that you have to you
know see it to achieve it and I
believe that wholeheartedly that
we need to learn you know about
our cultures our history and and
and where we came from so but I
also have have concerns and I
hope that we can address some of
the verbiage on setting up the
council and then I want to make
sure that we are.
Standardizing this education
making sure that we're training
and that we have the educators
to actually teach this
throughout the state you know to
everyone I don't want to be just
center to where it's in Los
crucis Albuquerque and Santa Fe
if we're really want to do this
and wanted to throughout the
state I also want to make sure
that it is a scam require more
resources to do that this is
required appropriations so those
are some of the questions I have
but I wholeheartedly support
which are doing I support the
policy and it needs to happen
so.
So with that being said there I
will open up to the pleasure the
committee do we have any motions
on actually hold off I'm sorry
one second I want to give
Senator Lopez and Representative
Cavaleiro one last moment to
close.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee you
know this is we we've act.
This is been on the list for
discussion for quite a few years
and I think the time is right
for us to begin the process and
as the Legislature I'm seeing
we've talked about it but let's
actually do something put
together the plan will change
the language should this move
forward out of the committee
today tweak some of the language
and I believe that the council
can come forward with something
to us and again the LFC is part
of the discussion as one of the
members of the council of your
public add PED as well as higher
as that we can actually can't
get our our hands are our arms
around it if we wish to say
about what we can do is put the
plan in but we can't keep
pushing it down the road we
can't just keep saying okay well
let's wait and then it keeps
going down another two years
another three years because we
have to give ourselves Mr
chairman members of the
committee I believe a finite
period of time to get the work
done and again Mr chairman
members of the committee there
are members of our community who
are already beginning and have
some plans that I think we need
to review and look and see how
we can implement it sooner
rather than later so I
appreciate it thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and Mr chair
you you made a.
A huge statement about making
sure that we standardize
Moving forward because that is
creating systemic change is
exactly what this bill is
intended to do we do not Mr
chair want to experience
continue to experience what we
experienced in the heat of this
past summer.
And in the last four years of
I'm institutional racism and
racial injustices and racial
inequities.
We saw the horrible face I'm all
of those and the lack of and the
loss of life as a result.
These racial inequities and
ethnic studies.
Fifty plus years ago.
Is just as important as it is
today how do we instituted Mr
chair as we had intended fifty
plus years ago ethnic studies.
I think it would have made Mr
chair huge difference in how we
treat communities of color.
And how we approach.
Communities of color and how we
left these communities of color
in our effort to break down the
barriers.
That have prevented.
Racial equity.
Income and equity.
So Mr chair and and members of
the committee I would hope that
this process setting up the
council and the council being
charged.
with wait looking at ways to
institutionalize and structure
ethnic studies within the
educational curriculum.
Beginning from kindergarten all
the way through.
It is my hope our hope that this
is what this bill will still and
begin that process that should
have continued fifty plus years
ago thank you Mr chair and thank
you members of the committee
thank you.
Thank you Sanchez so I will move
it over and pass it to the
committee do we have any
motions.
Senator Pinto much.
Do I.
Senator Pinto has a motion for
do passing Senate bill two tend
to have a second.
Mr chair second.
Thank you senator souls.
Merry and if we could do a roll
call vote.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
You know like to explain but
that.
Well.
No.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes.
I'm gonna go back to Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey on mute I thought
I said a past you did I'm back
to you for about oh I'm sorry.
past.
Senator you you can't pass you
have to.
Senator you're commuting I will
admit you caught me double
tasking I got a very important
phone call okay that that I had
to date of the over health
insurance of all things I vote
yes.
And senator souls.
Well yes in explain my vote to
please.
So we are back to we do have a
due pass and Senator Kernan
would like to explain Boden and
Senator souls would like to
explain his.
Since the thank you Mr chair and
and as I said earlier I do not
propose an impact I do support
the the work of the commission
of the council that will be
formed as well as dressing the
standards across the curriculum
from kindergarten through eighth
grade but at this point I think
it's it's not appropriate to
make a change and graduation
requirements entail just add
chairman souls indicated the LFC
under his leadership next summer
we're going to do that evidently
very deep dive into that it went
to look at everything across the
board I just think we're not
ready for that at this point but
certainly everything else in the
in the legislation in this bill
I support.
That that many of us just up
finance will have that
opportunity to take a look thank
you.
And.
Mr chair yup that explaining my
both very similar to Senator
Kernan I was very torn on this
in that there are parts of this
bill that I think are very
appropriate I think it's time we
move on and we do a bunch of
those
I'm concerned that it's
premature until we look at all
of the graduation requirements
that the adding have credit year
and a half credit there makes
that Django pile even more
unstable and I absolutely a
commitment that that will be one
of the main topics we look at in
the LFC over the interim
But I did want to go through and
throw out some sections of the
bill would keep other sections
and so I wanted to move forward
and senator if you would and
just let me glance at the the
amendment that very caring into
finance so that I can make sure
that the kind of needs that
concerned about that the make up
of that council no I would
appreciate it but I I want to
make let it move forward and it
may actually end up on the
governor where she has a bunch
of these credit requirement
bills and she will decide
whether to be co them knowing
we're going to deal with it or
pushing through it yeah we'll
we'll see where that goes but
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
A working.
Congratulations Sanchez you have
a do pass on Senate bill two
ten.
And.
And I will pass over the reins
back of the chairmanship to
Senator souls.
Thank you Mr chair vice chair
thank you for handling things so
we believe all while I was gone
and Center Lopez I think you are
it's Senator Lopez day you're
still up with Senate bill two
twenty eight UNM Chicano studies
department for the public
looking in we just passed Senate
bill two ten ethnic studies
education we're on two twenty
eight and after this will go to
Senate bill two thirty three the
students bill of rights so
Senator Lopez please.
I'm again thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee
I am in front of you with Senate
bill two two eight and this is
an appropriation bill that of
course will go from here also to
Senate finance and we're asking
for three hundred thousand
dollars from the general fund to
be appropriated to their board
of regents at UNM will allow the
Chicana and Chicano studies
department to build a higher and
pipeline through community
engage curriculum which you know
course high school community
college and and other venues as
to which the department will
work with and that Mr chairman
members of the committee I do
have a few expert witnesses that
I would like to yield to the
first is Dr Elizabeth Gonzalez
go to than us she's an assistant
professor at the department of
Chicana Chicano studies at UNM
her PhD is an education with an
emphasis on race and ethnic
studies and researches of the
impact of Chicano Chicana
studies on students in higher at
a doctor Gonzalez conventus
movies.
Thank you senator Lopez chairs
those and members of the
committee I have taught you got
a general studies for over
thirteen years now and also
published researcher in the area
SB two to wait provides support
so that she can educational
studies at UNM can find online
programming connecting high
school community colleges and
universities we also have over
twenty years of research on the
positive impact that you got you
got all studies has on students
at the high school level
community colleges and
universities.
There has been continuous and
growing body of literature that
you got you got all studies
approaches improve academic
achievement for students in
particularly underrepresented
students of color Mexican
American
achievement or makes it more
studies excuse me enhances
positive identity for students
of color white students and
increases cross cultural
understanding among all
students.
She got it you got also these
approaches achieve these
important academic and social
outcomes while improving the
relationship students have with
their communities my own
published research shows that
students who are involved in
community based learning through
Chicana Chicano studies are more
likely to make positive civic
contributions to the community
the Chicana Chicano studies
department anyone and has gone
positive has shown positive
student outcomes in student
credit hours degree completion
and community outreach in the
last four years we have had a
twenty five percent growth in
student enrollments we have
grown from a minor program to
the most comprehensive
department in the country
offering full graduate education
through the Ph.D we are the only
program in the country with
online degrees high school dorm
room and pathways and beginning
in the fall of twenty twenty one
a new transfer pathway from
central New Mexico's college new
associate of arts degree in
Chicano Chicana studies there's
no other university in the
entire nation with the depth and
breadth of our reach SB two to
eight will set New Mexico into
first place among flagship
universities in this country
thank you very much.
Thank you very much and Mr
chairman and also I I apologize
but with the screen changes that
I keep during Representative got
by it was also my co sponsor
from the house and if I could
also allow her if you would
please allow her to say a few
words also in support of this
bill my apologies Representative
coming up.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
majority whip Senator Lopez I
think I there's nothing else I
can say other than I would defer
to the expert witnesses to I am
currently a doctoral student in
line to kind of to kind of
studies I have been witness to
the past few years as the
program has gone from being a
program to a department the
incredible pathways that the
Department has made in the inter
relationships that has worked
with very effectively with the
public school system but more
importantly we have experienced
you gonna going to studies Mr
chair at UNM has experienced the
highest enrollment we've
contributed to the greatest
enrollment.
data to the university which
just not only legitimizes
validates how important what you
gonna do you gonna studies is
doing all across the board in
its community based and
community centered education and
the fact that there are so many
students that are now pursuing
this pathway at the university
so it's very very important and
I stand in strong support of
this appropriation and also want
to mention that have we Mr chair
on the institution
needs to stand and take
responsibility and stand strong
in support of this program.
In this to the programs
associated with this department
and I would hope that you NM
does that and all of the other
institutions thank you Mr.
Senator Lopez yes and I have one
other expert witness Mr chairman
and this is Dr Tricia Martinez
of she is a UNM taus
postdoctoral fellow and visiting
assistant professor for the
university of Wyoming in Latina
and Latino studies so a doctor
Martinez.
Thank you Senator Lopez Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Dr Chester
Martines air to the ability of
our land grant and resident of
this month this year house as
part of my post doctoral service
I am working as a dual credit
liaison collaborating with
thirteen different high schools
providing college credit
opportunities to over three
hundred students in northern New
Mexico and also teaching to get
into custody UNM Health.
To get into go study six
thousand students support
community outreach and public
program I am a product of the
positive benefits of detention
state I come from a family who
continues to work the land in
order to make a living many of
my parents generation could not
leave their homes to go to
college because of their
connections grant now to get
into got a study has developed a
framework that expands education
cyber school.
Today the pandemic has presented
even more challenges for
traditional communities together
engaging many of their cultural
practices Senate bill two twenty
eight provides funding to create
online public programming to
extend the benefits of college
education and resources into our
communities especially here in
northern New Mexico in more
rural spaces works valuable.
K. twelve to twelve it teachers
need access to high quality
culturally relevant curriculum
insight and knowledge that there
students can connect to in the
classroom and that research
shows increases achievement and
index.
An online public program will
help to sustain and enhance our
Hispano Latino community culture
inheritance.
Both of you an Amsterdam into
dental studies department is
accompanied with the recognition
of our faculty expertise evident
through invitations to present
at national conferences and to
provide professional development
trainings addresses need by
lobbyists response on for us
system invites school district
and others who spoke in support
of SB two ten in fact at the end
of this month I will be hosting
a workshop titled cultivating
authentic relations of the
humanities in northern New
Mexico for teachers at a local
high school here in town.
There is a new series of these
workshops already schedule
because there is the need.
This work serves as one means to
help remedy the Martinez Yazzie
last we also have a unique
network of educators and
community leaders throughout the
state who will implement this
material into classrooms and
community spaces the momentum of
this energy is critical as we
build pathways for students in
northern New Mexico into branch
campuses community colleges and
from there into university thank
you and have a good.
Senator Lopez Mr chairman and
that is for our expert testimony
we will stand for quick.
Thank you I'll turn it over to
our very capable mark Kellett to
help us through public input.
Absolutely we will now hear from
ash I'm sorry first are there
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition for
Senate bill two two eight.
Please use the reactions of the
bottom of the screen if you wish
to speak in opposition.
Sir Robert B. did you want to
speak in opposition I see that
you needed yourself.
No okay.
We will move on to statements of
support actually Martinez.
If I might well actually coming
up just remind people we limit
public comment to two minutes
per person.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Ashley Marie Martinez and I'm
from Las Vegas New Mexico and
then this year I will graduate
with a master's degree in
American studies and have just
accepted admission into your
names Department of Chicano and
Chicana studies PhD program I
would like to speak about the
professionalization
opportunities which have been
offered to me by CCS upon
arriving at UNM expressed
interest in teaching and
trading.
CCSS and and gave me the
learning opportunities and both
areas.
In two thousand nineteen sep CCS
we work alongside curators to
create an exhibit titled she
drugs uprising which focused on
the diverse and vibrant forms of
art which spoke not only to
local and global conditions of
the times also.
Activism social protest and
creativity.
Additionally during the twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty
academic school year CCS offered
me a teaching assistantship.
Where I taught intro to Chicano
studies state college freshmen
and sophomores CCS consistently
supported me as an instructor by
giving me the training and tools
necessary to instruct college
level curriculum at the height
of our state struggled with the
pandemic.
At a time when you Mexicos
averaging upwards and six
hundred positive cases per day.
My students repeatedly expressed
to me that they wish to other
departments we're capable of
responding in similar ways as
CCS we take care of I'm.
Students who became L. and also
showed compassion to those who
have to care for loved ones
I am happy to report that I will
continue teaching in March and I
hope that you'll support this
bill.
Thank you Mr Martinez right now
we will hear from Joan Baker the
speaker.
One more time is John Baker.
We will move on.
And you hear from Mr Gambino
Norie.
Mr Noriega.
Okay I'm Shentel Trujillo are
you available.
One more time mission tell
Trujillo.
Moving on Mr Keith Sanchez.
Thank you members of the
committee my name is keep
Sanchez I'm originally from
Berlin New Mexico and then the
Chicana Chicano studies and
bilingual at the LA teacher our
state charter high school in the
heart of the indomitable south
valley amid testimony here today
is simple I'm asking for a
distinguished lawmakers to
support.
Two twenty eight because it is
the vital lifeline for clear
path to higher education for our
youth.
We've been made to believe that
colleges out of their reach I've
seen that light flicker my
students sites when they
realized through dual enrollment
and cultural and programs within
minutes this is what college
education feels like I want this
in my life.
Cultural education inspires kids
to be their best selves hearing.
The struggles they once thought
impossible.
We're reaching over six hundred
students throughout APS honor
shoestring budget please help
assisting that.
And more importantly crow this
program.
Thank you so much for your time
and dedication to the people to
the extent the level Mexico.
I appreciate it thank you thank
you Mr Sanchez I miss my.
This anti are you available my
god.
No okay we can go back to Mr
Gambino Noriko.
good morning chair and
distinguished members of the
Senate education finance
committee which again many of
you are you are I am an educator
and PhD candidate in Albuquerque
New Mexico and I I want to make
sure that I can get this clear
to is an educator and being part
of of this ProPublica project in
part of this initiative it is
been important to me that not
only is something that continues
to be and hopefully will
continue to be in the future
a transformative a program for
New Mexicans students and in
regard to educational path we
and also careerpathways from
high school and into college and
even into the into the into the
work force
most importantly this could to
come thirty than your typical
continue to demonstrate how I
think the meeting program helps
our students into viable
educational profession
opportunities available within
our state and by being part of
this committee and and we have
been part of this initiative
I've seen so much growth in my
students and seeing how they
connect and how they get a grant
no not only being able to hear
their own stories and hear their
own narratives but also to be
able to understand how to
navigate systems of of higher ed
and also like I said before this
is kind of like of doing the
same thing discussing the same
thing over again is like this is
just pretty eighty seconds
putting these opportunities in
their heads and allowing them to
be able to progress not only a
students but also a few mins and
it also offers them the ability
to make
connections to their communities
it also helps them to network I
mean there's so many things that
that that students benefit from
this and it is been difficult
like.
Keith says like to do this on a
shoestring budget we need the
help and support to be able to
continue to make thank you thank
you we will now hear from the
Thalia Toscana Italian.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee my name is not that it
was gonna I'm a PhD student in
the department of energy and the
state and I'm here in support of
SB two of two twenty eight
I particularly want to discuss
the importance of of how this
bill will support community
college students as our expert
witness mentioned right we're
comprehensive department that's
not only supporting high school
students and those in the
University Park particularly
supporting and invested in
supporting community college
students at the committee call
the transfer myself coming from
a family of community college
students my brother my mother
we're able to attain their
educational degree by going
through the committee college
pipeline this bill is
particularly important because
of supporting the secretary of
students who are caught where
marginalizing often pushed out
of the educational pipeline just
last night we had a workshop
with the violence yeah Intel's
two and branch students and
working with the CNN no need to
develop the ancient indigenous
studies but to provide resources
and tools and strategies which
students can bring their lived
experience into the classroom
and use that as our support and
navigational inkers to get
through to not only get to be
able to move on beyond and knows
SB two to eight is going to
provide us those tools to make
sure that the community college
students who are all come right
the backgrounds were not we high
school graduates the returning
students students with
disabilities veterans students
and this
was initiatives to make sure
that those students get through
the pipeline get their four year
degrees and beyond thank you so
much.
Thank you.
We will now hear from corky
frustum.
Quirky.
One more time for Mr frost
still.
Moving on Mr Lee rice stays.
One more time for Mr the racy.
Mr Gustavo Garcia are you
available.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Gustavo
Garcia I am a PhD student to
come studies and I also work
with the New Mexico humanities
now community college initiative
that's directly working with CNM
and also what that you come
across that is
that is partnering up with
violence and tiles and I am here
in full support of SB two to
eight at this moment now more
than ever we need to build
greater infrastructures to
support Hispanic about the
unknown at the moment and she
got a check on the students who
are interested in obtaining
university degrees little who
are still struggling to navigate
institutions of higher education
as mentioned earlier just make
studies Chicano Chicana studies
provide important skills and
tools to be able to assess the
society that we currently live
in and to engage in building
creative avenues to address
those institutional challenges
I'm so I strongly support this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from mystery
Jackson.
Miss Jackson refillable.
Okay moving on Mr Frawley in.
Our so called are you still
available.
Go ahead.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee on federal school of
PC student in the college of
education in which there's and
of cultural studies and must
part of its consequence that is
a long line and I and support of
this bill this bill will help
support the continued growth
charge concert is at UNM has
demonstrated a constant growth
in its department and its
offerings to students and this
bill will just continue to
sustain that growth that's going
so I urge you to support as B.
two two eight.
Thank you and I finally Dr Irene
baskets.
Chairman souls and members of
the committee I urge you to pass
Senate bill two to eight of this
bill will actually allow us to
consolidate a number of the
gains are made in the last few
years to address some very
serious gaps that we currently
see not only in terms of
professional development but
online curriculum materials and
We are in a position now to be
able to address our curriculum
as we've seen in the LFC
analysis that has pointed out
that there has been some
progress made in terms of
developing a curriculum efforts
to the African office of African
American affairs the indigenous
New Mexico curriculum initiative
and the Indian pueblo Kerr
cultural center currently we
don't have curriculum that has
been developed other than what
we have done in partnership with
APS and now moving in
partnership with House unified
school district and I think also
of working with the efforts that
are taking place in Los crucis
to bring together a strong
curriculum that Senators she got
no respond let the no histories
and experiences in the state the
pandemic has magnified the
disparities economically
educationally
we need to come back into you
know our our current of face to
face instruction or however it
might look in the next year and
be prepared with the materials
to provide professional
development that will meet
Yazzie Martinez mark Martinez
Yazzie lawsuits thank you.
Thank you Vasquez are there any
other members of the public that
wish to comment and support for
Senate bill two two eight now is
your chance Mr Robert maybe go
ahead.
Yes Mister chairman members of
the committee Robert Beatty with
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
the students of Robert F.
Kennedy benefit from this
program Armstrong support I want
to recognize the working with
them at of doctor Velasquez.
Thank you for doing this program
our teacher teaches Sanchez I've
seen you to development of him
are working in the program and
working with the peers this is
an important program that will
to be supported long term I
believe I testified up with this
funding in the past and
encourage it to be sustainable
funding
in the years to come thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Beattie are there
any other members of the public
that wish to make a comment in
support of Senate bill two two
eight I see any a New Mexico go
ahead.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Steve showing is not the
government relations director
for any a New Mexico on behalf
of our members we stand in
support of this bill for the
same reasons we stand in favor
of any educational bill that
valley students culture and
helps them build their sense of
words actions in academic
abilities research demonstrates
that community based programs
help students expand their
career and higher education
opportunities.
For these reasons than those
already expressed in public
comment we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward and
we asked the committee to
consider a favorable vote thank
you.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public to speak
in support.
Mr chair he'll go ahead.
Thank you and I want to.
Against a good morning to the
the chairman and members the
committee I apologize for not be
able to.
So.
Of my soul but I am Michael
Trujillo I'm the associate chair
CCS at UNM I just want to say we
seek to serve our state and our
New Mexico students this bill
will serve.
For us to do that work and so
thank you for your trust and
your your work and your time and
working on behalf and please
support this bill.
Thank you.
And I see Dr new general you'd
like to make another statement
real quick.
Go ahead.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee my name is Dr
solicit on America and as I
mentioned before I'm an
assistant professor in the
departments Council cities at
UNM I speak it I also speak in
support of SB two to eight
because I understand the
positive community contribution
and the growth of two kinds of
studies that the growth that the
chances Department demonstrate
of the last couple years.
Programs that the chances
Department a UNM runs is all are
already helping young students
in Albuquerque
in Albuquerque area see
themselves in higher education
and I see interest in this
program growing throughout the
state
I can say I can speak to the
research that states that the
positive outcomes that Chechen
cities has on students in
particular the ability for
students to.
Make links between their ethnic
identity and the academic
identity I see this happening
amongst the students in the U.
N. M. CCS of various programs
that they run and I can attest
to that that that as well as
someone who's worked with
students we're teaching students
how cities to students from
students of in ninth grade all
the way to the Ph.D level.
I also understand that the
research as research
demonstrates that unintentional
studies as well as other ethnic
studies programs contribute to a
higher student engagement
increase school attendance
boosted GPAs sentence and I hope
that the committee can recognize
the tremendous potential that
that you can chastity's
departments pipeline programs
have and decides to invest three
hundred thousand dollars in the
bright futures of New Mexico New
Mexico's young students thank
you for your time.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak.
Please raise your hand at this
time.
Thank you and that concludes all
the public statements for Senate
bill two hundred and twenty
eight.
Thank you for smoothly moving us
through all of that we're not
going to go to questions from
the committee.
And I don't see any hands up at
this point is Senator Pinto.
Thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you Senator
Lopez for bringing this bill
forward I do have a question
about the U. N. M. support for
this I don't know if anybody can
speak to
having that snowing the state
that we live in that you
amendment should be kind of.
Allocating funds are
transitioning funds from areas
that might not be so.
Just so positive that they would
move it towards this.
Mr Chairman if I could drive
Vasquez would you
Answer.
Thank you senator souls members
of the committee thank you for
the question Senator up until I
appreciate it what is happened
with this particular bill and
the work done by Senator Lopez
and Representative Roybal
Caballero is taking into
consideration of course the
incredible growth program has
gone through I'm not only you
know in the last four years a
twenty five percent growth in
enrollment but a fifty percent
growth in degree earners and and
that's significant at this time
of the issue with you know the
current budget process as
I'm sure all of you know is
that.
The request for funding are not
necessarily in sync with the
budget development process of
the state for example you
amendment right now is currently
planning its fiscal year budget
twenty three and this time last
year was planning for fiscal
year twenty to get academic
departments are actually going
through planning and design and
implementation you know
beginning in the spring and into
the fall and and already the
architecture of the budget is
set so we're talking about a
situation you know beginning you
know in early fall and even
extending into the last month's
we're we've been invited to do
professional development in
different districts in our need
it and we are in and in need
of staff and interns to be able
to move that forward and so
another development that
occurred that again was out of
sync with the budget process is
that the new eight eight degree
is going to roll out in she got
into going to studies at CNM and
fall twenty twenty one our
partnerships with you in Intel's
have have grown and in regional
eight actually in the last few
months as our expert witness
testified to I we will be of
providing a professional
employment professional
development for high school
teachers in Taos and in many
ways sort of building off what
you're earlier quote or
statement was Senator Pinto
we're we're being asked to
provide professional development
as to how do you teach to got
into gonna studies through math
through the sciences humanities
arts and social sciences this is
going to give us a really great
opportunity to develop even a
potential model I know native
American studies curriculum is
already made many advances in
terms of looking at a native
American per.
Perspectives through math and
science and we can all catch up
but we do need the resources and
there's no duplication here in
terms of staff of graduate
insurance is raised in the.
LFC analysis and so you know I
just want to
I just want to assure you that
these are our dollars well spent
and that and they will they will
certainly help position New
Mexico to be you know you know
at the at the top in terms of
developing a culturally relevant
and responsive curriculum
through.
Our different ethnic studies
programs thank you senator.
Thank you and the reason I say
that is because it seems during
this time especially with COVID
that a lot of our.
A lot of people that are seeking
degrees are steered towards
schools that are going to meet
their needs.
And if you amendment is not
listening to the students isn't
and is not responding in that
manner.
And then we're just gonna put
you know we're asking to put
have us put money into it when
really the it should be up to
the university and leadership to
say okay this is where we what
we need to do and when we have a
degree like that in pursuance I
believe that a major degree like
law tied with that the continent
Chicana studies would be
With in our state very valuable
but it does have to be tied to
you know something that I think
is that more career moving to
green that they can get their
foot in the door then just with
that humanities degree I have
some people that work at Walmart
because all that was all they
were able to achieve even though
they say they went to school for
four years and got a degree in
humanities but in that area they
still need something else to
accompany it to really have a
career not just a job.
so that they can get the
retirement benefits and I don't
really like the idea of having
some of the students especially
during this time have to see.
Out schools that are not in New
Mexico because that means
money's going outside of here
that they're paying that tuition
or getting that out of state
from some other college that is
meeting their needs that should
be met here in our state because
they're working here but yet
they can't get their higher
education or move up because of
the restrictions or whatever our
own colleges are unable to help
them with
so I find that a bit
Yes it is and the battle with
supporting this bill in that
manner and I believe there's the
south with Hispanic institute.
Well within U. N. M. and we have
these institutes I really.
Hope that it would be a
resource in the manner of
pushing that need in the area I
mean I I think New Mexico in in
some sense yes Wirth hi the
diverse but there are several
departments that should
incorporate this into their own
curriculum I'm an absorb those
costs within their departments
to benefit those students that
want to work in in this specific
area to help their people there
you know that I have the same
hair to chance them.
So that's why I think some of
the and I don't know if you want
to speak to that or respond to
that but that's my bit of a
dilemma with supporting this
bill thank you Mr chair.
Thank you of the representative
put.
Thank you Mr chair and just
Senator Lopez as mentioned from
doctor Vasquez Vasquez I just
want to confirm in the analysis
and mentioned that there was
possibly duplication of on a
ninety four thousand dollar
request in the ninety one
thousand dollars it sounded like
she said that there wasn't
implication I just wanted to
confirm that.
This place.
Yes there's no duplication of
Senator souls and members of the
committee Senator pope thank you
for your question there's
absolutely no duplication of and
I'm not sure if that was just a
a timing issue in terms of
submitting the budget it was
submitted to staff and I think
it it it isn't reflected because
of the twenty four hour time
period but I can assure you
there's no duplication.
Thank you and and then the next
question I would have is and and
we've heard the testimony I
guess just from the Sanchez
From you know from your
perspective how does this just
really improve the lives of
students doing doing
implementing a program like
this.
Mr Chairman representative of.
This program for me adds value
to what at a student's journey
through education is all about
and I know that there is you
know from
is services to what you can do
with a degree in Chicano Chicana
studies I think and so it it's
it's it depends as to what a
person can use and how they are
creative as they move forward in
their careers
you know even though with what
Senator Pinto mentioned about
our lost school no there's
there's a specific area that's
dedicated because of the
complexity regarding Indian law
wonderful work if they do I even
took a few classes because it
was so interesting to me to to
learn more about Indian law here
that just in New Mexico but
across the country but we do
have to look as to how we
integrate with them as we just
had a discussion on ethnic
studies in K. through twelve we
also have to look as to how we
can integrate.
Ethnic studies across the board
in higher education to
you know with Africano studies
native American studies in which
she got a Chicana studies it
adds the value I think is
there's more exposure across the
university not just say you one
and that state and other of are
still open statewide
institutions this is it's a way
that we can add value to the
education of our of our future
so for me I just there's been a
fight at UNM for awhile and I
see a fight and not within the
institution of course but the
struggle that they had in order
to gain the statue that they
have finally to have standing as
a Chicano Chicana studies
The recognition within the
university system it it's it's
so rewarding to finally see that
it's there.
you Senator address another
places at the University of New
Mexico have been around for
awhile but as we go through the
budget at the that UNM it's
always been what we call special
allocation special projects and
a lot of these programs were
special they're not special they
should just be an afterthought
if there's money it should be
part of what you know is is that
the context of the university so
I hope that answers at this just
adds value and complements what
we have to do.
Continuing to ethnic studies
education so if that is there is
that alright with all of the
other the colleges that are
there at the university level.
And if I may Mr chair answer the
Senators question.
Yes yes thank you and thank you
for thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator for asking this
question
I think it's incredibly
enhancing.
And it gives.
Coming from a community
organizer perspective and having
gone through the pipelines and
being at this stage of my life
and completing a doctorate
degree our I think had the
pipeline spin in place just
using myself as an example my
world would be very different in
the sense that the connection of
how I started in this social
movement of Chicano on the to
kind of social movement back in
the sixties and where I would
have progressed going back to my
initial statement on the
previous bill and that is and
having work towards establishing
Chicana studies it would have
taken on a little bit of a
different twist in the way in Mr
chair in this manner.
There's been a huge gap in
research the huge gap in
research in fact I was asked to
direct my dissertation in the
field in in a manner which would
help contribute to closing that
gap in researching and in the
research field there's been a
gap in publishing in in
publications that have come out
there's been and a gap in
connecting the into disciplinary
works
at the institution that direct
and and formulate aware our
students go in terms of research
so that the connection in those
battle also Mr chair to what the
students conveyed to me and had
this pipeline been in existence
for them they would have chosen
different paths for example had
they understood the history and
their culture.
In a in a more academic way they
would have chosen feels that
would have contributed to
research in higher education
that's one Committee another
Committee is as a teacher if
they pursue the field of
education they would have
specialized.
In.
Studies or in a field of
multicultural education or
bilingual education had they
understood Mr chair this
pipeline in the chosen a
profession rather than going
into a professional field they
might have chosen a field that
was more non profit oriented
nonprofit community based
oriented to be able to help up
lift their communities out of
income inequality there's
countless stories Mr chair and
senator of the students
articulating that had these
pipelines and pathways been in
existence they would have it
would have impacted even the
approach is a scientist the
approaches of looking at racial
inequities in the impact on
communities of color when you're
a scientist and how you approach
that is very different when you
have come up in the pathways of.
Studies and you're gonna you're
gonna study so would have made a
lot of difference mathematicians
also very different approach so
it's all about changing the
mindsets.
From a perspective that they're
already grounded in in terms of
their cultural identity and
racial identity and then taking
it from those pipelines.
And reinforcing and academically
with the history and then
connecting it into the real
world of how they can make those
countries there's multiple
stories Mr chairman and senator
that we can go on and on about
that I think that testimony
that's been given today on apple
fights
what I'm articulating is going
on and what the feedback we're
getting from the students so
this is definitely an answer to
senator Spencer as well
definitely something that we
have to
statutorily give strength to in
so that these institutions can
understand that this is an
investment.
Not only that we are
encouraging but we're having to
look at because to supplement
the the current stream that
they're looking at because I
think institutions need to
understand and be fortified
knowing that this investment is
actually a strength not a
weakness thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator.
Thank you thank you senator
right over there.
Thank.
Can I continue on this Mr chair
from the I think we were on
Senator pope right now.
I'm sorry your.
Well thank you and I think you
know thanks for answering the
question you know I I I support
this program and you mentioned a
U. N. M. you know I I would have
got through without even
programs and and and out places
like African American student
services of Centro American
Indians to American instant
Services I was there all the
time actually worked their work
study and I just wish that.
you on and some of the other
hiring departments supported
this a little more I guess put
this in their budget that's the
hope of money in the future
but there are is also those
budget concerns that we have
here in the state but you know
like everything I think a budget
you know it reflects our values
and and this should be a
priority because I think this is
an important program and
actually brings more value to
the university not only to the
people here that are going to be
taking the classes we just
mentioned before who who is
going to be teaching ethnic
studies are high schools so this
is a pipeline there's far as
getting that education as well
so I just hope we can find a way
to support this in the budget
and I will be supported thank
you.
Thank you senator pope
I don't see any other hands up
right now I just have a couple
of very quick questions if we
keep the responses short not
I've been that long
because we've got less than two
bills done in over two hours but
just was why would not presented
were requests to the higher ed
department.
After Vasquez would you please.
Senator so the members of the
committee the request for
funding a rules
outside of that process because
it hot it'd already been
underway and clothes and Senator
Lopez import Tricia Roybal
Caballero have been Sanchez
before of bills that have have
gone through the the legislature
of that have been supported by
ATV if I had to explain it I
would say it's because our
budget process was already
complete and as I mentioned most
of the academic planning is
happening already when the
budget is being developed and so
the the bill was not part of
that process and therefore it's
my assumption this is why we
don't do not have a response for
me to do.
Thank you and with that in mind
are you putting in your request
through your department and
through a G. D. for whatever two
years from now or are we going
to every year have wanted these
to be told that it we didn't get
it in and out what is the pre
planning so that we don't have
this stacked on top of the
official request for the Chicano
and Chicana studies department.
Thank you for the question of
what we certainly do put in
requests and there is a very
complex process for the
selection and I'm sure it's I
don't know what the exact
percentages but perhaps ten
percent of requests are that are
put through maybe selected and
then going through H. P. D. N.
LFC those are narrowed but yes
we we I.
We will in fact this Affairs off
did this and Dr Barbara Damron.
Is we send is all we were out
side of the timing.
I I have because of the request
from Chicano Chicana studies
yeah was for ninety four
thousand I think there's ninety
one thousand is in the executive
board this year and this funding
is outside of that so it did not
come formally through the
department process for things of
are you now we in that process
within the department within the
framework of you an impending or
is this going to continue to be
funding outside of that general
funding at UNM.
Senator souls our aspiration is
that it will be included in
UNM's process this year.
Okay
I guess those were my my main
consideration I don't discount
the the importance of things but
yeah when it's not part of the
formal process from a department
and then this is a staff on to
it is this one of the priorities
of that apartment always becomes
a question or where they told no
by the university and so they're
coming straight to us instead
the to put this on one that was
not one of the the focus or
priorities at the department.
Thank you.
I was sure that was a question
Senator souls but I do want to
say that in previous years
shares of Bill.
There have been larger amounts
under marked under probation we
have not been you know fortunate
enough to get a match for what
it is that we actually need
going into this year we're
actually providing even more so
services and online programming
and so we hope to capture.
To capture an amount that is
equivalent to bills that are
currently being proposed and and
house bill eighty seven by
Representative Lenti
has an appropriation for two got
into going to studies in there
that's higher however what we're
hoping that
Will be another support to our
schools.
Okay thank you a pleasure the
committee please.
Anyway the committee want to
make a motion Senator.
Mr chair I.
What I can do a motion for do
pass on Senate bill two two
eight.
Your passed by Center pope is
there a second.
I'll move a second Marianna if
you will call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Novell.
No.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes and to explain my boat.
Senator pope yes Senator soul
yes.
Go to explain about.
Thank you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee and I think you
representative Caballero for
your input on that and the
reason I'm voting yes on it is
but I do have some qualms about
it
Leave it.
This program but will be used to
the board of regents that they
don't spend it accordingly to
the intent is when I'm.
Because I'm having issues with
within to make you in that sense
with with doing something like
this and then it doesn't ten out
to exactly what eight it was
intended for so thank you.
Thank you so Senator you have a
two passed we're kinda way
behind so we can kind of any of
the experts are others please
keep comments to the relatively
short but we're now on HSD two
thirty three students bill of
rights for the public watching
we added you pass on Senate bill
two ten ethnic studies education
that you pass on Senate bill two
twenty eight UNM's kind of
studies department brought SB
two thirty three to be followed
by SB thirty seven charter
school do the so Senator Lopez
to thirty three please.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee
I am here to present student
bill of rights.
and Mr chairman I think
you know a this was started back
in I think twenty fifteen if I'm
correct and we did a memorial
that was specifically dealing
with the similar types of issues
with regards to student rights
within our public school system.
what we have done at this point
in time is we having we have a
bill in front of us to actually
see if we can move this forward
which be part of our public
school code.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I know that we'll get
more into in depth into the
discussion I'm sure of the bill
in front of us but I do have a
few XO two expert witnesses who
if I could Mr Chairman allow
them to say a few words first I
have miss Emma Jones who is
actually one of the persons that
I've worked with a few years
back I will be presented this
bill so if I could miss Jones.
Please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Emma Jones and how might.
Thank you.
All right.
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's Emma
John I'm in the an independent
consultant with over fifteen
years of working within families
to advocate educate educational
right in the state of New Mexico
at the consulting I provide
technical assistance training
strategic planning and support
services for addressing systems
change he can community
organizing skills and creating
experiences learning
environments for nonprofit
school district.
My career I have focused my work
around organizing and everything
that family advocacy prior to
being a consultant as Senator
Lopez Jeff said I work at the co
director and youth organizer
with the south.
Over ten years that
it would act the original
memorial was actually introduced
in twenty thirteen
the times I okay at the time I
serve as the youth organizer who
led the development of that
student bill of rights when it
was first introduced and passed
during that time we engage in
work with over a thousand young
people to draft the language and
the values that were reflected
in that memorial that has now
been carried over into this bill
I'm also a mother and two
beautiful children my son Cruz
today if we're going to be
getting public comment on that
the later today and I'm really
proud of him I just wanted to
honor has hit him in saying that
but thank you today for having
me.
There Lopez thank you very much
Mr chairman and thank you Emma
next I have as an extremist
expert witness M. Isabella Baker
miss Baker.
Thank you Mr chair Senator Lopez
members of the committee my name
is Isabella Baker and I'm
honored to be here today
representing the voices of over
a thousand young people
throughout New Mexico as my co
worker Emma Jones to spoke of
that have worked to craft this
bill before you today at the end
to gonna women who didn't do it
from high school that long ago
I've experienced many if not all
of the inequities that when in
this bill from discrimination to
being discouraged to go to
college or be in college prep
courses to struggling with
mental health to being told
directly the fact that the
second I walk into a school
building that I don't have any
right.
I know many students have
similar stories and because of
my own personal experiences I've
decided to devote my life to
working to create changes the
community organizing and which I
primarily work with young
people.
I've been involved in community
organizing and working to create
change with the New Mexico's
education system for over
thirteen years now as part of
that I co founded youth voices
in action or via which is an
organization devoted to
empowering young people to
create change in their schools
and communities I have also
worked for a few years now with
transform education New Mexico
and I'm a proud member of the
coalition
and have worked with other
various esteemed organizations
over the years as well.
As part of that work I believe
that youth and students are
above all people I'm and that
they deserve rights and respect
in their educational experiences
I believe that you for the
solution not the problem and
that by empowering youth and
letting them lead we can create
a more equitable society for
everyone as we have seen by the
incredible youth leadership and
social and political movements
across the country in recent
years this bill contributes to
that and establishes a basis for
safe fair and engaging learning
environments for all New
Mexicans students I'm humbled
and honored to be in front of me
today to support SB two thirty
three the student bill of rights
and I'm looking forward to the
discussion and I ask for the
support of the members of this
committee thank you.
Thank you Senator.
Mr Chairman.
That will be
All of us the presentation will
stand for questions.
Thank you we'll move the public
comment and Markelle if you'll
help us do that and I remind
people we live it to a maximum
of two minutes you don't have to
use all of that time please try
to avoid saying exactly what
somebody else is set up by
telephone.
We will begin with Jordan wax Mr
wax removal.
Okay we'll move on to miss Julie
Bettencourt Julie are you
available.
Yes I am.
Are any good morning chair
committee members and community
members joining us today and
thank you all for allowing me to
speak on behalf of Senate bill
two thirty three I am with an
organization called by per lives
which the youth led direct
action program that focuses on
supporting and uplifting youth
voices both inside and outside
of the classroom.
I graduated from Eldorado high
school in twenty eighteen and in
my time there there are three
other out of student suicides I
was told I was not allowed to
run for prompting prompting
because quote I was not trends
and I'm.
Was given a suspension for
leaving campus to get to food
because there was not a bit not
accessible to me on campus how
did you decide in front of a
teacher in which no action was
taken during or after hi there
covers falling off and pages
falling out.
I did not learn information
regarding clear transpacific
sexual health and I have one to
navigate on my own Norway's are
substantive information
regarding indigenous people
aside from the perspective of
colonizers.
This is my experience but it's
only a fraction of the problem
black students are more likely
to face disciplinary action
compared to white students black
students represent thirty one
percent of school arrests are
suspended or expelled three
times more than their white
counterparts and one suspended
or expelled by three times as
likely three times more likely
to have contacted the juvenile
justice system the following.
Along with this approximately
twenty six percent of New
Mexicans you Spanish is the
primary language in the
household and the students
should be able to learn the
language they're most familiar
with.
Classrooms are overcrowded
indigenous students are less
able to get attention from
teachers with struggling thirty
seconds smaller class sizes have
led to better academic
performance and greater
participation understanding
among students organize our
support capability of students
making decisions regarding their
education and learning
environments students should
have equal access to education
regardless of race ethnicity
gender identity sexual
orientation immigration status
language disability a class
schools have equal access to
funding and should be not be
determined by district rating
systems that only harm the
students especially marginalized
students for their schools are
generally the most impacted
Senate Bill to.
Thank you Julie we will now be
moving on to Mr Lee said deal.
Police are you available.
It looks like she's not and we
will move on to miss Joan Baker
go ahead John.
Hello Mr chair members of the
committee my name is John day
Baker I am the executive
director of the for which stands
for businesses educators and
families organizing to reform
education.
We stand and strong support of
Senate bill two thirty three the
student bill of rights
some of you may remember two
years ago our organization
worked with Senator Padilla of
for the bathroom rights bill
and.
I think that this bill gets to
the root cause of why we had to
bring that bill two years ago
which unfortunately ran out of
time on the house floor in many
of you supported it at that time
I'm happy to see that that
bathroom rights are included in
this bill as well as students
nutritional rights I think too
often we forget that that the
brain needs proper nutrition to
to learn and that we must full
fulfill students basic needs of
of of safety before their brain
is even an optimal level to
learn and another portion of
this bill I'd like to highlight
that I really appreciate is the
condition of the school
buildings I have personal
knowledge that there is a school
in my local district we're
eleven of the fourteen H. FAQ
units do not work thirty some
and and and I don't know how
they're going to fix that so I I
think that the students have a
right to
have a comfortable temperature
they have a right to have our.
Indoor air quality and they have
a right to dignity nutrition and
use the bathroom and I strongly
support this bill in the
students leading the way thank
you.
Thank you John we will now hear
from Cruz maldanado crews are
you available.
Morning Mr chairman and
committee my name is creating
all the auto and seventh grader
and I go to John Adams middle
school Albuquerque New Mexico
and member of the voices and
action and I am here today in
support of Senate bill two
through three the bill student
rights I believe students there
may be treated with respect to
all schools I think this bill
will empower students to be
aware of their rights and have
their voices be heard as
students there have been times
that my right to been violated
and I did not know that you care
about this bill because it will
help prevent that from happening
to other students in the future
and this will help you to be
part of creating solutions I
hope you will for this bill
thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Amanda day goes Amanda are you
available.
Everyone good morning members of
the committee thanks Amanda
Gaydos I'm a community organizer
in Albuquerque I'm twenty two
years old and I'm here on behalf
of transform education.
additional bill of rights would
undoubtedly empower students all
across New Mexico students
deserve rights especially during
these incredibly uncertain
times.
I was one of the users who
originally helped write and
facilitate the creation of the
first memorial and I was
fourteen at the time you can
imagine it was an incredibly
empowering
powerful experience for me I can
tell you without a doubt this
document was formed from the
minds of young people with the
intention to make schools were
both for all now as a new twenty
three year old adult I can still
firmly say this is a bill that
needs to be passed I think that
my educational journey would
have been different if I had
these rights.
The document has been carefully
curated for nearly a decade and
is a shining example of a youth
leadership looks like in real
life
once again just reminding folks
that you the solution not the
problem and to please vote yes
on Senate bill two thirty three.
Thank you miss us we wanna hear
from ICAM this exam.
I'm here thank you good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jonathan
I'm senior Crisco heritage and
I'm speaking on behalf of trump
medication Mexico Mexico Dream
Team the to tell you students
across the state to touch on to
the clauses regarding SB two
thirty three in the first being
the right person to organize
amongst themselves are going to
school decision making process
and the right for students not
be discriminate against based on
our age or tokenized for
experiences as students these
two clauses mean to me is we
have an accurate ratio for
portion of the representatives
to student to the whole state
population within our schools
based upon my experience my high
school has to say presentation
used to get representatives in
instructional council
Representative a student body of
two thousand this representation
is unfair to students when
compared to the teacher
representative to teacher ratio
in each of their respective
departments is gross like our
presentation is suppressing
Amiri out of Weiss's
perspectives to the US students
want to bring concrete material
changes to that affect our lives
for a better and as any comment
I'd like to say we are all used
at one point and I believe we
all experience the adults
talking down to us or dismissing
us based on our age and I do not
believe that is right it I
believe that maturity is also
factor not planned we deserve
rights just as much as anybody
else thank you Mr chairman and
committee I urge you to support
SB two to two thirty three for
the sake of students across the
state thank you.
Thank you very much will now
hear from Barry par Sanchez.
Good morning chairman souls vice
chairman pope and a steam
committee members my name is
merry par Sanchez and I'm the
president of NEA New Mexico.
Any in New Mexico stands in
support of Senate bill two
thirty three I would like to
thank the sponsor majority whip
Lopez for bringing forth of the
bill our education system must
be Rick rebuilt on core values
of honoring our students well
being and ending systems of
discrimination and
marginalization that do not
allow all students to learn and
perform to their full potential
schools and districts must look
critically at their practices
and endeavor to create a
culturally sustaining
environment for students Senate
bill two thirty three would be a
right step to fully re opening
our schools safely and equitably
after the pandemic with a much
needed emphasis on respecting
and valuing what our students
bring with them into our schools
which is core to any in New
Mexico's foundational beliefs
the bill gives students and
educators the right to
continuing study on education
justice which should be a
fundamental right of every
student in the state the bill
seeks education mentorship and
intervention programs instead
of.
As they navigate the different
stages of growing up the bill
would require more staff
including behavioral health
staff and restorative practice
staff to support students this
is what is sufficient education
system works fine thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Disney's I did not receive a
last name in the email.
Well sorry it's Jacquelyn okay.
Hello then maybe chair and
members of the committee I am
the needs from the New Mexico
Dream Team I support SB thirty
three because I believe that
every student should have the
access to truly to truly
everything they need to.
To be a student either phone
free from the bureau either that
goals from free from
discrimination to getting good
and healthy thing to have a
better future for the students
for the students for the
students to have a big choice in
New Mexico because we think we
are the future not to forget
what we think and into that and
to remember that we always have
a voice thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Natalie Rogers Mister Rogers are
you available.
One more time for Natalie
Rogers.
Okay moving on a lease Sanchez
are you available.
One more time for me Sanchez.
Okay we wanna hear from Melissa
Candelaria go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and we
stand strong support of this
bill student equity is the heart
is at the heart of transforming
our education system and it must
be bill of core values of
honoring and embracing our
students lived experiences and
this really does include
dismantling inequitable and
discriminatory systems and fully
supporting student safety and
well being this bill ensures
that our youth voices rightfully
at the table in improving a
learning that happens in our
schools and for these reasons
and the many other sorry camp
and we support this bill and we
hope people to pass thank you so
much.
Thank you stand a lot we will
now hear from Emily wild I'll go
ahead and leave.
Good morning Mr chairman and the
members of the committee member
New World out representing New
Mexico children at thank you
Senator Lopez you bring for this
bill to protect the rights of
all New Mexico students that we
support SB two thirty three and
not only because student right
into statute but because of all
the powerful student testimony
that you've heard here today.
Students are told us what they
need to be able to succeed
Education and we ask the members
of this committee to join us in
support of SB two thirty.
Thank you Emily.
Are there any other members of
the public who wish to make a
comment in support of Senate
bill two three three I see the
NEA Mr C. say yes go ahead.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Stacy I'm is in on the
government relations director
for any New Mexico all the pre
for the sake of time on behalf
of our members and to echo our
state's president's message in
those in the public speaking in
favor we stand supported this
bill for obvious reasons.
The bill is very clear in its
intent to safeguard certain
basic rights among them building
a community across our students
and also building schools that
are safe if we build safe
schools we close the achievement
gap because we now ask for
researching just common sense
that would students attend
school they learn if schools are
unsafe then students stopped
attending perpetuating chronic
absenteeism and widening the
treatment.
This bill is also lined with
Indian New Mexico's goal Bill B.
community schools and I ask that
this committee to keep in mind
that the community schools model
should be rolled out statewide
as part of an effective strategy
to fight poverty improved
educational achievement and
achieve racial and social equity
in New Mexico we thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
fourth and we ask that you go to
in favor of this bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else who wishes
to give public comment at this
time please raise your hand.
Thank you and that concludes all
of the public statements for
Senate bill two thirty three.
Thank you mark tell us we're not
going to committee questions and
comments anyone on the
committee.
Please raise your hand.
I
that always takes a moment for
people to find that.
if you look like I thought I saw
you looking for it so yes Sir
please go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Lopez for bringing this
bill
in principle I'm absolutely for
and I also really love the fact
that at least in the analysis
really gets much more deeply
into our redemptive are yes the
plan incentive unit discipline I
think that's a really.
Our
strong
Argument and one that we really
need to pay attention to
particularly as it.
Affects.
How the student can be engaged
they feel safe are there and say
things going on but also if
there is in some form disruption
trying to take that and get
through causes rather than just
a.
A piece of discipline
I also
Really might be beginning to
discuss how how are we going to
do this point programs and so
forth I don't know what the
answer is that it seems that
that might be something that is
going to evolve over time and
how it's practically done
what what is troubling to me is
is what came up in the
Legislative Education Committee
and the and and that is
the the best excuse me the
definitions around small
and
also and and and and some of the
physical plant and I know we
have a.
If I have understood correctly
shortage of about six hundred
teachers and in the state
particularly and some smaller
communities where it's more
difficult to recruit how are we
going to.
Bring them into compliance with
the may almost be impossible on
our is there it is there any
punitive action towards that
we're particularly their own
circumstances they they can
assist that
I I and I don't know where this
bill goes next but if it goes to
finance on I think that probably
it's going to raise issues about
where is the money that's going
to need to be put in our I I
would love to have the money to
put into all of that and I small
class sizes I think are really
fundamental but you just don't
know that that that's practical
so that's where I'm having some
difficulty with that to
Senator Lopez I don't know if
you have any comments on in
regards to that thank you
Senator souls Senator Hickey
this particular bill goes to
Senate Judiciary actor here.
Okay thank you but I I still do
have the issue of how is it
going how is how is some of this
going to be funded and how is P.
E. the right yes it's going to
in forcing agency going to deal
with we're simply that they
can't get the class size down to
where it ought to be are they
don't have the funds to be able
to make what are probably needed
staff
functional aspects of the school
in terms of buildings higher and
and what happened.
If you can answer that Senator
Lopez I'd appreciate.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Hickey if you notice in
the legislation we didn't list a
specific number or what a small
classes and over the years we've
had built that have come and
we've had to limit change the
size of classes you know what is
deemed a appropriate size of
classes for students to learn in
what in our discussion with the
experts and others that have
been part of you know that the
group coming together to right
the bill part of our discussion
of course had been.
I'm looking for
a small class and of course it's
all based on budget as we all
know that very much but we still
firmly believe that a student
has a right and I should be
asking that we
Decrease the size of the student
teacher ratio I think it's a
request that all of us make at
some point or another in
different venues maybe not just
specifically for small classes
but I serve for million in
support of of what the request
is that they do have a right in
which to ask for a smaller class
size waivers and some of the
high schools as we know there's
a big huge student teacher ratio
and I can only admire.
Those.
You for the large that the large
ratio that we have and as you
look in smaller grades to you
know depending on where you are
what school districts and such
you may have smaller classes
just because of the smaller
number of students and in a in a
larger districts such as as in
mind that I exist and atrisk
heritage academy has quite a
number of students and it
wonderful for us to be able to
decrease that ratio and of
course it always goes back to
the availability of teachers it
goes back to the availability of
monies that where we can
actually hire so it's a systems
issue but we did not list a
specific number of what a small
classes of course is defined in
statute as to how we deal with
that just hopefully it we don't
as we have in the past Mr
chairman Senator Hickey we've
allowed variances your statute
when there's need to be and I
think and I know that sometimes
we don't even legislation
aspirations but a rate of a
student is not just an
aspiration is something that we
as adults as the policymakers
should be adhering to to help
and and guide and respect and
what their rights are.
Thank you.
You're still on the third.
I'm sorry with.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator low as for your
explanations that found that
very helpful and I you.
Thank you Senator Hickey next I
yep Center pope.
Thank you Mr chair I'll be real
short I I really like this in
principle and what we're doing
because I believe something
needs to be done and I'm
supportive of what you've laid
out here I guess the question I
have from my understanding this
is not a constitutional
amendment I guess how is this
going to be implemented have and
what's statute.
Do we put this bill of rights.
I'm Mr Chairman Senator pro this
of course would be in the public
school because.
Thank you and I share some of
the concerns and I understand
and and you know all the great
work you did on the crown Act
and and and you know now I'm
sponsoring that I appreciate the
work some of this is that
there's questions on some of the
requirements here some of the
verbiage you know small classes
things like that and I I think
people are concerned with that I
have a few concerns on some of
the language as well and it's a
struggle for me because in
principle I I really support
this bill I want to see what we
can do to really support our
students but I'm concerned just
on how it's implemented and how
we ensure that what we're
putting down on paper actually
happens for students so I don't
know if this actually does it
and once again I'm not against
this but that's what I'm just
kind of struggling with so
that's all I had Senator Lopez I
appreciate it and that's all I
have Mr.
Thank you center open center
current.
Well thank you very much and
Is looking at the LFC if I are
in our they indicate that the
cost is significant and
indeterminate so in other words
they can't even put a price tag
on this I'm just curious why
this was not referred to finance
and I wonder if the sponsor with
that agreed that this bill
should go to finance up for
consideration because of the
significant cost that could be
encourage we as legislators have
a responsibility I even though
we have projects and we have a
proposals and and things were
very passionate about we still
have to figure out how Fund in.
From the overall picture of that
the funding available to us so
with the sponsor agree that this
could then to to finance.
Study tornal mute you're on mute
but we have to find.
Mr Chairman representative you
know
and and you medic Mr chairman
senator of course you said on
finance three years but you've
also been on this committee that
has dealt with funding for our
public schools and I think the
the lawsuit for the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuits the combined
lawsuits have actually brought
to the forefront of what New
Mexico needs to do with regards
to education you had a
discussion in your committee
with regards to that P. L. eight
seven four otherwise known as
impact Aid as to what we're
doing with those monies.
I think it's the system that we
really need to we need to look
at we actual we have I think
The permanent fund of bill
that'll be coming over to the
legislature to look at
you know right now is funding
early childhood education which
would go to the E. C. I'm sorry
not up to the acronym of that
but the early childhood
education department.
you know in New yeah we could
maybe add something in there so
that we could potentially add
some more funding for teachers I
mean there's I think there's
some variances that we could
look at this point.
so you know it is a financial
impact but you know if you were
to take a legislation like this
and look at for funding I think
it would even show the bigger
hole that we have as to what
we're not able to do
for for funding our public
school system and if I may say
Mr chairman senator I think
these these are not just
aspirations this is the reality
of what our students and
families are asking for and if
you know through not just the
LESC but the L. ESE also there
are many of these points in here
that are already part of law is
there efforts that should be
recognized and supported through
our public school system and
they're not you know we have to
talk about special education you
have the issue one at risk
students issues I'm going to the
bathroom when my son was in high
school he couldn't go to the
bathroom unless he was afforded
a past at the end of class to
go.
two students in his school got
sick because the teacher
wouldn't allow them to go to the
bathroom when the students had
to go developed a bladder
infection the TI me these are
all things that are documented
where students have a right and
should be afforded the
opportunity of respect to
exist in a situation where we
recognize what a lot of this is
in statute already and yes it's
a finance I mean if the
committee decides to add on
something to go to finance you
know we can have a discussion in
front of finance committee also
but I think this also helps our
recognition Mr chairman senator
about not just again with the
Ozzie versus the state Martinez
versus the state this is
something that we just need to
keep in for front and I'm just
happy that the students know
this and understand it and we're
just we're talking about it so
thank you Mr chairman senator.
Well thank you very much and so
my question Mr chairman desist
Committee have the authority to
send a bill to another committee
are deceptive occur typically at
a request with the bills right
now.
Okay Senator Kernan I believe it
has to go through the main body
when the bill was read out is a
request for the additional
referral.
Okay thank you very much and I
do I just want to caution at the
members of the committee I think
this is really something that we
have to consider on every bill
that comes through this
committee is what is the cost
going to be we certainly know
there's some issues here that
need to be addressed and I don't
that question that at all I've
always been a hundred of small
class size but is that Senator
Hickey drive making mention
sometimes we just don't have the
teachers and and the.
We do have the opportunity to
ask for waivers from school
districts that they can't meet
that requirement that there many
many other things in in this
bill that that could be very
costly and I just believe that
it needs to have a look at
finance and I promise I'm not
going to do this every time the
bill comes up that I'm going
forward with regard to revenue
estimate chairman smiley we are
going to have a significant
problem with with revenues going
forward so and to get started on
something that we're not gonna
be able thanks for about three
years so with that.
I'm I'm not gonna be able to
support the bill at this point
I'm hopeful hopefully we can get
this look at in finance and see
if we are we can have the money
to pay for thank you.
Curry will we'll just get you a
little button that you can push
to play that low reporting when
it's appropriate.
Thank you very much.
Of I have a couple of questions
on this bill Senator
This is called the bill of
rights and it says students have
a right a rate implies that
there's a right of action if
these things are not done which
means a right to legal redress
of.
How do their number of things
that are undefined like small
class.
We'll get soon who has to pay
for those who loses their job or
their license if these things
are not that.
Mr Chairman the.
As I have mentioned previously
Mr chairman
these are.
Of what we talk about what we
say and from the laws that we
pass over all these years and
how we set up the education
system for the state of New
Mexico and
I think it's part of us to
recognize and understand the
rights that our children do have
our students to have in the
public school system and it's
not just them is also for their
families and as I mentioned some
of the the language it is in
your course is afforded for
existing law.
and you know some of the cases
that have come before supports
to deal with issues for at risk
students.
and with regards to
Some of the other areas as it
deals with the ethnicities and
different areas of our state
also for their educational
rights so I have you know you
can say that it would be brought
forward in a lawsuit that we're
not meeting the small screen
size but Mr Chairman
yeah this is it's a lawsuit that
can be brought at any point in
time you don't have to have it
just on this piece of paper if
there's a a discrimination that
has been experienced by a
student and or his or her family
and they can always bring a
right you know a right action
against the school district or
the state this doesn't add any
more to it it is in existence
already and this just puts it
down where students have had a
voice and in part of the
educational system they have
something also that
if they can utilize and at the
talk in student government in
other ways within instructional
councils and such to make sure
that they are part of the and
included in this discussions
where we are talking about
education of our students this
Mr chairman I guess certain
suite there already is a right
afforded for students and their
families to bring up a case in
court.
Up Senator I understand in some
things that are already logged
but this also indicates they
have a right to epic food that
they are comfortable with and so
if we get a student from Brazil
use the school has this would
say that the responsibility to
provide resilient group for
example and if that is not that
that there is a right of action
which would you can so so the
school district because their
child didn't have at the they
match they particularly wanted
or white
the language for instance around
student representation says a
student has a right to not be
talked down to.
What does that mean and again
somebody now we are putting in
the law they have a right and
therefore consume because they
don't believe that the the
school listen to that whatever
that is so so much of this and I
I don't agree with the
aspirational side of it but when
you put aspirational into a law
that says they have the right to
it is a full employment for
lawyer bill that says yup this
were to become law every time
this doesn't happen there's a
suit waiting to happen and so
I'm very concerned as well as
the.
The additional costs for if
these are all right that
districts are required to do it
it doesn't say the required to
do it if there's enough funding
for it it says they must we
already have in our constitution
for the right for a ask the.
Trying to get the right words
but that sufficient education
insufficient is up for debate
and typically we determined
sufficient changes depending on
how much money there is in the
budget I don't think sufficient
does this as a whole whole lot
of that that is not defined and
that it also doesn't define on
the back and what is the remedy
group like I I started with yeah
with this doesn't happen is it
the public yet Department that
get students must cover the cost
is that the individual teachers
that the district is that the
principal the superintendent
this creates a whole lot of
rights and rights means right of
action in the court which is the
remedy for such thank how do we
manage or handle all of that.
And Mr chairman if I may to and
I apologize but I think with
speaker also wanted to add to
this conversation also miss
Baker.
Yes thank you Mr chair Senator
Lopez the members of the
committee I did want to add that
as as the person who helped to
write this bill I'm a reason why
we did leave some language in
there that it's a little more
open ended like small class
sizes and buildings in good
quality things like that is
because we do understand that a
lot of this does revolve around
the budget and we didn't want to
have to have funding attached to
this bill a lot of what we
wanted this bill to
to do is just to ensure that
students aren't discriminated
against in schools for various
reasons like bathroom usage for
raise for for different things
like that
and a lot of like what this of
eight quality buildings or small
class sizes is outlined as it
into is the Yazzie Martinez for
student Mexico last year
and
and so yeah we wanted to do it
in that way so that we it was
more open ended to the
legislature and didn't feel like
it was forcing the legislature
to put more money into something
that there is no money to put
into we just wanted students to
be afforded these rights in a
way that they can be able to
find in one place and understand
it and more reasonable way
because as I mentioned in my
opening statement I was told
when I was in high school by my
government teacher that I don't
have rates and the second I walk
into a school and yeah I just
wanted to to clarify that a
little bit more I understand
that might not completely answer
all of your questions but thank
you for forgiving me sometime.
Thank you I I appreciate it and
again the aspirational side of
it and I think school people
most across the state are trying
to meet these but when we put it
into a wall.
We have a bill of rights that
means we will we must it's not
like we will we must if it's
convenient if it works so we
will we must or we get sued by a
lawyer that said this is law and
you're not following the law.
And I can't supported as written
because this is not a law this
is a memorial this is
aspirational this is what we
hope people are working towards
we do have some things that are
locked up we years ago passed
the anti bullying legislation
which does discussed about
bathrooms and gender identity of
and some of those types of
things but this is much broader
than that and and give students
are right to as I indicated to
not be dismissed by adults
whatever that needs that I don't
I understand it does occur but
we can't put that into a law
something that is nebulous as to
how bad they do they have to do
this best is rolling their eyes
being dismissed I mean do they
say you know you don't have any
right year and go away with that
being dismissed those things in
law must be clearly identified
and this doesn't do any of that
this is very aspirational but
that does not make for good law
We're I see Senator Hickey.
Bill has is you have a second
I'm question or something else
senator and usually second house
please give very quick and
short.
Hopefully this can be quick and
short his PED weighed in on
their impressions of the
viability of this.
And Representative if you would
please if you've got a
perspective easy.
I'm sorry.
Mr chairman and
Senator Lopez and Mr Santa do
you have any thoughts to offer
from the perspective of the PED.
Mr chair Senator Hickey thanks
for the question
first I I do want to say that we
appreciate the in the the spirit
behind the behind the bill
obviously we we agree that
students deserve these rights as
far as the the implications and
the implementation of something
like this I do think we have
some concerns about who would be
responsible for for the
implementation for the
evaluation of whether or not
these things are happening again
to Senator souls concerns about
a liability and who would be
might be liable if something if
one of these rights was not that
was not provided a student so it
just some of the some of the
concerns that you've heard
already.
Thank you Mr Senator thank you
Senator Lopez and Mr chairman
and that Michael.
Thank you anyone else of the
committee.
And if not I would entertain a
motion from the committee.
The table.
We have a motion to table that
is non debatable merry and if
you would call the vote please.
And your brand.
Senator Hickey.
Yes to table.
Senator Kernan.
Yes Senate Bill.
Yes.
Your video.
At.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
No.
Senator soul.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
No.
We do have
For for the supported tabling
this bill so it's tabled.
For yes Reno's in New Mexico you
and and Senator Lopez this bill
is tabled at this point and I
hope you understand the concerns
about I think that what the
people have just about the the
viability the expense of other
kinds of things which I believe
are probably the reason I.
Thank you Mr chairman and as you
know we always rewrite and we we
do and Amanda such so we'll be
back thank you thank thank you
senator we've got about twenty
five minutes to hear FTE to
thirty seven that charter school
duties and center Lopez you're
still in the hot seat.
If you would please take us
through Senate bill two thirty
seven for anybody watching
Senate bill two thirty six
independent Carlsbad community
college at the sponsor request
is that move it will be the
first one on Monday and it
appears that will be the same
but but they will have just two
to thirty four SB two forty and
SB two forty eight on Monday and
will probably at a couple of
additional ones to that list so
Mr the what Mr Chairman
representative there for the
apologetic County to Senator
Lopez can I get the boat from
the committee secretary on
Senate bill two twenty eight.
Senator Padilla.
Members of the committee Senate
bill two twenty eight was and I
do pass.
And.
We had four yeses one now when
three excused.
The to read who voted I'm
perfectly fine thank you madam
secretary and Mr chairman I it
was as you know in the rules
committee I just want to make
sure I knew what happened there
thank you very much.
Thank you okay Lopez please back
to Senate bill thirty seven.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and if
I may say it's so wonderful to
be in Senate education for the
morning so I appreciate your
indulgence Mr chairman members
of the committee I am in front
of you of of with a bill that
actually we have presented an
almost got through both chambers
previously in another of course
legislative session but
essentially what this bill would
is proposing to do it prohibits
such charter school from
employed any immediate family
member.
I'm you for the charters of so
we're looking at the of charter
schools had administrator any
member of the charter schools
governing board or any charter
school employees would be a
direct supervisor of the
immediate family member it also
requires a charter school the
existing employees who would be
prohibited from and employment
under this provisions in the
bill to notify the charter
schools chartering authority of
the relationship.
In in the chartering authority
would then be required to work
with the charter school to
alleviate or mitigate the
effects of nepotism including
identifying to the supervisor of
record will be additional Mr
chairman members of the
committee also as language to
the charter schools act to
expand the role of chartering
authorities in monitoring the
governing bodies of charter
schools and of course would
direct charging authorities want
to oversee the charter schools
compliance with federal and
state laws in in the courts also
to take action of following
appropriate steps Mr chairman
what a charter school is not
following laws or its own
policies and procedures.
And then Mr chairman finally it
also adds language to the state
charter schools act specifies a
chartered Authority must follow
its policies regarding
suspension suspension revocation
or non renewal of our charter
schools charter and with that Mr
chairman that's all I have for a
presentation.
Back up thank you senator expert
witnesses on this particular
bill I'm Mr Chairman no.
Okay thank you mark hello you
will go to a public comment on
SB to thirty seven.
Are there any members of the
public that we wish to speak in
opposition of Senate bill two
thirty seven please raise your
hand at this time again this is
for statements of opposition for
Senate bill two thirty seven.
Matt Paul did you want to speak
in opposition.
Yes please
Good morning I had to check
whether it's afternoon good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee I first want to
recognize that we don't think
that the Sanchez attacking
charter schools here we've
appreciated her partnership on a
number of charter school issues
in the past however we say we
oppose this bill because it
addresses a statewide public
education issue with the charter
specific solution nepotism is
real and public education in our
state including school districts
and in both rural and urban
areas we'd love to work with the
sponsoring a proposal for all
public schools along with our
public school partners and we
believe that her and her
language on notification and
assistance to mitigate the
impact of nepotism is a really
good start I also want to know
the charter schools are closed
for gregis behavior the PC has
closed charter schools within
months of opening due to
conflicts of interest and one of
the charter schools that I think
brings up some concerns here was
recently closed flat bites
authorizers our accountability
in our system is strong and that
accountability doesn't exist
across the entire public get
system and so we'd like to work
with the sponsor to fund and
find a solution for all schools
in in in in an issue that's
relevant across the whole sector
thank you.
Thank you Mr Paul are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition to
Senate bill two thirty seven
please raise your hand at this
time.
Okay we're gonna move on to
statements of support we will
hear from Mr Joseph Esposito.
Just.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Lopez we
do stand in support of this
legislation we appreciate the.
Senator bringing this forward
and to work look forward to
working with her on some
improved language that meets
national best practices from the
national association of charter
school authorizers on.
Specifically working with.
Governing councils thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Esposito are there
any other members of the public
that wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two thirty seven
please raise your hand at this
time.
Once again these are statements
of support for Senate bill two
thirty seven.
And that concludes public
statements present a bill to
thirty seven thank you so much.
Thank you market will now go to
questions at less as senator you
have anything else before we go
to questions from the committee.
No Mr chairman Senator questions
thank you Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the majority with and
then finding the bill and and
described this and explaining it
to us excuse me I can talk to
them just a little exhausted as
we all are
I guess I have similar comments
to Mr Paul from earlier was
there a reason why this was not.
is it already in the public
schools this this type of a
policy requirement I don't think
so because I know of multiple
cases where you know family
members work for family members
or fork within the public
schools together can you talk a
little bit about that to
majority whip.
Mr chairman Senator Padilla this
legislation was brought to me by
some of the persons who are
associated with a charter
schools as a chartering
authority and also from some of
the previous conversations on
the Public Education Commission
and it's a part of us to see
what we can do to make sure that
As our charter schools are
hearing to
How would I say making sure that
other governing councils are
operating accordingly there are
have been councils where
you don't have sufficient
membership we have one chair of
the governing council who also
operates in other venues within
the school as
kind of oversight you know
there's always a conflict and we
have a governing council member
who actually has another role
within the school itself so this
was an opportunity just to make
sure there's clarification for
charter schools so that they too
are following what is the proper
procedure.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and and and madam majority whip
I I guess I didn't think I heard
that last portion of your
description I just just to
verify that's in this bill also.
The portion of the governing
member council member having
into the role and that's in the
bill or it or was it just it
meant family member but I heard
earlier was family members could
work in the school if there was
a relationship with the
governing board member maybe I
didn't hear at all.
Mr Chairman no you heard with
regards to the issue on having a
family member of course as we
know even in our our own public
school system there are some
issues sometimes that need to be
addressed with regards to having
of you know supervisory level
with a family member it exists
also in our state government
where you have department
secretaries to have their spouse
to been working within the
department and they have to be
moved so that exists but we want
to make sure that for chartering
authorities at this is
Explicitly listed and can be
addressed within that and also
for governing board members just
making sure that policies that
are adopted by a governing board
are here to.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
major with a so are these for
the non publicly chartered
schools are these were all
charter schools is that what
you're describing.
Mr chairman senator this is for
all of our public school for our
chartering so like yes of course
is the chartering Authority.
Public schools and then some of
the other sorry public school
systems are also chartering
authorities but this also goes
under the Public Education
Commission which is the other
entity that authorizes charters.
I appreciate that so that
they're there in lies the
conundrum of the the maybe the
problem I have with that with
the language so far which is if
these are publicly chartered
wouldn't all of the policy up
and down the chain be consistent
with what we would expect from
any other public school in the
state I don't know why we would
call out just something just for
public for public for charters I
would think that this would be a
policy that we would need to
develop for all of education why
why why are we focusing on on
charters.
Mr Chairman representative
quite frankly because some of
the the charting of the charter
center schools are not following
process okay.
I appreciate that I I think I
understand now and I appreciate
I'm I'm I'm I'm kind of torn on
what to do with this and madam
with major website will listen a
little bit more and then I'll
make a decision on how I might
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator senator dole.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you
Senator Lopez and I understand
the
The intent of the bill as far as
trying to
be fair in the sense with the
governing boards and those that
are employed under them.
But there is a difficulty
defining exactly who family is
especially with my district
nepotism has been brought up
multiple times in every
every entity.
It's it's very hard to define
who family is and ask what
extent are you related that you
should excuse yourself from
Following through on some of
the.
Disciplinary actions that occur
and whether those disciplinary
actions are also related to
another member of the school
that is working there in
retaliation
so I.
I don't know really how to dress
or defined that the tourism and
in the area I I Representative I
think it's a struggle within
that we've dealt with the year
after year
So with that charter schools in
my area
I think this would be very
difficult because they are on a
smaller scale in other schools
that we start to
Discount them in on the
disciplinary action that I don't
know who that would be left to
thank you Mr chair.
Get up thank you senator are
next up Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Lopez for bringing this
bill forward I have in my career
dealt with nepotism issues over
and over again and basically we
we have been forced to pretty
strictly the sense of equity
the companies that I've
I had the pleasure of meeting or
being in management
that equity component is very
strong I also recognize of with
uh Senator Pinto is bringing
forth defining where his family
stop
Very often and in the private
sector we would we would define
it as nuclear family that is
children siblings parents
but it also in terms of equity
can get sticky and aunts and
uncles and cousins I understand
that and as it even gets
extended out further I know of
when I worked on the Navajo
reservation the nepotism and in
different plans it was an issue
as well so
I don't know if there's some way
to further define that
and secondly I thought I heard
that there the bill could be re
written in some ways to it to
follow whether a national
charter schools standards that
are out there I I thought I
heard that I'm just wondering if
that's a possibility as if this
bill moves that that could.
Be working thank you Senator and
thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Hickey of
anyone else on the committee
with questions.
It's not I've got.
Maybe a question or or two of.
We nepotism I think is clearly
defined in the the public school
statutes as to how close the
relationship past that has to be
I think the problem with charter
schools is charter school boards
are more we did rather than
elected like public school
boards up is that Senator the
reason that we need this as more
of a statute rather than it
falling under the.
The main nepotism laws within
the the public school code.
Mr chairman thank you yes that's
one of the points I also wanted
to point out to you is that of
charter school boards can also
what I call exempt themselves
from the nepotism our rule that
we have at this point.
so this would actually would
would clarify that we're that
they cannot waive that nepotism
role for a family member so this
kind of tightens it up a bit
making sure that all of our
public schools are following you
know that the proper law that
yes we're looking just to see
how we can work with them this
is our public schools which have
an elected board verses these
who are just appointed thank
you.
Thank you senator I think that's
the real distinction is though a
public school board is able to
make an exception on a case by
case basis for
somebody working in the same
school or work something of that
sort they are publicly elected
and therefore they are
responsible to the public where
the governing council for
charter school is not
essentially
The old with the any particular
group I mean they are appointed
they are self selected I mean
there's some other mechanisms
but they are not publicly
elected and I I can see the the
reason for that and so thank you
senator pleasure the committee
please.
What we don't have everybody
just jumped up to make motions
this morning do we.
Mr chair like to make a motion
for do pass on Senate bill two
thirty seven thank you Santo
poco motion for it to pass is
there a second.
Not I I will do motion for a
second Marianna if you will call
the roll please Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
****.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
Senator renewable.
Although yes.
Senator Padilla.
Thanks taking we I wrote now.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Now.
Back to Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Senator souls yes.
We have a due pastor.
We I think it's a four three
vote Senator you have a due pass
for Senate bill two thirty seven
on the charter school duties of
we will not have time to get to
any other bills today a couple
of clarifications as we're
moving forward is on Friday we
will start with Senate bill two
thirty six independent Carlsbad
community college well then
here's Senate bill two thirty
for the lottery for home school
students Senate bill two forty
vocational training scholarship
that Senate bill two forty eight
at the sponsor request I believe
we will be hearing on Wednesday
we should be able to get that
and that should be the first one
on Wednesday we should get that
read out so that it'll actually
go forward at the same time as
the others up for the public
because of the zoom in that we
are not having four sessions
every day bills are tending to
go through more as a patch
rather than every day some
moving forward in our next group
to be ready and will be on
Wednesday and they will all get
on to their next committee at hi
so whether bill passes today
Monday or Wednesday they're all
going to move through with that
say that it gets read out on
Wednesday we will later this
afternoon have out the schedule
for additional bills that will
be on Friday from the Monday
schedule and I'll start looking
towards the Wednesday schedule
committee members if you've got
particular bills that you want
me to look at trying to get on
the schedule please let me know
when you know certainly
depending on scheduling things
I'll see what I can do about
getting some of those forward is
there anything else for the
committee today.
If not I'd like to thank you for
particular we think mark hello
merry and they really make this
committee meeting and frankly
they're kind of behind the
scenes and such but they're part
of what makes us all very
successful as we're moving
things forward so we can do a
little virtual thank you to our
people who make things run
smoothly I so appreciate if we
were with us every day and and
committee I think we have a very
good functioning committee and I
appreciate all of you have a
great weekend everyone we do not
have a meeting tomorrow
afternoon as we we thought we we
might depending on how they
built a drop so thank you all
and have a have a restful
weekend with what's going on
next week thank you and with
that we are adjourned for today.
