Ship changes it was rolled over
from our five our friday meeting
when time ran out just a heads
up for people in education we
have a hard stop at eleven each
day and so if we get close to
that and there's a bill you and
people really want to get past
maybe less a questions or public
input for things also on during
public input I allow only two
minutes per person and so please
use your time wisely if you have
things to say any comments or
questions from committee
members.
If not.
Center could I him bill welcome
to education secretary welcome
thank you mister chairman I am
here with my expert witness
secretary richard guys with
senate bill to thirty nine that
immense certain eligibility
requirements for students
pertaining to the lottery and
opportunity scholarships it
changes the definition of full
time in the lottery scholarship
act to thirty credit hours per
academic year from the previous
fifteen credit hours per
semester at four year
institutions and to twenty four
credit hours per academic year
at two year institutions the
reason this is an important bill
mister chairman is some students
just prefer to instead of
carrying a heavy load when
semester they like to spread it
out a little bit I I know that's
how I always went to college I
tried to spread it out
throughout the year and go to
summer school as well so out
overly overwhelmed but with atm
chair i'll i'll let my expert
witness introduced herself and
then.
Thank you mister chair think you
senator we just have a couple
more things but the senator hit
on the most important part of
that on page five we also
removed legacy student it's an
outdated term that refers to a
core her cold horse students
from twenty fourteen and page
six we also allowed lottery
students to now take a summer
semester as an option but it's
absolutely not a requirement and
students can take less than the
mandatory credit hours for the
last semester before graduation
that's incredibly important
because how many times have we
heard somebody say I just had
three credit hours left but I
couldn't afford to do it but
they can do that with the
lottery scholarship now now the
primary changes to the
opportunity scholarship are
simple and include on page nine
students are allowed to take
fewer than sex credit hours and
their last semester before
graduation like the lottery
scholarship on page twelve
there's a mention of maximum
distributions to colleges in
universities based on the annual
increase of the higher education
price index which relates to
tuition and then on page twelve
we are now ensuring that
previously complete pretty
students who were dual credit
students who completed courses
that will not count towards the
cap of credit hours for the
opportunity scholarship which is
ninety for associates and one
hundred and sixty for bachelors
so they get to go to school and
receive the opportunity
scholarship during their bridge
semester and that is it mister
charle go ahead and differ back
to the sponsor and of course
you.
Thank you mister chairman and
secretary we stand for
questions.
Thank you for adding the
audience anyone in supporter in
favor of this legislation if
you'd like to please come down
or line up to speak at the
microphone anyone in support
work please come down
others please line up so we know
how many people are there.
Thank you anyone else when
speaking support.
The.
And online we have two people in
support serra it's gerald.
If you want to speak you need to
come up to the front please.
Thank you.
The.
Serious gel please go ahead
good morning mister chair
members of the committee i'm
serious it's gerald with the
greater album chamber of
commerce or in strong support of
this bill these two scholarship
programs have the potential to
really be life changing for so
many of our young people this
bill before you make some smart
changes that will ensure
students can take full advantage
of these exactly where we want
them to it clarifies some really
important requirements grants
our college students meaningful
flexibility as well and this
make sure we hold our high
school students harmless kind of
for dual credit courses they
might take it shouldn't count
against them when they use door
credit to get ahead that's
exactly the reason we created
this program this bill will
ensure that state funded
scholarship opportunities really
work for our students so they
can succeed in attaining their
degree in less time and at no
cost to them we are support
thank you.
Thank you serup and emily
will though.
It will be please.
This.
Good morning mister chairman
members of the committee i'm
among well doubt new mexico
voices for children would like
to think senator krayer temporal
procarrying the spell and how we
stand in support today we
believe that covering the summer
semesters as part of the lottery
scholarship in particular is a
really valuable change to the
program that will allow every
student the access to summer
courses that they might want to
take without be concerned for
their tuition expenses and and
by allowing this flexibility in
the program that levy its
pressure on students who would
prefer to spread out their
correspond over all three
semesters during an academic
year so
you know we believe this can
help students continue forward
with the moment and they have
from fall in spring to continue
school and could ultimately help
more students complete the
program of on times thinking so
much.
Thank you emily anyone in
opposition.
He went online in opposition.
If not any comments before we go
to questions from the committee.
Questions from the committee.
Sir into.
Thank you mister press mister
president thank you
members of the committee I think
you send him film for bringing
this for secretary
so shippies on a trimester
holders this affect them
mr chair sen so sippy actually
is a bureau of indian education
score and all of their tuition
and fees are covered through the
federal government so there
would be no impact related to
the students that set me.
Thank you thank you mister chair
and thank you secretary and so
what about into you and in a
college I just want clarity so
we're mr chair no it's a fair
question as far as never had
technical university I and
didn't at college they will all
be covered with this bill.
You're welcome.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you to senator how fill and out
of secretary for bringing this
before just just a few
questions.
I'm reading here from the first
center bill to thirty nine
requires a higher education
apartment to determine the
maximum distribution the
opportunity scarship based on
the annual increase in the
higher education price index.
For the mountain region
could you explain that a little
bit to me at a chance to kind of
look at that I just just want to
understand that mr chair yes so
a few years back when we first
implemented the opportunity
scholarship on average the
institutions increase their
tuition and fees by eleven point
one percent so what this does is
prevent our institutions and
kinda hold them a little bit
more accountable for those
tuition and fee increases can
they up go up to ten percent yes
they can however they're gonna
have to figure out how to cover
the remaining that we put in
place so let's say the average
is four percent they'll have to
figure out how to cover the
other six percent and how
they're going to put that on to
their students but will retrain
to do is make sure that our
institutions are price gouging
our students in the state of new
mexico and we're creating
averages that take into account
the region and inflation of the
nation great thank you mister
chair and thank you madame
secretary for that answer
and then the other question is
there's a mention in the fire
about that
these changes will draw more
funds from the lottery
scholarship and fewer friends
from the opportunity
scholarship.
And so how how will that be done
mr chair that is correct so now
that we're expanding eligibility
for a lottery scholarships we
may have to rely a little bit
more on our lottery funds the
impact to the fun is potentially
eleven million dollars through
our calculations however
remember there is a sustainable
funding through streamed through
the lottery tuition fund which
is from our l.
Will thank you matter secretary
thank you center thank you
mister thank you other
questions.
Just a question or two I have in
it and it was following a text
right then so I hope the idea
that don't reiterate the same
one.
The then was made a chart of.
The various ways are students
are required to take thirty
credits a year but they can
spread that out in any manner
they like.
Mister that is correct it would
include the false spring and
summer semesters now.
So for instance a student could
take twelve credits in the fall
twelve in the spring and six
during the summer to make
thirty.
That is correct mister chair if
they are at a four year
university yes I understand
I I really like that because
when we moved to wear they had
to take fifteen and fifteen o
fifteen credit hours are not the
same there are some semesters
where fifteen is an incredibly
heavy load and other semesters
where eighteen might be a very
light load and so I think this
gives students a whole lot more
flexibility to to manage their
education and not run into
losing their scholarship if
they're able to take some credit
summer credits going full time.
This would it allow.
Students for instance to take.
Fifteen.
Six during the summer and
another fifteen with those all
be paid where they could pick up
thirty six credits or it will
only pay for thirty total.
Mr chair.
I'm gonna differ to my expert
witness sorry.
Is that turned on you know that
it's on right now
mr chairman thank you
so a student actually the way
the bill is written as the
student has a maximum of nine
credit hours in the summer
semester so they would only be
allowed to take the nine credits
and then of course any others in
the fallen spring
so my question they then could
take fifteen in the fall fifteen
the spring and nine during the
summer could actually pick up
thirty nine credit hours all
paid for by the scholarship yes
mister chair that is correct.
I like that you it'll give
students a lot more flexibility
in using the scholarship to
actually get towards their
degree.
Sir pinto second time yes mister
chair members in the committee
I was thinking back and my first
semester I took twenty one
credit hours so
I know we're trying to like
lower it but what about those
that are able to
I mean that there's no ceiling
on it again.
The.
Mr chairman a call on heather
again.
Mr chairman in members of the
committee i'm so students are
are ill eligible to take
can you repeat the question
sorry so mister chairman members
of the committee that if they're
so we're putting a floor saying
that fifteen in the night but as
far as the ceiling consumer when
I got it I don't remember all
the classes they took my
freshman year but I was up back
to anyone credit.
Are we work we're not limiting
that mr chairman answer the
opportunity scarch limits
students from a maximum eighteen
credit hours per semester yes
that's what the opportunity will
currently cover
it and I believe that higher ed
typically eighteen is considered
full time and for an overload
any student would have to pay
extra to take more than that.
I'm correct mister chairman that
is correct.
The other questions from the
committee.
If not open for emotionally or
did you have questions thank you
mister terman president thank
you mister center and filled the
maybe existing laws
and bring it up but you say
students are eligible for a
hundred sixty hours of classes
so my question is the only need
a hundred and twenty to
graduate.
Why would we pay next for an
extra forty mr chair senator
that refers to the opportunity
scholarships that the maximum is
a hundred and sixty however
there is this last state a
hundred sixty credit hours or
degree attainment whichever
comes first so if they get their
degree they're not going to have
an extra forty credit hours that
they can just do they already
have their degree and they will
no longer receive the
opportunity scholarship at the
four years I know thank you
thank you mister chairman but
now that makes sense I think if
you can't not get out of like a
hundred and thirty five hours
you know you should pray we take
a math course or something but
i'll give my my old to the
lottery on the house floor
mister.
With it with the year.
We got ask ourselves do we need
to sell lottery tickets to raise
money for sc.
Thank you thank you senator and
I agree that yeah we've we've
got money to make sure that all
students can get there their
college paid for up if I could
my analyst indicate we probably
need to make a very short
amendment in the the short title
for this does not match that
it's also the opportunity in the
lottery scholarship and so the
title should match.
The.
In that way should that that
read on here cause the titles
rather long.
Where is that just how it's
listed for instance on our
thing.
So it
yeah so not that the great big
long went and I don't know where
that actually goes is that
something we talked to council
service about getting.
So i'm not sure that that needs
to be amendment I guess but in
how it's listed as speed two
thirty nine lottery scholarship
changes.
The.
It should be watery and
opportunity scholarship changes.
On the short title and I think
that's something just in how
they listed on the the bill
finder and other things through
council service list your chair
that is correct it's an
identifying factor when it comes
to looking up the bill we can
definitely ask the drafter if
that's something we can change
that's your now okay.
That that was the only thing I
don't think we need to do that
with an amendment so committee
pleasure the committee please.
October I do password center
though second by center my
estimates please call the role.
Send a branch.
Considered.
Yes.
Yes
yes yes unanimously
thank you
and I see chairman rometo came
in the room I know he's trying
to chair his committee over on
the house side so we are going
to move down to a house bill one
seventy one as amended the
school graduation requirements
this is the first house bill and
I think you also have some
senate bills on your side today
always please that education are
the first ones to get education
done on the opposite chamber.
We tend to be less partisan than
others and so I appreciate my
colleague on the the house side
in that we we try and get the
work done.
Alright I appreciate that
chairman rometo if you would
please house bill one seventy
one as amended great thank you
miss chairman I don't know at
Which is the change to the high
school graduation requirements
if you remember.
A bill for high school
graduation requirement.
And out of the house obviously
last year.
What was vetoed by the governor.
The most substantive change for
this year which alleviated the
executives concerned certainly
as the moving from the number
twenty two twenty two was a
minimum requirement of the last
piece of legislation this piece
of legislation that number is
back up to minimum of twenty
four
so that alleviated those
concerns from the executive side
I do want to start off by saying
at least that is piece of
legislation is all about a
student choice at a time when we
have.
Uh own issue with attendance.
With an issue where students not
being able to see themselves
reflected in the education that
they're taking this opens up
multiple pathways for their own
students to decide on what
they're interested in what sort
of courses they should take in
this is all up and down their
englishman science social
science credits on there is at
least one credit that is given
two students to decide on their
own what they would like to take
in those respective categories.
As far as other issues I know
that we've had it's certainly on
the house side of us discussion
around personal financial
literacy that is in the bill
it's a class that I teach which
is government for half semester
and.
Economic slash personal
financial literacy in the reason
why we do that
and this has been a long road to
come to this point is that
having the class a long with the
standards a long with the.
The.
Emphasis on economics allows our
students to explore one how they
fit in two economics via
personal financial literacy but
also giving that economic side
of how interest rates for
example are decided upon what
economic factors there are so
that it's not just making up
you know how much interest is
going to factor into their car
loan at different percentages
it's so that they can learn both
so we definitely do have that in
there i'm one of the other
issues that we have heard as
well.
We do have that in its also with
in our social study standards
there is a strand.
And ethnically appropriate
instruction and social studies
where students are getting that
throughout their social studies
requirements.
So I feel that we have a great
piece of legislation certainly
something that i'm we're really
looking at re engaging our
student.
Co sponsor representative.
Thank you mister chair good
morning.
I'll i'll just be brief I think
this this bill has had wide
support in the reason why I
think is because it's bringing
some some great changes to our
high school graduation
requirements a couple of things
that all highlight that it are
important for me is the
incorporation of cte in a new
way I think that gives a lot
more options to our students
particularly those that are
interested in when entering the
work force right out of high
school
I also like having to sit down
with our students and and create
these career pathways I think
that's a smart change as well
and then the last thing i'll
mention is I like the the two
credits of local school
districts deciding what's
important in their district
because what might be important
where I live in astech may be
different than what's important
in los cruces and recognizing
that education really should be
individualized and I think it
allows a little more flexibility
for that so thank you mister
chair and mister chairman we
have our director.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chairman.
The.
Thank you chairman I believe we
have two amendments one from
center hiki and one from center
my estimates center hiki would
you like to go first.
I don't matter
when thank you mister thank you
german romero just.
Working with the executive and.
The
I did a media literacy bill a
while back and it tweaked the.
The middle school statute and so
it would put the magic words
media literacy in the middle
school statute.
So and with be reviewing your
bill I couldn't find it it took
me up a while to find I finally
found it this week and it's it's
actually in another statute.
So if we could consider
amendment double oh seven point
one.
Double o seven point one.
And.
And essentially on the on the
page three.
It is kind of nudges nudges the
the middle schools a little bit
anna.
Current law is media literacy
may be offered.
And so what this would do is
they make media literacy and
personal financial literacy may
be offered.
That way you know maybe there's
that media there's that there's
that financial receipt teacher
in middle school that it wants
to teach it and doesn't have to
fuss with.
So ask if.
If you consider that a friendly
or not.
The.
Mr chairman and and senator
myester say I appreciate it I
guess we're having issue with
wear exactly there's some men
men is being proposed so not
necessarily directed to the bill
i'm the other thing I will say
is mister chairman and senator
is that we just passed a
memorial and I chair the
legislative education study
committee in order to review
middle school next so that's
where we are hoping to be a year
in but certainly we would invite
you to those conversations but
at this point I think this is
unfriendly and then understood
thank you and then also don't
have the one seventy one in
front of me but if if this were
to be a committee so it would it
would go first that's why I
couldn't it's not so the statute
isn't included in the current
one seventy one.
But I know there's a big push f.
So I would I would move the move
the minute okay we have a motion
for the amendment of the ads in
personal financial literacy may
be offered as an elective in and
that's dealing with a middle
school.
So up to the the audience those
in favor of the amendment and
you and in favor.
If you'd like to come down and
get you have two minutes please
if there's anyone else pleased
why enough and this is only on
the amendment.
Yes now
is it.
It definitely is on mister chair
members of the committee
sponsors and advocates my name
is nation and i'm a person with
multiple disabilities and also
disability advocate but in a
prior I was also in educator and
administrator at a director of
career planning replacement at
an art school where you would
think money is not the issue but
it is very very important that
financial letter state be braded
into every
every part and parcel of
education I would often use play
money to inspire people to learn
how to write grants and to make
a fiscal impact but something
that was very revealing to me
was when I was working with
someone who was an high level
leadership position and I went
with her to go purchase a car
and I was the one who
backed the interest rate out and
my phone and their individual
that was doing the final sales
was like I said oh and the
interest rate will be this mount
and and he does how do you do
that next that it's called math
so I hope that everyone moving
fireword will be able to lift
themselves out of in out of
poverty by understanding how to
buy a car how to buy a house and
how to make their life better
trajectory thank you very much
mister chair members of the
committee and sponsors
thank you anyone else on the
amendment.
Believe we have one in favor
online.
Please go ahead.
Hi i'm a rush you teeky i'm a
student from albuquerque academy
and and the student director of
jump start new mexico i'm
talking today in favor of the
amendment to build one seventy
one that would create
financially to receipt as a
additional graduation
requirement I speaking a day for
two primary reasons the first is
the importance of that is not
with the amendment is on we can
have you on later when we're
actually talking about the
member that would add financial
literacy this is just
that financial iters he may be
heard of their middle school.
Conversation sorry thank you
thank you.
Anyone in opposition
please come up.
Thank you.
Mr chip and missile
mister chairman standard for the
school superintendents
association and the colors of
education leaders would
appreciate what the sponsors
trying to do.
Here's the canana worrying.
When you are opening up the
question about middle school
credits.
Counting toward high school
graduation we understand the
word may and we appreciate that
the mister that's a wider scope
of question about when credit
will count when they world while
well and what won't this turn we
think the more expedient where
to go just to have this taken to
the lsc during the intern and
make a part of the middle school
study so it can be sure to have
things calibrated and put
together properly as we look at
the overall graduation
requirements for our students in
new mexico thank you.
Mister chairman members of the
committee my name is bunny life
but i'm president of the mesco
coalition of educational leaders
also retired to pretend to my
very small district I seem to be
the voice of micro schools I
appreciate the sponsors position
and words and offer the word may
as well however just like to
remind the committee sometimes
are offering things and
districts where there's a very
limited staff becomes a
problematic in terms of offering
for students when it comes to
staffing pops at that
possibilities thank you
thank you chris mister chris
honourable registered obvious
for relative public schools and
last clues as public schools we
appreciate the sponsor up the
amendment we understand intent
here behind but we ask that this
can be taken through the interim
since there is a memory of
present and we can work together
on what we need for that for me
to scoop thank you.
Joe thank you I can mischairman
members of the committee joking
new mexico school boards
association nor we've been
working with the
sponsor of this bill throughout
the interim and we think that's
the approach to take on the
issue that is brought forward so
again where we oppose the
amendment.
Good morning mister chair
members committee lee white
superintendent schools and
loving.
And I stand in opposition to the
amendment as a superintendent in
a small school district a lot of
times it makes it very difficult
to find the staff depending on
how it's implemented i'm finding
the staff who specially license
your wise because of the the
sticky points that that happen
with license or so any time you
put it lower into that it
becomes a possible license your
issue and so I stand as the
board is
as the bill was originally
written rather than the
amendment thank you thank you.
Anyone outlined
okay
back to committee questions on
the amendment.
The.
No one else I I guess.
This only is a mate is there
anything in the statute that
prevents districts from offering
this at the middle school level.
Mister chairman that it was so
they don't believe so but up
but given the bureaucratic
nature of our cater twelve
system I can't imagine.
A teacher convincing a principle
to commence a certain term to do
something unless there is that
saturda.
I disagree because I actually
did that in my school one time
the and got them doffers
statistics but I understand
center people thank you thank
you mister chairman members of
the committee and being a
teacher
when I started my education.
Could they went from business to
education and
I only had the common court
standards to learn.
And the common course standards
were around what fifty years
before I was back in let's see I
stopped teaching and twenty
eighteen so up before that it
was like fifty years old already
but would I understand is new
mexico didn't really adopt the
common court standards tell
lebanon twelve.
The full implementation of the
common court standards didn't
really throughout new mexico was
in twenty fifth team throughout
the comical standards
since
first grade children are you're
supposed to incorporate data so
if these are doctor are adopted
locally then that's what
teachers are held accountable
for because that's what the
assessment is supposed to be
about the common course
standards.
And then by second grade they're
supposed to be to be doing time
value and money so from that
second grade level up to this
time you know they're it's post
to be incorporated in your
lesson plan
in if you look at the common
course to enter from cape from
six to twelve it implements all
of what we dean financial
literacy all of it even from
insurance to understand in
credit even to stock market so
if that is not being taught and
when I got into teaching the
student site had there was no
understanding and I think it was
because this was not adopted
earlier.
There were teachers that were
still.
That I worked with that were
still on the national standards
to all standards so there was
that transition that had to
happen so what they were
teaching was kind of what they
were used to teaching but yet
the new touches that came in
with the common court standards
that old standard wasn't
something so you had to being in
the real world to our students
incorporate technology and I
think that took a matter of time
I know we have I think they're
still some time that were still
in that transition a little bit.
So all of this trained
make this happen I think it's
really up to local level in that
sense to
those would you call them
coaches that are in the schools
that come in to see how you're
doing your lesson planned how
your
implementing to make sure that
that particular aspect in your
school
is being incorporated so i'm
this I don't really see how
we're really trying to make this
better unless it's the teacher
or getting the resources if
they're not available if they
don't have the internet how are
you supposed to really explain
the dust to stock market to the
students at the school.
And even in the young gallop
area there was always an issue
especially what you're trying to
do something in it testing time
because the bandwidth went back
support so you couldn't do this
if they were doing testing
because they were online.
Those issues need to be and
worked out.
So that the teacher does have
the ability to do what they need
without that in europe should I
think you are take that really
as a question but
thank you mister chairman
understand the intent of the
bill but if you're
in that career fail that he
could get something there is
that if you're not aware of you
need to make.
Implementing in your classroom
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you and you know my other
concerned with amendments were
in a thirty day session time is
the enemy kills most bills and
any amendments then have to go
back over to the the house which
is an extra step which makes it
less likely that the bill the
entire bill has a chance of
getting through we've done this
for several years and so any
other questions from the
committee.
The.
If not if you will call the role
on the amendment.
Sender hickey no center my
estimates yes considered novel.
Senator pent up nope said her no
singer no so the amendment does
not pass
we do have a second amendment
which I think is
those are going to
present your amendment please
miss terror as we are moving man
to.
House bill one seventy one can I
explain the amendment or
yes what we're trying to do here
in miss chairman.
As representative I appreciate
it catherine brown's been
working on this for a long time
and trying to get it
mandated in the education I had
to give you a little bit his for
years ago I took financial
literacy class
through day brands each it
allowed me to pay off my house
like you would car but I
wouldn't know that if our church
hadn't pushed it
what we're trying to do here's
to try to get it amended it it
only take a half credit
but
if I go onto the build you want
me to go in mind out the.
Um page.
Mr I don't
look up on their
one if you want to want to talk
about okay
thirteen so so on page thirteen
online eleven were striking.
And the and personal finance
literacy and then on page
thirteen between large twenty
three twenty four were inserting
one half unit of personal
financial literacy.
And then are the remainers
seem paragraphs will be read
number on page thirteen line
twenty four will strike and one
half and then on page fourteen
line six or strike financial
literacy and mister and
representative that would do is
just would allow us to immend in
their gain at one simple thing
to guarantee that every new
mexico high school student will
complete one semester plus
financial literacy is driving a
house bill once only one a
positive corporate financial
literacy concept into existing
economic requirements they could
be just a small element in that
economic course.
There's twenty five states that
have already enacted this making
a stand alone once measured
financial literature class at
the high school graduation
requirement and it's up from a
six and twenty nineteen so
twenty nineteen only six eight
currently there's twenty five
but eleven we have financially
see already as electric as since
two thousand and only eleven
percent of the students in the
mexico of completed financial
literacy class before the
graduate so were one in the make
it mandatory to put it in
it's just moving to have credit
and electives
and will stand for questions
chairman thank you miss chairman
so feel like a broken record
which is german because i've
done this before not that part
but I mean saying no this is
unfriendly amendment as I
mentioned in the beginning of of
my testimony here is that we do
have personal financial literacy
I think senator pinto explained
it very well that when you look
at the standards and when you're
responsible for your students
you're teaching by the standards
standards as far as our new
social study standards sprinkle
and personal financial literacy
from kindergarten all the way to
high school culminating in the
class that I teach is economics
and personal financial literacy
there are thirteen standards
that are personal financial
literacy and again to reiterate
mischairman the reason why is
because you get to teap students
in a more robust way how when
you talk about taking our money
for a car loan they can talk
about and we'd talk about I talk
about in my class with my
students walk through what your
interest rate is based upon how
much you would pay per month if
you get a car by a car for
twenty five thousand dollars at
five percent interest and then
the duration of that long buy
the economics part that makes it
so much more robust is the fact
that.
You get to talk about the things
that drive interest rates what
are the fed up to what do they
really look at in determining
interest rates so you're hitting
them with her personal financial
literacy but you're also
educating students on the larger
factor so when they're watching
the news it's all in a goal of
trying to get students more
civically.
Literacy hanging on its own has
its merits but it's so much more
robust I think the way that we
teach it currently in mind you
to send it her pinto's point
So this is the first year of
actual implementation of the new
social studies standards so I
think it's a a lot more robust
way of doing it.
Attempts because I don't think
it's fairer to say that we don't
require a personal financial
literacy we do as seniors as
well as sprinkled throughout the
students k twelve experiences
one other thing mr chairman if I
may in mandating a class
we're also taking away those
options from students albeit
it's a point five credit the
whole point of this is to open
up students
opportunities and perspective
and not mandate mandating this
that in the other on because
honestly I think personally
students should be taking
philosophy class so that they
can really start thinking on
their own doing logic puzzles
things like that but if we all
thought personally we are
students should be mandated this
that the other we'd have a
hundred twelve standards or a
hundred twelve classes and I
don't think that's the way to do
it we've been working on this
for four years standards with
the public education department
as well as credits but.
The.
Thank you out of the audience
those in support if you would
please come up to the mike you
have a maximum of two minutes
please try not to be redundant
with what other people have
already said thank you good
morning mister chairman mister
chairman I important I have the
honor privilege of being your
state treasure first email I
will tell you that though I
manage seventeen billion today
when I was in high school and
even in calculated class I
didn't know how to manage a
budget I didn't have a savings
account and either did my
parents because we were making
ends meet from chap check to pay
check and that's the story of
many new mexicans today.
Happened credit to the
chairman's point it's nat fall
in pepper on your on your cheat
out on bored those this is the
chile financial literacy is a
requirement that we all need to
have here in new mexico to give
our children and opportunity to
make good healthy and better
decisions financially for
themselves for sometimes their
parents and their grandparents
that may have not known better
or for the children that they
plan to have in the future the
council of university presidents
have unanimously endorsed this
eighty five percent of new
mexicans support this this is a
bipartisan effort that's going
to help our students to be more
successful and it doesn't cost a
penny more we already have
financial literacy as an option
and when we talk to the
chairman's point about options
you didn't give students and
option whether or not they
should be in geometry or in
algebra but you want to give
them an option as to whether or
not financial literacy is better
for them when we all know that
financial literacy is better
because it may have either
messed up our credit score or
someone else's credit score
close to us it may have been the
loan that we got and didn't
understand the interest rates
that are fixed verses variable
matter this is an opportunity
that twenty five states have
already given to their people we
have the opportunity to give it
to ours with the new standard
there's legislation that says
this won't be looked at again
for another ten years we need to
look at this today we're already
behind the schedule where forty
ninth we have an opportunity to
be able to move up you have
bankers you have people from
both sides of the isle that are
coming to this conversation
today that have never been here
to say let's support financial
literacy for our students thank
you very much mister charlie.
Others who would like to please
line up so I know how many
people are there thank you
mr chair members is a commercial
and sponsors I am in favor of
financial letters say not
believe that i've already made
my statement and support thank
you very much thank you.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Good morning my name is charlie
birthman
i'm a senior advisor at the
career service is office of st
john's college here in santa fe
and on the former director.
I have taught financial litter
sea for twenty years
five years
in high school in california ten
years.
It alberty academies high school
and five years you're at a
chance college or I teach a
semester course for freshman.
I do not believe that it is
possible to properly teach
financial literacy as part of an
economic scores
a good financial literary
literacy curriculum covers
budgeting savings credit and
credit cards college auto loans
and investing I believe you can
skim and sprinkle and introduce
some concepts but if you really
want to make financial literacy.
A user bolt said of knowledge
that you can apply to life it
must be a semester course
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee
i'm johnny anderson I represent
the new mexico bankers
association
my first thought listening to
testimony today is how lucky
the yeah students and that
representative of chairman
romaro have
he's obviously doing a terrific
job basically.
Engaging his students in matters
having to do with financial
letter say
in our view that's not happy
neighborhood in the state and so
we really think that having a
one semester dedicated to
financial matter see as crucial
it's a life skill I think all of
us have at one time or another
particularly young.
Gotten ourselves into some
tremendous problems financially.
And it seems to me that this is
a life skill that we could
basically if we catch one out of
ten students and help them
through their early years
understanding that a credit card
can be your best friend or your
worst enemy.
As we are talking about buying a
car by an used car new car a
house whether it's raining
reading your apartment on these
things were so important to you
whether you're going to go on to
college or you're going to go
and start a business or whatever
and particularly starting to
business having some
understanding about financial
literacy and who to go to who
not to go who who do watch out
for whatever things that are so
important to to I believe to
young people and me there at
least a lot of us
as we get older we have the same
problems on fifteen seconds
please but anyway I would just
tell you i've touched financial
letter see on behalf of the new
mexico bankers association and I
can tell you students feel that
they're really getting their
money when they take the class
thank you very much
my name thank you mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is fred nathan
and I and the executive director
of think new mexico we strongly
support this amendment.
It's important to understand
that the high school graduation
requirements bill is passed only
once a decade traditionally by
this legislature in fact the
last time it was passed was
fourteen years ago.
As it's been mentioned twenty
five other states guarantee
their students are full semester
course in financial literacy and
is mister bergman said it's very
important that it's a full
semester there's a lot to be
taught not an optional course
like in the house bill one
seventy one not embedded in
another course like in house
bill one seventy one our
students shouldn't have to wait
another decade or fourteen years
for this course which they need
to know now we're forty ninth
out of fifty states in overall
financial literacy according to
wallet.
In other states where this is
taught it's not uncommon for
these students to go home and
teach their parents and their
grandparents the same concepts
that they've learned that day
that would be very powerful in
new mexico.
In deciding whether a full
semester course in financial
literacy belongs in the high
school graduation requirements.
I encourage you to think about
your own family and yourself and
maybe your family struggled with
some of these canceps like
budgeting like savings.
Like investments like credit.
And think about how this course
would have been helpful to you
and to your family and let's not
deny that
to our students finally I want
to point out that you're
constituents overwhelmingly want
this it was a pole taken in
twenty twenty two of seven
hundred and fifty one new
mexicans seventy eight percent
favorite area only nine eight
opposed
online those in support and I
serve it.
So.
Thank you mr chair i'll keep it
really brief ceremony with the
greater alba cricket chamber of
commerce we are in full support
of this amendment financial
literacy skills are skills every
young person needs whether
they're on track for college or
a career thank you.
Thank you and next I have.
Stephen rogers.
Even if you're there please go
ahead.
My name is stephen rogers I was
the senior private banker whilst
fargo for twenty years so I have
a personal perspective in their
now it is state of knowledge of
financial literacy among my
clients I can tell you I can't
tell you how many times my
clients confess to natnoin how
to manage money they couldn't
manage handle a budget or cash
floor basic investment
principles and he would think
these are people who know better
than making good money a lot of
professionals but a lot of them
just didn't understand how to
manage it all and so i'm afraid
that these same people are going
to pass down that lack of
knowledge to their own kids
class there is required
well kind of base pass that and
ensure that kids get this
knowledge they want to get that
knowledge but left to their own
devices you know if it's not
required it's easy that just
like let it go and do something
else so that's why I strongly
support the notion of this
amendment thank you.
Thank you
mention.
The.
Let's care of members of the
committee i'm married
and i'm speaking on behalf of
legal woman voters of new mexico
and the american association of
the university women
and I have to say as an educator
thirty eight years thirty six at
higher I have seen more drop out
and crankly
who had
problems because they did not
understand finances they get
credit cards the charge things
up they take out loans the loans
compound and their lives are
ruined i've seen students with
you know their family blues
their houses after they get what
card to get the money worked
with home wise and and you know
gotten loan and they can't pay
their bill
I this is urgent it and you know
I believe in philosophy and I
have the greatest respect for
care romano and think that he
probably does bring a lot of
your personal economic into
macro economics but we need our
our student okay instruction and
financial winter and require to
open the relieved rule and
because they are they do not
understand based on concept by
credit so I urge you to adopt
this amendment thank you.
Thank you and last year and I
think it was the student we had
on before it this now we is
appropriate on this amendment so
if you would please sir.
Sorry for me speaking earlier
i'm a student from albuquerque
academy and i'm the student
director of jump start new
mexico
i'm talking to the session today
today because i'm interested in
telling you guys how valuable
financial literacy as a two has
been at my school we provide it
as a four semester long class to
all of our students and it's
been incredibly valuable for
everyone who's taken it but the
biggest reason why i'm talking
today is the importance of
creating it as a mandatory
class.
Because in a world where it
would be commanded toward my own
college guidance officers have
told me that they would like for
it to be mandatory as it exists
right now the problem is that
the legislature and the laws
that we have dictating the
required ratuation requirements
don't make it mandatory right
now if it becomes mandatory
demand of kid they're going to
have access to this really
important class is going to
increase a lot thank you.
The.
Thank you that is the comment
for those in support those in
opposition if you would police
come to the middle so but some
so I can see how many.
Please draw and keep your
comments shortened unredundant
term of the love does require
right now financial litters what
are requires as a process is
senator panto indicated mister
chair that is integrated from
kay twelve.
This is literacy literacy isn't
that one semester how do you do
how do you do literacy for
reading.
Not in one semester mister
chairman.
Instead you was a legislature
and through the public education
department we designed a
correction that's integrated
throughout all the grades that
cabstones itself over in the
econ that are the the sponsor
talked about
chairman it's been in place one
year.
I will tell you the
superintendent of schools for
years don't give our schools
whiplash as we continue to
emphasize this important issue
miss chairman it's there it's
supported and where you heard
from the sponsor is what is the
is actually what's in the
curriculum mister chairman thank
you.
Good morning again measures
chair members of the committee
again my name is body light but
name mesco collision is case to
leaders president what I didn't
tell you earlier was that before
I went to the dark side I was a
act teacher so proud every
advisor and that was right it's
been most of my career I also am
the current new mexico school
superintendent over the year so
I speak through several
different lessons I emerging you
guys to trust the less the
interim process and the their
time there's gone through in
this bill it has got to this
point listen to the educators
that have gotten to the place to
recommend house but one seventy
one as unamended the mandates
that I mentioned you before
about stephanie is one situation
that's a problem
if you take away the student
sway says sender represented
remail has an imagine before
that would have destroyed the
opportunities that my students
in again and I will tell you
there is a there's opportunity
to agreed chation to teach again
like business which were
emphasised as student choice to
further develop literacy is in
an elective course and as since
and rounds just mentioned this
has been a one here
thank you for thank you for
considering leaving this bill
alone and I are strongly urged
eight do not pass on this
amendment
thank you
good morning mister chair
members of the committee my name
is ellen burns president of the
albuquerque teacher's federation
and I just want to underscore as
teachers we teach to the
standards and we do that and are
held accountable for that from
kay through twelve and embedded
with an all the standards is a
component of financial literacy
understanding money becoming
well versed in what the chair
said so eloquently and that is
how to make connections with
financial literacy and every
other subject that we teach.
So our job is explicit
connections and and making sure
that we wive this through their
entire educational career and
i'm speaking against the
amendment thank you.
Thank you miss chairman members
of the committee joking with new
mexico school boards
while we support the intent of
this there has been a long heart
hours put into over four years
trying to get to this point
somebody mentioned earlier we
hadn't had a graduation bill in
ten years well it's time we have
one it's ready to go
unfortunately this concept in
the other amendment did not come
forward during the interim or on
the house side where it might
have been discussed and in more
timely i'm afraid that this
would be
this would cause a possible
failure of the bill to go
through so we support the bill
as presented and has worked on
throughout the interim thank you
thank you
thank you mister chairman
committee lender siegel for
santa fe public schools and we
stand against this this was all
worked out during the interim
and elia c and we want to make
sure that our students have
options so
thank you linda and our last one
yes out yet a hello my name is
rachel montoya the nab
nationwide president and we do
have many school districts
across some are nab honation
with the state of new mexico I
would like to humbly ask their
to vote yes for this um.
Financial literacy i'm sorry I
was in another comedian we are
in opposition okay thank you so
much though
thank you anyone online
if not in question the committee
on the meth.
This health care have to do with
this and actually it has a lot.
Health care that well being the
child and so forth has a lot to
do between parents and their
ability to solve problems and
and conflict in the family or no
or lack of conflict in as well
know from our own partnerships
however they may be
and correct justice money is
probably the biggest point of
argument.
And that leads and sometimes can
lead to despunction
just between my wife and myself
we probably have close to
seventy years of fault time
education
the two of us are you over what
turns out to be relatively
simple stuff that we have to go
get a financial advisor to go
you know if you only got this
little peace he could be
okay
it's a I understand it can be
woven into the curriculum but I
do think it's a finite life
skill learning to take care of
yourself me we do teach houses
as separate and so I i'm i'm
sorry III know there's a lot of
different points of view i'm not
an educated but I really feel
this is a fundamental life skill
and if it were well learned can
create rather than scattered
because when stuff is scattered
one and done doesn't do it
and a piece here one year and a
piece here that year they they
all relate to each other and I
do think they need to be
concentrated and so
from those points of view and
and believe it or not really
from from the health of of kids
in the families I am going to
support this amendment thank you
thank you other questions from
the committee.
Saturday I have a a couple of
questions along with this is
there anything that prevents a
district from requiring
financial literacy on the room.
His chair
and school board bents ten point
and I know my so contended
actually call me on this
they feel restricted.
But they currently have it since
two thousand and it's just not
being used only eleven percent
of the students have taken it.
Um but they can.
Well I guess we problem in the
year to the sponsored ask in
house bill seventy one if I
understood it's not a mandate
from school.
So I would say that it's
probably not without this men.
Senator at you didn't ask into
the question that I asked can we
try it again I believe already
that districts are a loud to
offer it in a district require
it as one of the two extra
elections.
Missed chair i'm getting a non
sector that
it is
so senator would that be local
controlled that if a district
feels strongly that this ought
to be offered in their community
could they require it.
Miss chairman
and I like local control but
being that it has not been even
though it it it would give them
the local control it's it's only
eleven percent have used this or
trying to get it to the point
that we are not a poor state to
be able to teach them financial
overseas.
So senator if I might you're on
the school board there would
your board require it in your
district mister we have or we
can we have not.
But you could good okay.
If districts decide that of
course in any economics.
The superintendent white
footstaying could they with that
as a required course in their
district.
Mister arm this chair yes they
could.
In so I economics has a lot of
financial literacy but that may
be more focused words consider
rural areas
mister
are you kind of what i'm getting
at is there's nothing that
restricts the district from
doing this
I worry every time we have
another required class.
Some kids won't graduate because
of that class.
They won't have that class to
graduate.
There is nothing that restricts
the district.
From adding this course and I
think similar to chairman rometo
I used to teach statistics I
think statistics are to be
required for everyone i'm not
gonna bring an amendment forward
because districts could require
that many districts offer that
you I think that would be very
helpful for a students.
But I think it gets in the way
of the flexibility and options
when we overly restrict or say
exactly what students have to
help and every additional
requirement weep went on being
some kids yet do band the last
year because they have to take
an extra course or they can't
take the cte classes that keep
them in school because there's
another required course and
there's nothing that restricts
districts from certainly
offering it I think that's
already required that they
offered the class right that's
correct mister chair one thing
that I was going to know is one
of the aspects of how spill one
seven.
Credits that must be determined
locally and so one of those two
credits that are going to be
determined locally.
Either at a half unit or full
unit.
And so I think the point of this
is this is very much a local
control issue that local
districts can require it if they
see that that is the most
pressing need but if the local
district thinks the most
pressing need is to offer
another
halfway for their students to
get them jobs when they finish
and to get on graduation that
may be more important and can
along with them a little bit
different track senator yet with
the amendment have you read the
social studies standards that
are required of steal of
districts now.
Mister I have not.
Okay because I believe that the
sponsor has he teaches this and
the financial literacy and if I
could chairman
tell me several of the places
where financial literacy is part
of the required standards that
you have to teachers of social
studies teacher thank you mister
chairman I would refer the
committee to page five of the
legislative education study
committee analysis that if you
haven't done the homework on
this then you have a chance to
catch up but there are several
places so I mentioned it's all
through k through twelve so
standards and fourth grade we
heard from the audience
explaining what a checking in
savings account are used for
in sixth grade give examples of
financial risks that in their
individuals and households face
and then I mentioned mister
chairman in high school that
there are the thirteen personal
financial literacy standards so
twenty explaining how and why
people make choices to improve
their economic well being
comparing the costs and benefits
of saving using credit and
certain types of financial
investments are more but a few
of of those standards in it
might I say mister chairman in
users opportunity that i'm all.
Subject all classes have
standards I just find it
interesting that we're
questioning wine
instead of a blather of the
other twenty two that might be
subject to the spell or any
others I just find that that
interesting because we as
teachers are teaching to those
standards that's what our
evaluations are evaluated on
that's what everything all my
responsibility for my students
and to my administrators who are
carrying out my valuation are
based on I think they're super
important and we took them
incredibly seriously throughout
the interim which is why we have
standards in the class
thank you and I think you're my
my main point this is a local
control issue we talk about that
all the time in here and
ensuring that our boards have
the power to make these kinds of
decisions and.
Quite frankly I think the
standards we have are two
prescriptive as they are if
anything I would like them to
have more flexibility and many
states have much more flexible
standards we talk about how many
states have financial literacy
there are more states and that
that have more flexibility than
new mexico already has.
Every specific requirement that
we have in their means they're
going to be a couple of kids
won't graduate because of that
specific requirement.
I think we have talked about
this in the elia sea for at
least four years
come to the legislature of
several times I think we have
finally worked it out and in a
way that we believe the governor
will approve this and there's so
many other areas in this bill
that I would hate to see it go
down over just financial
literacy
terrifying close I just have
just got my understanding i'm
looking at the
okay twelve
i'm i'm thinking through that
only eleven percent of our
students users were forty ninth
in the state.
If we not use it he can
kindergarten at that point is
one thing it's when you're in
high school the distance can
really matter I don't know that
I remember what I was taught in
kindergarten.
And my age now so this gives us
an obligator keep it a point
time that they're going out to
the world the people to
understand how to handle their
finance but thank you response
let.
Thank you the questions it's not
motion
thank you mister chair and I
appreciate the amendments from
the sponsors I appreciate
the bill in general I just want
to everybody know that I think
everyone up here understands the
importance of financial
literacy.
The.
This is an issue that we've
talked about since I had been
here and twenty one in earlier
we've talked about how we
implement this.
I share many of the same
concerns from the chairman.
Of making sure that
we allow that flexibility at the
school districts but we don't
jeopardize this bill that we're
pushing forward.
I also want to say I have the
same passion for financial
literacy I mean for ethnic
studies as many of you have for
financial literacy.
And.
I'm also not trying to introduce
an amendment here to push that
and make that mandatory when for
me that is just as important.
And so I just want to let folks
know I understand the importance
but I understand the process
and so I will not be supported
the amendment that mister share.
Motion from the committee.
Motion for a due pass on the
amendment.
The second bite you call the
role please.
Send a brand.
Senator guy goes sender hickey
yes sitter my estimate yes
sitter novel.
Senator pope no sender no the
amendment fails on a five three
senator the bill to explain his
vote mister chairman i'm very
much in favor of the financial
literacy and I would hope.
But I do understand the thirty
day session.
Through we've been trying to use
this effort been going still
that's why I don't want to hold
it up with an amendment at this
point I think we need to get it
through clean on the side of the
of the.
Thank you mister chair thank you
senator
so we are back on the main deal
anything else you'd like to have
is we get back to the mean bill
no
we'll stand for questions on the
best okay i'm the main bill
those in support of the main
bill
what if a couple of you would
like to come.
And speak to the main bill.
The.
Yeah.
It sounds like you're we we have
a motion for a due past let me
first ask are there people in
the audience who are opposed to
this bill.
We have when opposed so I think
we probably ought to at least
let that can we let the the
opposition be heard and then we
decide if you all did to talk
and we get to the motion.
Yes good morning mr chair
members of the committee my name
is dominica chavis and I am the
advocacy manager at new mexico
kids can we support many
components of this bill and
appreciate all the work that is
gone into improving it over the
last year our primary concern is
related to one aspect which is
alderbert to currently any
student can choose to wave out
of the algebra two requirement
this a bill would make it so
that students opt in we think
the conversation forced by
making students opt out is
really important in fact it
maximizes the flexibility this
bill aims to create by
preventing students from making
a mistake by not missing alger
bertue before they realize the
consequences we also worry about
our statewide performance on our
high school assessment the sat
currently students would take
outer between their junior year
so they'd cover three force of
the content before taking the
sat currently the average sat
and new mexico is nine hundred
and one which is one hundred and
twenty seven points below the
national average we have
concerns that our math
achievement will further
decrease since many students
won't have algebra two knowledge
before taking the sat thank you
thank you does anyone else in
opposition
anyone in online in opposition
okay.
Spits gelled in opposition to
the overall bill.
Thank you again mr chair members
of the committee sarah for
sterled with the greater
available cookie chamber of
commerce this is a really
challenging bill for us we
appreciate the emphasis of
places on supporting students
and planning for their future
and boosting their engagement
but ultimately we're opposing
this bill because we strongly
believe our graduation standards
should contain a financial
literacy requirement it's a
necessary skill both for a
student's on a college track and
for students who are learning a
trade in my one day manage or
run a business in a state with
huge poverty problems we should
require our young people to
understand from an early age how
to manage money and set
themselves up for financial
stability and success thank you
thank you
that's all online okay.
If the supporters would like to
say a few words or we have a
motion.
Okay getting all that we're good
would you like please make
promotion
motion for a due pass by center
in the bill second by senator
brand.
For any questions from the
committee is not.
If you'll call the role please.
Serve.
Sender hickey.
Sender my estimate yes sir novel
center picture no explain.
Sender pope yes and her fault
yes you have a new pass with one
senator pinto to explain her
vote thank you mister chairman
members of the committee and I
do understand and i'm thinking
for bringing this bill that
there is you know this concern
about financial liberty but when
we still have barriers out there
even just to get a real id and I
appreciate it industry sat come
forward there is a gap in that
of those that were able to i'm
get the education on it but when
we still have these barriers
there and people that are still
unable to get the real id in my
area even though we have this
long list of requirements and
you I get have access to those
two documents.
Uhm they're still barrier
standard can still exist
regardless of we if we put this
for because you can't get banked
in my area
where there's like probably less
less banks in my area we talk
about corporate breaks and in
that sense too I think the
attorney general has stepped
forward within the area and had
to because of business is that
are not socially responsible.
And that is one thing we need to
make sure as a state is to make
sure when those people come in
because we've had elders that
were paying insurance on turn
life insurance and there you
know five tenth two hundred
dollars a month and they did not
understand that but their
insurance person that was dear
did not give them the advice or
will give them the what they
needed to know about it we had a
car industry too that was doing
some really
just explained the vote
I don't think this is really
going to solve that much but
thank you mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you senator.
Thank you you have have a due
pass and
chairman I know we're trying to
balance two things and the one
bill over your committee I
believe got rolled over we're
going to start at nine o'clock
on wednesday if we can hear that
bill first in your committee I
believe you started eight thirty
or you put on the full correct
press mister chairman of course
we will make that happen cause I
we start they don't think we've
got a heavy wednesday schedule
so we can start a little leader
so they were not that going to
be a committee if that makes
sense I appreciate him thank you
committee
thank you
thank you
center citizens
come on down we're going to go
to senate bill two sixty three
and unless you women's sports
as he's coming in this would be
a great time
turn and senator as i've got a
group of students from the
loving elementary student
and I would ask if they would
stand one of the time as I
interdo something will come
around I would be great jersey
smith could you please stand
development locus
day standing so we can clap
three all at one time
evoking went this.
A bailey man look older by.
In earth lane on southeast
education get into
government works so thank you
for being here as chair I hope
one of these are my replacement
in two years thank you very good
and while we're getting ready
here I also would like to
introduce my internet for this
week she'll be around all week
mccalor hotel who is a student
at UNM I believe in political
science and government she
actually was telling me that
german rometo was her teacher in
high school and.
Talked very much about
government that's why she is
here and why she's in the major
that she is in and so education
does work in the state in new
mexico
I don't know
but the kello be sitting here
with me and on the floor and
helping analyze education bills
this week so trying to get her a
really good experience in in
government.
Center if you would please thank
you mister chair committee
members.
Thank you for having this bill
this morning bill to sixty three
like you said is an
appropriation for a nutritionist
for women's sports or for five
hundred thousand dollars a
hundred thousand dollars for the
next five years
I have my extra with me as
doctor amber
and I stand for questions.
Thank you anything.
Like data just technical
support.
I will provide technical support
thank you
but I don't have any opening
statements okay out to the
audience those in support.
And please in the back said yeah
the then look like he's needs to
come up and talk anybody in
opposition.
Anyone online
in questions from the committee
they're
thank you thank you mister
chairman around members of the
committee and that they keep
senators interest.
Why specifically women's
which they're disparity aren't
equality here with the men's
program or man sports
mr cherson that's a good
question know the men's sports
already have
a nutritionist and it's their
overwhelmed with that they don't
have there is only one for all
the sports or this one would be
now for just the women's sports
and so be able to help the
nutrit.
Representative we have over two.
We have over two hundred women
student athletes and currently
we do have one register
dietitian the register dietitian
is working with over a hundred
and twenty football players.
It's that don't have someone
who's working directly with
them.
And it's simply a time factor
rate to work with a hundred and
twenty foot while players takes
a great deal of their time we
are supplementing with an app
it's called zone in that app
provides an opportunity for our
current register dietitian to
provide some nutritional
information connected with our
on campus
dining facility but it does not
provide the very specific
nutritional information that a
woman student athlete needs and
mister chairman reserved a
committee.
So is it only the the nutrition
it's it's only for the sport
football.
Senator that is correct
so mister chairman members of
the committee
we talk about equitability and
title nine and even with the
other sports that a university
is.
It doesn't seem to be
the other word than fair that
those other sports don't have
access to a nutrition and in
some sense going along the lanes
of
and that much I have been really
been updated on the.
Are other lg b t q
entities are those that do
participate or.
How that stands but I think if
this is just said nms you think
the question to is is that
throughout the whole state in
mexico with our higher than
institutions that were not
really making sure that there's
an equitable access to this
specifically and I understand
that sports programs that stir
prerogative to find whatever
they wish to.
Thank you mister chairman mister
chairman etc I would like to
comment if I could
all of our student athletes do
have access to our register
dietitian does she have the time
to put in there are women
student athletes really need for
that directed information toward
their specific nutritional
needs.
No so everyone has access to it
and each one of our teams could
utilize her in terms of team
meetings but when it comes to
individual students late
meetings to help them meet their
very specific needs that's where
we're falling short and the
purpose of this bill is to bring
us into compliance with title
nine requirements so there is
more equitable access to
register dietions for all of our
student athletes.
But also you also uhm mention
about time so.
The mail at least
compared to the number of women
at least.
It I I don't really.
The.
It it seems like you should just
still have it together I don't
know I think that was one thing
that really preterred being high
school was how that.
The boy's basketball program was
able to yet like two pairs of
shoes and all this in suits and
all this staff when the girl's
basketball team didn't really
have anything when I got into
high school and then when the
girl started going to state them
pretty soon the boys were like
well we want to combine our
booster clubs a weekend
capitalize on it so.
You know the dead disdain agent
to get it should be structured
already.
Thank you mister chairman
thank you other questions
is about thank you mister
chairman.
The.
Was this.
Was left she approached during
the interim on this particular
funding request
mr chair senator noid believe
not this was brought.
A few weeks ago and we were
talking about it.
And so I assume it's not in hb
too.
The draft that came over from
the house of the whatever they
approve the other night
mister chair senator.
It's gonna be a long shot so
I don't have any of up objection
to your bill but I I think that
the process would be that you
would approach the lfceder in
the summer
whenever president goes you're
whoever's president at that
point term comes deal have seen
says we want money that's when
you bring these kind of things
it needs to be incorporated to
the university of request thank
you miss chair thank you other
questions and kind of along
those same lines I was that that
same meeting with all the women
athletes and brought that up and
we all kind of went on my
goodness there isn't and very
much center pintos this is a
title nine type of issue and
women's nutrition is different
than what a football player is
trying to book up needs compared
to a swimmer or a volleyball
player who's trying to to be
able to jump I instead of trying
to push people out of the way
and so I very much appreciate it
and I know exactly when where
that came from that's I think
senator nevel is exactly right
it's a long shot this session
check with the munios and with
adrian million dollars isn't
that much in the big scheme of
things but it's a long tried to
get it in but it's awareness for
next year that this is something
that you in any msus request
whether it's for their probably
even through grow money or
something like that depending on
what's available next year but
it's great to get it on people's
radar because I think it very
much is an equity issue.
They're pope.
I guess I was just going to echo
the comments as any thoughts on
this with what the plan be next
year to try to get this in the
budget I guess i'm just
concerned to make sure that
there's recurring funding for
this
mr chair sender yes that's
that's a goal.
Thank you mister.
Pleasure committee
motion for a due passenger
gagos.
Second by center pinto is not in
your head that good enough
if you'll call the role please
send her guy
center hecky center my estimates
yes sir novel sender pinto said
the pope yes
yes you haven't unanimous good
job center thank you misses
we have two other bills to do a
low passing compose I do not see
them and so i'm going to go down
and try and manage both of those
bills.
All right mister chairman those
in the audience we are on senate
bill two fifty four senator
soldier florida thank you
this is an appropriation bill
that provides me see two fifty
four two million five hundred
thousand dollars to the brain
injury services fund for
expenditure in twenty twenty
five a million dollars that the
brain injury service is spend
for expenditures.
Beyond two twenty five twenty
twenty five it appears and then
there's six hundred thousand
dollars to the health department
for expenditure in twenty twenty
five and three hundred thousand
dollars to the health care
authority
bring injuries are
when someone has a brain injury
it's unlike twisting and where
you need a new replacement it
can fundamentally change who you
are and making sure that their
appropriate services for
rehabilitation and integration
back in and I think that's what
the the point of this particular
bill is but it's it's mostly a
straight up appropriation b.
Thank you senator once again
we're not sent able to fifty
four do we have any supporters
on this bill in the audience
alright if if we could have you
line up and you have two minutes
to make.
A comment.
The.
Once again if you want to
support the bill please line up.
Thank you
mr vice chair
mr chair the sponsor
for sponsoring the bill and
committee members am I am a
person with multiple brain
injuries my first one was in
nineteen eighty four so i'm four
days l and the brain injury.
Sorry about the vibration the
brain injuries are responded
i've support me in the past and
further education and support of
brain injury services community
education provider education is
extremely important a standard
support of the bill thank you
very much.
I'll end my name is nation.
Thank you
looks like there's no other
supporters in the audience can
we go online do we have anyone
on line and support.
No all right do we have any
opposition in the room on center
bill to fifty four
we do not any online
all right I will go back to the
sponsor you had one supporter
looks like you're okay.
Do we have any comments
questions
it's kind of the same as the
last bill don't know where it's
had exactly but i'll move a do
pass.
Mister baster i've got just
quite a question
of mr
trying to figure out because it
shows that this bill a similar
legislation bill one fifty six
which properage for me and all
from general fund and possibly
even sent bill two or three that
has two point five do you know
if those are all add ons to make
a completed price I just don't I
don't understand why would have
a three vehicles with same
summer intention and maybe
different dollars.
And mister chair and senator I
do not know
I
i'm down here just presenting
for a colleague and no hardly
more than what's written on here
okay as we know they're often
times or bills they do similar
things in different committees
and often it then left up to the
finance committee to sort out
which things they're going to
fund in at which levels last
question miss boston chairman
you know of this and house bill
to it all currently I
tear and senator my guess is it
probably is not in house bill to
at this point most times when
they are we either don't get
them or we get noticed that this
is the enabling legislation for
them to hang the money on there
and this has not come with that
to my knowledge okay thank you
for administer most.
Thank you so we have a
motion on the floor and the
second if we can cover all
center grants center giant
so I think yeah center yes
so yeah sender yes
yes
you have a department thank you
and I think you want to move on
to the next bill and then send
it built to seventy also is a
direct appropriation bill to the
university of new mexico to for
five million dollars a million
dollars a year from twenty
twenty five to twenty thirty to
increase compensation for
students doing residencies there
the one thing that I know could
be a potential concern is
the I believe the graduate
students there that would have
to be approved by their union
any contract as far as
compensation agreements but
other than that it's a straight
appropriation.
This.
All right thank you senator do
we have any support for this
bill in the room
if you could come up in please
line up.
And remember to state your name
and who you represent any of two
minutes
mister chair thank you my name
is nation bush I am government
relations director university of
new mexico thanks to her
chairman soles for putting on
the bill
I believe senator composed might
be on its way here but I don't
want to speak for him I do want
to introduce briefly we have our
graduate medical education
expert from university of new
mexico health sciences doctors
away and a fair and she's here
to answered questions but we we
do support the bill thank you.
And and i'll allow you to
minutes as well at good morning
senators thank you very much for
your support of this bill i'm
listening your associate do you
never graduate medical education
at you and m which is the
oversight percent for our seven
hundred and fifty medical
residents and fellows
it is true that the state of new
mexico has been incredibly
generous and support as our
residence and fellows both in
their growth of our residency
programs as well as in their
salaries while we have been able
to negotiate this year with the
house officers union has been a
five percent increase in no
small part due to the generosity
of the state of new mexico
one thing that we would seek to
do each areas to try to have
them achieve the fiftieth
percentile for the national sort
of standard from the american
association and medical colleges
and that would actually require
an additional bump and so the
purpose of their spell would be
to allow for additional funds
flow into you and i'm too los to
be able to offer through the
collective bargaining process
additional wages that would get
them closer to the fiftieth
percentile and so i'm happy to
speak further but wanted to give
you that overview thank you
thank you.
Looks like that's
the last of the supporters in
the room we do have a supporter.
Online
believe its chelsea pollal.
You have two minutes.
The.
Hi good morning chairman and
member of the members of the
committee my name is chelsea
polio i'm at the medical student
borrow college of osteopathic
medicine in los cruises i'm
currently doing my clinical
rotations and albuquerque
competitive pays important in
medical residency because it's
critical for my ability to work
and well managing the
significant debt of medical
education the average debt in
the country coming out of
medical school is about a
quarter million and that does
not include undergraduate that
that was in clean accumulated
this financial factor as you can
imagine strongly influences
medical students crossing to a
plater and sees that offer
competitive salaries to manage
their debt
competitive paper residents will
positively impact in addition
the physician shortage in new
mexico were accessed to
specialists and primarily
doctors can result in months of
waiting and delaying care this
is an issue particularly
amplified and exacerbated in
rural areas.
This is where in my opinion as a
medical student unm is a
residency that shines compared
to all other programs in the
nation it has a bus dedication
of rural health excellent and
excellent primary care track
this is a problem that I think
deserves to be fairly
compensated as a medical new
mexico medical student
perspective resident applicant
it's my dream to continue my
medical career providing high
quality care for the people in
new mexico and research has long
shown that medical students who
do their residency in the same
state are a hundred percent more
likely to practice in that state
beyond their residency
requirements this bill was your
competitive pay for residence
which will encourage medical
students from all over the
country to come to mexico and
stay new mexico which will
impact or continuing education
and physician shortage please
vote yes on SB two seventy and
thank you for your time.
Thank you
do we have any opposition in the
room on this bill said about two
seventy or so you don't do we
have any online.
All right I will go back to the
sponsor anything else before we
go to the committee thank you
mister chair the actual sponsor
is here and if you would like to
make a comment or two but other
than that I think we're ready
for a vote she'd like to say
anything center chairman thank
you very much mister chairman as
well as we move forward I really
appreciate you all put in the
sound this morning this is you
can tell is a really needed
there are the unimage school of
medicine as ideal directly with
a lot of the residents uh I do
have these personal discussions
with them and as they continue
to put in there sweat equity to
ensure that they're going to
become the best doctor's
possible
we do find that often times it's
difficult for them to even make
ends me with a long hours with a
kind of compensation that
they're paid this definitely
would assist them and again as
has already been stated by
people that
have made their statements this
is part of the incentive the
incentive and if you will be
enhancement so that they will
continue here in new mexico so
that again mister chair mister
chair I appreciate the work that
this committee continues to do
when they look at how do we
advance education.
At this high level within the
state of new mexico thank you
thank you senator I will go to
the committee for stuff center
pinto thank you mister chairman
members of the committee and I
think it's more of a comment
because I don't know what the
collective bargaining agreement
was but
so we put this in there and then
we do this increase but but
you've been for those that work
at you in and I think it's also
those dues that they have even
for parking and all of this to
sir that you know yes we're
going to give them this extra
money well how do we know we're
not going to charge him for
something else and then bring it
back where they're still not
being you know it's not in their
pocket that it's still going
back in and that's all I have to
change thank you senator complex
thank you senator pinto center
of bill.
Thank you mister same issues
before objection to the bill
that I assume it's an
appropriation bill I don't know
if you've got it house to kill
it without street or if it's
something you're going to try to
insure find it thank you very
much so mister chairman or
senator novel in terms of added
is not in house bill to at this
time this is something that
we're trying to uh.
The health proposal.
I would move a new past year
thank you senator we have one
more but your motion is there
senator hickey.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you senator campos for bringing
this bill
it is as I look at health care
new mexico which I said maybe in
the health committee i've never
seen it and were shaped and it
is today in the forty years that
i've been practicing in
administering in new mexico
there are several things that we
have to do to get out of the
hall that were going in because
if you talk with the groups
they're retiring and they are
not recruiting the compensation
as very low of the
husband too raising medicaid to
a hundred and fifty percent of
medicare will help and I will
shortly release the paper set
showing that that still not
adequate when compared with
other states and
but there are there are two
things when that that I want
everyone to remember and i'm
certainly in support of this
bill but there's more to do
we remember when I first came
here we talked about teachers
and getting him up to the
national and and we we did
better we did better
I would have is a business
person you and track the best in
brightest and keep the best in
brightest we should have gone to
sixty percent
that's just that's my
observation and in this endeavor
with residents to keep them here
and to feel fully valued here
next year we may may look at
increasing this but there are a
number of other things that can
be done as well child care free
parking
no other styways are pulling the
money back which certainly
happens and in a lot of
situations and the other
component is we are we're going
to have to accept the fact that
the state supports the faculty
at you and them at about six
percent of the fact of this
hourly in the national standard
as eighteen percent and state
support and it just slipped that
way over time as result
a great number of the faculty I
think on average.
The fact they are twenty five
percent of the mc american
academy and medical colleges.
And many facultier below twenty
and they are leaving and if you
if we want to really go fall
bore and this is something we
have to do now this is not the
ten year plan of growing him
starting and in junior high
school this we have to do now
cause we have a crisis people
can't give access so the other
peace will have to bring forward
and maybe some of its in in the
in the resolution bill but we're
gonna have to support the fact
that good faculty attract with
residents and if we attract if
we if we educate the residents
and then we have them say we
don't want to go to another
state this is a really great
place to do it and if we have a
preference for new mexico
trained medical students and
residency and of course you know
we want to get a lot of the best
but that's seventy eighty
percent who are going to stay in
this state and then of course
we're going to have to work on
compensating him because the
national shortage of physicians
anyway in the next few years is
going to get to be about a
hundred and seventy thousand
come out and in the paper that
i've commission and where we
stand compared in the country
and so i'm sorry to take up this
time but i'm just trying to till
the field for this that we've
got a lot more to do and this is
a start and I commend you for
bringing the bill this isn't
something that we should kind of
and I don't believe we are
equivalent over but it's it's a
beginning so thank you very
much.
Thank you mister chair for
tolerating my little silly
liquid
having doctors in the state no
problem center this is the time
to do it on a last bill so we're
all come we have a motion
from senator available we have a
second second from senator pinto
if we can call the role center
br.
Yes please.
Yes
yes.
And you have a dupass senator
correct relationship thank you
very much mister chairman mister
chairman thank you members in
the senate education committee
for your consideration all right
so that is the end of our agenda
and send an education we
currently don't have any bills
for wednesday but that will
probably change we are going to
have sent an education committee
start at nine am on wednesday
that's nine am that nine or
eight nine nine fifteen nine am
so that's all try to be here and
meetings adjourned thank you.
