Roll first
No, we do not. We have corn.
OK. Um, Mr. Chair and half the
committee.
House Bill 195 um establishes a
three-tier school licensure
system. We, we all know on this
committee that school nurses
play an important role in our
schools and keeping students in
class and healthy. So this
establishes a three-tiered
school nurse licensure system
that mirrors the teacher's
system.
Um, it outlines the criteria
needed for school nurses to
receive levels 12 or 3 license,
and that is based on the
standard structures that
currently exist in our, in the
nursing profession.
And in accordance to the New
Mexico Board of Nursing, HB 195
brings licensure brings clarity
to school nursing licensure
levels, as well as
salary levels, the hope is to
Deuce turnover and help retain
some of our nurses and possibly
recruit a few more, and because
we are under time constraints,
we're just gonna leave it right
there and go to public support.
I have an expert witness who is
really expert, uh, if you have
questions.
Thank you, Senator. With that,
we'll go to the room. Do we have
anyone in support of House Bill
195 in there.
If you could line up, um, let me
have
I could have 4 or 5.
could not be repetitive, you'll
have 2 minutes. Do we have
anyone in opposition?
House Bill 195.
All right. We'll get started
with the supporters.
And once again, you have 2
minutes.
Miss Miss Chairman, members of
the committee, Joe GM, executive
director of the New Mexico
School Boards Association, the
uh association supports this
legislation. We've taken action
through resolution at our full
membership to endorse this
again, thank you and we thank
the sponsor for bringing it
forward.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Bonnie Lightfoot,
president of the Coalition of
Educational Leaders are
presenting Superintendents
Association as well, and that
there are 89 districts, 230
students, and nearly 1000
administrators. We think the
sponsor for this bill and I urge
it to pass.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Lynn Wheeler. I'm the
director of nursing for Rio
Rancho Public Schools. I support
House Bill 195 because it
increases salaries for school
nurses across the state and make
school nursing salaries more
competitive with hospital pay.
As a director of nursing, I
review salary schedules quite
periodically. And with this,
with applicants.
And it's not unusual to review
the salary and then have someone
withdraw their application
because they cannot afford to
work at that level.
I also support House Bill 195
because it recognizes the
importance of a national
certification for school nurses.
Nurses that are nationally
certified, demonstrate
proficiency and excellence.
And the care that they provide
to our students. They are better
equipped to manage students with
special health care needs, acute
illnesses, and emergency
situations.
School nurses that are
nationally certified or working
at the top of their licensure,
which is what we want for all
nurses. Overall, House Bill 195
can potentially bring more
school nurses and highly
qualified school nurses to
support the students across the
state.
And that is what school nursing
is all about. Thank you. Thank
you.
Hi, mister.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Myrna
Barbie Lee. I'm the nursing
supervisor for Santa Fe Public
Schools. Um, we already
implement a pay tier system
that's similar to the one being
proposed statewide through this
bill, um, and we also pay the
stipend for the nationally
certified school nurses. Um,
this has helped us tremendously
retain and recruit staff, um, we
have 0 vacancies and we're fully
staffed, unlike some other
places in in the state. So I
hope this bill will help.
Uh, recruit and retain school
nurses across New Mexico.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Gloria
Doherty. I am representing the
New Mexico Nursing Association
and the New Mexico Nurse
Practitioner Council, I will not
repeat all the wonderful
rationale you already heard, but
we urge you to support this bill
so we can retain and recruit
more nurses to our children and
our future. Thank you.
Thank you, and we have 2 online.
Nancy Rodriguez.
2 minutes.
Good morning. Thank you for uh
the sponsor and to the school
nurses who support the children
in our state, the New Mexico
Alliance for school-based
Healthcare stands in support of
this bill, similar to
school-based health centers,
school nurses are critical to
students' health outcomes, which
are strongly linked to their
academic outcomes. I know this
committee is aware of the
challenges facing schools with
attendance and typically some of
the top 3 reasons for a lack of
attendants are health related.
We need our school nurses to
support students so they can be
in their seats ready to learn
and be successful. So we urge
your support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. And if we could have
Elizabeth.
Dixon, I believe, 2 minutes.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Great. Thank you so much. Um, my
name is Elizabeth Dixon. I'm a
registered nurse, a former
school nurse, now an educator,
and I'm speaking in support of
this bill, as speakers have
mentioned, this bill's
incredibly important for the
health of the students in our
schools, not all schools in New
Mexico have a school nurse, some
districts do not have the school
nurse, yet all students need a
school nurse in their school to
care, manage and support the
students as the only healthcare
provider in the school space,
school nurses provide that
diverse level.
a preventative health and
behavioral health care to
students with a wide range of
health issues.
This legislation can address the
healthcare workforce issue in
schools, the state of New Mexico
and the country are in the
middle of a severe nursing
shortage that is hitting our
rural communities more harshly.
Many don't realize that this
nursing workforce issue impacts
schools and ultimately the
students in them, and the
shortage is not predicted to end
anytime soon. We need to support
schools to recruit and retain
the best nurses they can hire as
a parent of children whose
physical and mental health were
improved because of their school
nurse. I ask you to support this
legislation and a do pass. Thank
you so much.
Thank you. Um,
We didn't have the opposition.
Um
Center Figueroa just wanted,
there was no opposition, which
you want to give you an
opportunity if there's any left
out.
Mr. Chair, the only thing I left
out was to shout out the actual
sponsor to the bill,
Representative Joy Garrett. I'm
here on her behalf because I
believe it's a good bill and
important, and she has to cover
other bills this morning.
Thank you. Now we'll go to
committee center starting with
Cenizo.
Mr. Chairman
I do not know who
And she said he had some very
important things to say, and I
haven't heard him speak yet.
Mr. Chair and send her in the
interest of, of saving time. I
asked him to speak to answer the
tricky questions that I know
y'all are gonna bring me. His
name is Josh Landry, and he is a
school nurse at Chaparral in
middle school in Almogordo.
Mr. Chairman, I do have some
questions.
Um
You are talking here and
whichever one of y'all want to
answer this question. I don't
have a problem with that, so
thank you for being here today.
It says that the department
shall establish competencies and
qualifications for level one
licensure. Talk to me about
that.
Mr. Chair and Senator, what page
are you on?
I am on the uh
Analysis from the house, I
guess. Let me make sure that
that's where this is.
OK, Mr. Chair and Senator, thank
you. If, if you look at the bill
on page 3, that is where the
qualifications for licensure.
Uh, for
Nationally certified nurses are
and then page 4 of the bill lays
out the level one requirements.
So level one licensure is there.
And that's for the nurses who do
not have at least 3 years of
nursing experience.
Um, and they will have an annual
evaluation, they will have
mentorship. It's very similar to
a level one teacher's license in
that sense.
So that's the level one, which
continues on to page 5.
Page
6 is where the level 2
descriptors begin, and again
they parallel level 2 teaching
licenses in most ways.
Are you looking, Mr. Chair and
senator for more detail than
that, or is that?
Well, I guess I was kind of
confused because I did have to
read down.
Quite a ways to find out the
answer it. The department is PED
then.
OK, I did have to read that
quite a, quite a ways before I
found, found that.
How come PED instead of
Department of Health.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator, that's an excellent
question. This is for their
license to serve in schools.
This is not their medical
license. They have to have a
separate medical licensing.
All right.
And I'm sure they're gonna have
to go through the same
procedures that any teacher
would have to go through more or
less.
Thank you very much for that
response.
Um
OK, here we go.
I'm also understanding that the
schools would have to absorb the
cost of this. Is that correct,
Mr. Chairman and
Senator
Mr. Chair and Senator, there are
two aspects to the cost in this
bill, and one is assigning them
to the same salary levels, 12,
and 3, that pertain to our
public school teachers, and Mr.
Chair, that is already in the
budget in our um calculations
for the 4% raise that's
currently in the budget and the
new tier minimums, 55, 65, and
75 that calculation included
school nurses.
Assuming that this bill would
pass. OK.
OK.
That clears a lot of that up.
But I'm confused again whenever
I go back and I look at the,
what I'm reading from the house,
um.
Analysis there and it continues
on with the PED analysis and
then I think it's covered
someplace else and I didn't mark
it.
But one of them says the
amendment adds an appropriation
of $250,000 from the general
fund PED for this expenditures.
Then I'm looking continuing on
under
The one from PED it's 11 place
that's saying.
Um, required additional sum of
approximately 576,000, however,
3 salary level it's going to
take. Let's see, total cost of
lighting nurse salary minimum
levels so that a teacher would
require approximately 980.
100 $0. So I'm, I'm confused
here. Which number should we
really be looking at?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, I'm
not sure which number HAFC used
to calculate it for the budget,
but in their discussion, the
appropriation that was added was
stripped off because they
included, they said it was
included in those tier
calculations. Now the part, the
second part of the cost of this
bill is the stipend for national
board certified nurses, that's,
and that is already.
Paid by 50% of the school
districts in the state, the big
urban school districts that have
the most nurses and the most
national board certified nurses
are already paying this stipend.
So
Out of the 59, I believe,
national board certified nurses
in the state, there might be a
few in rural areas that would be
needing that $8000 stipend, but
they considered it so
negligible, the way they're
scattered out. We don't know
where they all are even, um,
that it could be absorbed.
That's why they stripped the
appropriation out of this bill.
OK, thank you very much for
that. Well, I've also read that
there's over 27% of our schools
that do not have a nurse.
So is this going to guarantee
that every one of our school
districts, schools, schools,
excuse me, schools, we'll have a
nurse. Mr. Chair and Senator, I
wish, I wish I could, I wish it
did, but no, that is not
mandated in this bill.
Do you think Mr. Chairman and
Senator, do you think that with
what we were planning to do with
this particular bill right here
that that will be more of an
incentive, especially out in our
rural areas for more nurses.
To make application to be that
school nurse, and don't, don't
get me wrong, I understand the
need for it.
I've got a bonus granddaughter
that's a diabetic.
And she
Her pump was set up where it
would notify her parents where
they could call the school if
they couldn't get there in a
big.
big rapid hurry. Take care of
things for her.
So I do understand the need.
But
I would, if we're gonna do this,
let's do it all the way across.
Do you agree with that?
Mr. Chair and Senator, I think
you put your finger on the
intent of the bill, which is to
recruit and retain nurses so
that every school can have one.
We're not there yet.
And Mr. Chairman.
Senator, I do appreciate you
bringing this bill.
And is PED on board with with
coming up with this money to get
the job done.
Mr. Tarrant Senator, I'll let
you speak for themselves with
the chairs, with the chair's
permission. ED would like to
come up and come.
I thought he'd run off. I didn't
see him for a sec.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Um,
Thank you for the question. The,
the public education department
absolutely sees the need to
increase the number of nurses
in, and nursing services,
schools across the state. Um, I
have not seen, um, where it is
in the bill's life. I can't say
whether or not this uh HB2 or
General Appropriations Act
includes the necessary funding,
uh.
To provide, but we definitely
want to make sure that whenever
we are providing new financial
requirements on our school
districts that there is an
appropriation relate to that as
well. OK. Well, I think that's
very helpful. I mean,
Unless the funding is there,
this is all feel good.
We do have to have uh Mister
Chairman, thank you very much.
Thank you very much for the
presentation.
Thank you, Senator. Next up,
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
most of my questions are covered
by Senator sale.
So, uh, I just have a couple of
questions. So what is the
average salary for a nurse in
New Mexico.
I will let Mr. Landry answer
that question.
To make it worth his time to be
here this morning.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton.
She's done very good at
retaining a lot of the
information I've given her, so.
I appreciate that. Um, currently
the average salary for a school
nurse in New Mexico is about
$65,000.
There's some change on there as
well.
Excuse me, so that's for nurses
and schools or is this for
nurses throughout.
fact.
Oh
I must have misheard your
question. Was that, uh, in
relation to school nurses or
All nurses
Palmer would be 85,000, sir.
I think that that seems more
appropriate to me.
I, I also understand that they
can get overtime, so, uh, those
nurses can make probably close
to 100K if they.
The work
Additional hours.
So my question then is with
regards to this, it, it seems
like we're looking at the
minimum level of 50K 60K, and
70K other bill goes through,
it's gonna get raised center so.
So now we're looking at a level
1 at 55K65K, and 75.
Um
And so to get school nurses at
one of these 3 levels, that's
gonna be the cost.
It also seems like they also
have to go through this
additional
Training so that they qualify as
a under the same teacher
guidelines, so not only do they
have their medical license, they
have.
Future license
And you're doing all of that to
make less money than our current
nurse can, so I, I'm concerned
about the fact that this, uh, I
think it's a great idea, but I'm
concerned that I'm, I'm
wondering what the incentive is.
Uh, for why would a nurse want
to go through a dual licensure
uh to make less money.
Mr. Tarrant Senator, that's an
excellent question, um, and
I think it comes down to the
passion and the interest of a
nurse. Nurses specialized Mister
Tayor in the areas. They can
specialize in a field of
medicine that could be a
pediatric nurse in a hospital if
they want to do hospital care,
they can do specialize in ER
work if that's their interest.
School nurses tend to be
passionate about serving in
schools.
Just to clarify, dual licensure
is not established by this bill.
It's already a requirement, and
it's a requirement in every
state where there are school
nurses. Um,
This codifies what is currently
done in wool, and the key thing
I think for the future.
Is that by tying it to the tears
every time we raised the tier
licensure and tier salaries for
teachers, nurses will be
included, so they have a chance
now to keep moving up with the
teachers in this process, and
they have
Fought for that for years.
Um, so that will be something
that will help us retain school
nurses.
With respect to competing with
hospitals, it's a different kind
of work.
But with this change, um,
$75,000 nurse who does the
national board certification,
which is what we hope will be.
In their competitive range
within $85,000 a year salary
hospital nurse.
Would you like to add anything,
Mr. Landry?
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Thornton.
Senator Figueroa spoke perfect
to that. He said all the exact
things, the things that I would
say as well. Um, and right, so
we're just looking to try to
regulate it across the state
because there are currently
nurses in rural areas that are
not being paid at the same level
as teachers or even their, you
know, nurses across the state of
school nurses across the city.
Thank you.
Thank you for that, Mr. um.
Yeah, I heard that they are
about at least that LESC said
within 2023, the year 23 that
There's still not a school
districts without nurses.
That is a problem, and, and if
this can encourage some folks
to, to move into those districts
and support those in form or
fashion and
And we've done a good
I applaud the bill. I applaud
your efforts, and I, I will
support the bill. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other comments from Eddie?
Right but do pass from Senator
Nova.
OK.
As a second from Senator
Soulles.
called the
Tender boo.
Henry
Tinder Figueroa.
Yes.
Hickey.
No. Yes, Center Ramos.
Thornton
Yes.
of oak,
tender soaps, yes.
And Senator Figaro, you have a
due pass.
5, yes, for excused.
Congratulations.
That's
It
I'm sorry, Senator, it's my
fault. It's 6.
64 and 3 excused.
We'll correct that. So it was 6.
Or House Bill 195 amended and 4
excused, so that excuse forgot
cinder souls came back.
And next we're gonna be moving
on to House Bill 433.
Amended
And we have Representative
Gonzalez, you have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee. Um, House Bill 433 as
amended, um, is essentially um a
call for a study gathering um
important partners, higher
education department in
collaboration with the public ed
department, Workforce solutions
and LASB, um, to, to come to
tackle further issues regarding
CTE career and technical
instruction, um, right now we
have
A critical need for many, many
jobs within our state. There's
large efforts for this build
your own capacity, working
towards all these um this bill
is brought specifically to look
at
The instructor
Position hoping so that
bottleneck does not occur when
you're working through that
pipeline, um, the study, the
reason it's a collaborative
approach is there has been
individual work and all the
different um entities but
collaboratively identifying
where those needs for workforce
development are what current CTE
work we have happening both in
the high school level, um, and
in the higher education level,
um, and how to fulfill those
needs, um, some key points of
what we're asking the study to
look for, um, is one is.
specifically addressed the
community college level of
instruction, um, in a lot of
areas like mine, um, that
community college level is key
towards regional support for CT
instruction, um, right now the
community college instructor is
the lowest paid tier out of any
um educational instructor, um,
and they fulfill a very vital
role, especially in smaller
communities, um, so looking at
the availability of instructors
in the area and also just the
way that we look at
compensation.
with regards to CT in higher ed,
um.
You know, looking at that
dynamic there. The other thing
that it asks in the part one of
the intentions of the
partnership between workforce
solutions is, is there possibly
um incentives for industry to
lend support to fulfilling this
instructor need, um, for
instance, at our hospital in Las
Vegas, um, they did lend their
head nurse to our community
college for a few weeks where
they paid the salary of the
nurse, but that resulted in 6
nurses being able to be
recruited and hired at our
hospital, so maybe what
What ways can we incentivize
lending instruction, knowing
that in a lot of these CT
positions, there's a lot more
money, a lot more compensation
available out in the industry
side, um, and so with that I
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative, with
that, um, in the committee room.
Do we have anyone in support of
House Bill 433.
And it
You can line up, um, make
comments. Do we have any
opposition?
no
So, um, you have 2 minutes.
public comment.
Yeah
Good morning, Mr. Chair
Committee of my Mark Chisholm,
I'm the uh academic affairs and
policy director of the Higher
Education department. We're here
to provide technical support for
this bill and uh
excited to work on that if it
goes through. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, I'm
Scott Gripinski, deputy
secretary of the New Mexico
Department of Workforce
Solutions, and we are also here
in support of this bill. We feel
that this study could be
beneficial to career technical
education in several respects
and improve the effectiveness of
CTE programs by both informing.
CTE programs curricula to
support students and better
meeting employers' needs. So
thank you very much.
Thank you. And online we have
Alvin Warren.
You have 2 minutes, sir.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alvin Warren. I'm the
vice president of policy and
impact for the Lano Foundation,
uh, the largest foundation in
New Mexico focused on education.
We strongly support Health Bill
433 as a longtime proponents and
funders of CTE programs, we
believe this is the right time
for a comprehensive study by PED
Workforce solutions and the LESC
to assess current gaps,
workforce alignment and
potential improvements to
strengthen the state's CTE
system. Uh this bill seeks to
promote equitable access to
quality education.
by addressing potential
disparities in CTE course
availability and instruction
instructor compensation, we
believe the bill will lead to
more effective sustainable
programs that provide clear
career pathways for students,
address workforce shortages and
increased post-secondary
success. Should this bill be
enacted, it will be important
for there to be intentional
outreach, public engagement, and
inclusion of tribal
representatives, students,
educators, and local workforce
partners. We urge to do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. There was no
opposition in the room, no
opposition online.
Um, so now we'll go to committee
members. Any questions?
Senator.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
I like what I'm reading here,
but I do have a question.
And I guess I'm throwing this
out there at the audience.
Why has higher education not
been working with PED prior to.
Because Mr. Chairman, everybody
in this room knows that not all
children whenever they graduate
from high school, do want to go
on to college. They more often
than not have to get a job.
So the training is imperative,
but why has there been no
communication with those two
departments.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, um,
I don't want to assume that
there hasn't been any
communication at all, just in
this particular way I was
addressing the communication,
um, particularly when I pulled
in higher education, um, I know
there has been studies done with
regards to adjunct faculty or
maybe.
You know, the 4 year level, but
that
College level is also listed
under higher ed, um, in
particular, um,
Just the way that higher ed does
salary reimbursement, you know,
typically you're, you're paid
higher if you have a doctor,
your master's or different
education level in the case of
CD you could be CTE, you could
be a master welder without any
of the above, but he still
provide great value, so, so that
is the ask is that um it has
been looked at in, in different
capacities, but this is a new
way you understanding that that
pipeline to maybe collectively
and also this is one of the
purposes for the study is to
ask.
For that, um, for their
collaboration, um, and
specifically addressing that
salary possible shortfall there,
and if, if there's anything else
that um if I, with, with
permission, Mr. Chair, if
there's anything else that
higher I would like to add to
that point.
They're, they're more than
welcome.
Mr. Chairman, with permission,
I'd like to hear from her. Are
you representing higher ed, sir?
You.
We actually already worked in
this area in lots of ways. This
will just be a more focused
study and pull things together.
We work with the PED dual credit
programs uh to ensure that
students can be working on a CT
certificate in either graduate
from high school with a
certificate or have coursework
that applies directly to it. We
work with the Department of
Workforce Solutions to identify
uh areas in the state that are
high need.
And then we identify
certificates and the funding
formula that we attach extra
weight to, to provide an
incentive to the community
colleges and universities that
offer the CTE programs to offer
more of those programs, and we
are involved in doing a survey
of um
Uh, salaries, especially adjus.
This will have us focus more
specifically on CTE adjunct
salaries in addition to the
academic, so it'll be something
new that we will start doing,
but this is an area that we've
been working on and um with, we
continue to do so. This will
just give us more focus.
I thank you for that response,
but Mister Chairman, with your
permission, I would also like
Mr. Groggins, Groginsky to come
up from work for a solution, but
I'd like higher ed to remain in
place.
OK.
Yeah, let's just have everyone
uh remain in place.
At ease, please.
When we're talking about Mr.
Chairman and Senator, my
apologies. All you have to do is
just turn the mic part. There
you go. Just rotate the mic.
You don't have to get up, it'll
pick it up where you're at.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Representative and gentleman
whenever we're talking about
industry employers.
Not every area of the state is
the same.
We have great nuances between
The four corners of our states,
so I'm curious to know what
workforce solutions is going to
do to make it appropriate for
that particular this I said Juan
versus
the southwestern corner of the
state. So I, I'd like to know
what you plan on doing to be
able to work with higher ed to
get these.
Job skills available for our
young people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator,
we
At the Department of Workforce
Solutions have a statewide focus
and we know that there are
different
Focuses and priorities in
different regions of the state,
whether it's the energy economy
in the southern eastern, south
and eastern part of the state,
the northwestern region and
other regions have different
employer needs as well. So we uh
coordinate closely with HED as,
Mr. Chisholm said, and looked
for ways to collaborate. We
think that this uh engaging all
the huge diversity of employers
and uh really impact the
Better qualifications and
curricular career in to get.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that
response, but whenever we're
going down.
Where you are communicating with
higher ed, that's leaving one
big aspect out and that is PED
because
They need to be informing higher
ed, which students are going to
be coming in and what their
specialty may be.
So, how is everybody gonna come
together on this because I'm not
seeing any sort of
Meshing here where there is
going to actually be a meeting
and people are gonna be able to
sit down and they're gonna be
able to visit with everybody
about this, so talk to me about
that.
Yes, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
we at DWS actually have a joint
initiative with the publication
department, we jointly supervise
a work-based learning
coordinator that focuses on
youth.
That helps get the career and
technical education system
coordinated through the
industry.
As well as through high school,
especially high school
curricula. So we've uh
coordinated every, every week we
have um discussions and are
working on a tool kit that will
help inform both current tech ed
and work-based learning programs
statewide.
Thank you very much for that,
Mr. Chairman.
And representative gentleman.
And I'm gonna include PED, OK?
That's
And on this
I can see lots of possibilities
that may take place because I'm
a metropolitan areas don't
necessarily follow suit with
what let's say.
My area of the state does. I
mean, we have jobs down there
that are available as a truck
driver where they're making over
$110,000 a year.
And there is training for that,
and they could take it through
our local junior colleges.
With what we have been passing
out here in regards to all the
fires that we have been having
throughout our state with the
logging industry hopefully being
able to come back.
There's a lot of skill there too
that would be of great interest.
Women in welding, their
remarkable, those jobs are high
paying too.
Nursing, you name it,
cosmetology, the whole gamut is
out there.
Um, I'm going to be reassured
that these jobs are not
necessarily.
I'm not going to.
I will step on toes, but no, I
will. I'm just gonna go ahead
and do it. I've got boots on
today.
So, um,
These jobs are not necessarily
Mr. Chairman and Representative
going to be pushed towards the
labor union area. These are
going to be open. Is that
correct? And I hope that's, I
hope that's what I'm hearing
whenever I see people doing
this.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, yes,
this bill was created like I'm
looking at it from a different
approach seeing the workforce
gap, um,
Not
Not getting any priority to
union labor or otherwise just
looking at the labor shortage we
have in general. Um, in fact,
the true intention of the spill
when it was the, the brainchild
actually started within a lot of
our healthcare industry, um, you
know, that's kind of where this
started at, was looking at a lot
of those technician positions
that we're having a really hard
time filling up in the northeast
part of the state within that
community college level, um,
this, this bill was put in
tension for the water quality
operators that we need with our
situation that we're having
there in Las Vegas, um, this.
Bill was put an attention for
this truck drivers for the bus
driver shortage that we have,
so, um, there's a lot of need,
um, and there is a lot of gaps
within our workforce development
that this bill could help
support so um if union labor was
to get involved, then great, but
this bill was not intended to
specifically focus on on that
particular part of the industry.
It was meant to reach out to see
where the labor needs were in
our state, which the intention
for being in workforce, um,
solutions DWS.
And then looking at pathways to
get those filled.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I appreciate
that explanation. Probably I'm
going to say 18.
17 years ago, there was
A woman that was very involved
in just what you were talking
about right now. She came down
to the eastern New Mexico
University Rossville branch, and
they worked in collaboration
with Kitty.
Projects like this going and she
was very.
OK, we want 5 entity to come in
as well as maybe some labor
unions, sheet metal workers, all
this type of stuff. Let's work
hand in hand to get these
classes going and it worked out
wonderfully.
Carpenters were loving it
electricians were involved in
it, and it, it was.
Very, very good right now down
there we do have a trade school
that is going on and it's going
great. These young people, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, are able to continue their
high school career, but they
could also
go to this other school as well.
Be able to learn this training
because like I said earlier,
Mister Chairman, there are
students out there.
That can't go to college.
Maybe they don't have the desire
to, but a lot of them have to
find a job.
Great. I appreciate.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any comments or questions from
anyone else on the committee,
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
So this uh study that you're
presenting here, it's, it's a
statewide study.
Correct.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, you are
correct.
And, and when is this report
due, uh, back to
To LESC or are they, are they
the ones writing the, the actual
report.
Um, Mr. Cha, Senator, um, and
one of the previous amendments,
um, originally when the bill was
drafted, there was an
appropriation with a deadline on
the report. One of the
amendments to take out the
appropriation, uh, working
within higher ed, working with
the different partners LC, LUC,
um, the agreement was that they
will work towards the study as
this is important. This is
important for all of these
entities, um, but I did remove
the deadline of the report, the
intention of the deadline was so
that any decisions made could be
could be
Investigated with enough time
for budget consideration. And so
that is the commitment that I
have from the different
departments that by the time of
budget consideration, um, that
they will at least work through
the pieces that are needed
within this report that they
will get it as promptly as
possible, but that was one of
the trade-offs by removing the
procreation was to also remove
that deadline as there are quite
a few studies that they may have
on their plate to get completed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you for that.
I mean, based on that, Mr. Cha,
based on what the, what's
outlined in the bill in terms of
the amount of work that has to
be done in terms of the
evaluations, the findings from
Talking to CT instructors, um,
Basically looking at in
including industry employers and
things of that nature. There's a
lot of work that has to be done
to actually get this work done
properly.
I was actually concerned that uh
That house finance committee
removed the approach because
I think and, and what I saw was
originally just 100K.
Which I thought was not enough.
do this study properly.
Because you're gonna have to
bring people together.
Probably pay a per diem or
something just to get these
folks together and you guys to
do it more than once.
So there's a lot of work that
needs to be done between now and
I was hoping the October 1 day
was still in there you're
telling me that.
Now no longer valid.
the original bill.
So that, so that report won't be
coming out anytime when we could
then make budget decisions to
support this.
So my concern is that we're,
we're, we're going down a path
without any
enforcement behind it and
without any real allocation of
funds to support it.
Um, and so while I agree with
this, and I think this is the
right thing to do. I think we
also need to, if we're going to
ask you, we need to also support
it, so.
I'm not quite sure how we go
back to finance and.
get that included in
the amount of money necessary to
do this, what I would.
So
I'm not quite sure where I am on
this. I, I want to support it.
Uh, I just think it needs more
than what you're asking.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Back to
Senator Rio.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much for letting me go a second
time, which brings, um, it's a
follow up to what Senator
Thornton was talking about under
the Perkins formula.
And I hope, I know that
everybody in this room is
familiar with this.
Um
But to be able to continue the
Receiving the Federal's Perkins
funding.
Um
That finding is also supported
by what the state puts in, is
that correct?
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
Oh, that's part of the 85% of
the allocation that they do get
from the Perkins Fund, so it's
going to 2 secondary recipients
Ka throughil for the other half
goes to post-secondary
recipients.
Does a grant have to be applied?
Or to be able to get this
funding is that where it comes
from after, after the state
shows that they have been in
Keeping up with their part of
the bargain.
I'm not sure how that works. Is
this a question about Perkins.
OK, um, I, I.
Let this, if you can respond to
this question, but let's also
make sure we're really keeping
on the bill.
Mr. Chairman, in my opinion, it
does have great
It hinges a lot on this bill
because it's a lot of funding
that's gonna be able to come in
if it's still got to work.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, can
you
Restate the question about,
well, are we going to be able to
get continued Perkins funding.
If
Well, I know there's lots of
money out there right now, but
is this going to be able to
continue.
Cause right now they're calling
it um
Strengthening career and
technical education for the 21st
Century Act.
That's a mouthful to say.
And in 2024, New Mexico got 10.5
10, yeah, $10.5 million.
From this federal funding.
So how did y'all go about
getting that money?
So so.
I, I think you were initially
asking, do we have, is there a
state requirement in terms of
matching funds. So there is,
there's a maintenance of effort
that is required. We cannot
reduce our the funding that we
have to support CTE and continue
to get the same amount of money
from the federal government for
the Perkins grant, and it is,
it's um
Yeah.
OK
In terms of um do we apply for
it every year? It's uh one of
the block grants from the
federal government.
Uh
Does each
Technical school apply for it,
is it going through?
uh, tell me about this. How, how
is that finding acquired?
So in terms of how it gets to
the school level, schools apply
to, to participate in a in a
Perkins funded CTE program.
Mr. Chair
And Mr. Chairman, I did know
that. I just wanted to.
The audience to know how it's
done.
I think that is a
One good way that we can
maintain what we're trying to
get going here as long as the
state continues to participate.
But
Do you see that there might be a
problem later on down the line.
I'd like to see young people get
started in the technical field
if that is their issue.
But we all know
We're spending money left and
right up here and
You know, it doesn't grow on
trees cause we don't get any
water in the state of New
Mexico, so it's kind of the
trees are getting kind of bare.
So, I'm just kind of curious, do
you see a problem representative
in the future.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, if what
you're asking, do I see a
problem with the CTE funding
flow, um, as of right now, um, I
think there is
A sizable amount of funding for
CTE instruction and and and
again just bringing back to the
purpose of the study is, uh,
maybe streamlining that now that
it's a requirement for
graduation is um seeing possible
bottlenecks specifically with
that faculty instructor portion,
um, you know, federally, I can't
say what other money down the
road maybe coming down, but as a
state we have made a commitment,
um, even addressing, um, Senator
Thornton's previous concerns,
there's been a lot of studies
around CTE. This is so.
a lot of that work has already
been done um PED has done a
tremendous amount of work with
investigation and CTE highered
has done tremendous amount of
work, um, and now it's just kind
of pulling everything together
and maybe looking at it at a
little bit different way is the
ask of this study. So as far as
the funding flow, um, I, I'm
hopeful that it will continue
because it's important, um, it's
important for our state, um, but
so as of right now, things are
steady, but that's.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Uh, it's time that we put
America back to work.
And this is one way to get that
job done.
And it's put America back to
work.
And whenever we are putting in,
I think our budget now reflects
51% going to education in our
state. It's time to get it where
it's gonna be used in our state
as well. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Have any
other questions, comments from
the committee?
we don't, I, I just want to say
um
And have concerns as well about
the appropriation.
Being taken out, but I know
there's already been a lot of
work done.
We have
Bills that are related to CT.
You know
I agree there's
Every one of our students.
It's not going
College
But I think the important thing
is that we don't.
have any barriers whether they
be financial reasons where they
want to go that they can't.
That's what we try to do.
Good job to make for folks who
wanna go camp.
And if folks aren't ready at
that time, they can go later.
The opportunity.
Um, I will also say folks that
go into CTE.
There's nothing that would stop
them furthering their education.
folks that learn a trade that
might want to go to school to
get an MBA or get a business
degree, because now they wanna,
you know, start their own
business.
So I just want to make sure we
have those.
With that
We go to the committee for
motion.
Where we do pass from center
Isel and a 2nd from Senator
Nova.
All the vote.
Tinder bone.
Andriel
Cender Figueroa, yes.
Senator Hickey.
No. Yes.inda Ramos.
Senator Thornton.
Yes.
Tinder Pope,
sinner souls. Yes.
And representative, you have a
due pass on how to afford 33
amended.
6 yeses and 3 excuses.
Congratulations, and I will pass
it over back to our chairman.
Currently, uh, education, we
don't have anything sitting on
the agenda, but pay attention,
keep watch, there's lots of
stuff coming over from the
house, uh, and they, they show
up on this fairly late, so, you
know, kind of keep up, pay
attention. I'll try and let you
know as things are, are coming
or what's happening, uh, be
prepared for probably 9 o'clock
on Wednesday, but at the call of
the chair.
Thank you.
