The.
Good.
It
Yes.
It is.
So I don't.
of.
And this is.
Yes.
So as long as.
Is that what this.
The tax.
Good morning everyone and I love
the energy we are all kind of
back here it feels I'm not sure
we want to get back to do some
of the normals from before but
it feels good to have people
back in the building and excited
about legislative sessions
starting in thank you for a
showing up for Senate education
couple of just introductions as
we get started and then we've
got some of our education
partners we're going to present
today will have a couple of the
other ones specifically higher
education and early childhood at
another time
We don't have all our members
here and so maybe we'll wait to
introduce members a little bit
into the future and more we're
trying to get more of them to
come Education we do try and
start right about nine o'clock
every time I mean we are the
Education Committee and are
built here but we still are
going to kind of follow the
school starts on time you don't
just wait till everybody happens
to show up for it and with that
let me introduce some of.
This.
some of the staff that we have
in first the person who really
runs this committee Marianne has
been here for many years and
this.
And always make sure that the I
keep up with what's going on
that any amendments we make
happen is they should and she is
now I believe the lead among the
committee secretaries and is
helping with several of the
other committees to have new
secretaries of and so Marian you
want to introduce any of the
other staff.
Well I think we should just have
them introduce them okay but I'm
gonna introduce Cecilia Flores
and many of you that I don't
know if you have built in Senate
health and public affairs but
our long time committee
secretary penny she retired and
now facility Flores is going to
be the committee secretary in
that and so she's here with us
today to see how committees run
and.
So we're very very happy to have
her welcomes thank you for that
our specialty hi.
Senator sold to.
There's two thousand fourteen
thirteen thirteen I think you
were forty act.
It was fourteen years old.
The.
Background.
San.
Yes.
And then we have a couple of
gentleman down here from our
operative us with our hi I will
work on the floor but I do help
out with the students and the
the report.
More and more the other assumed
as well act presidential
actually done yet so very close.
Thank you
over on this side have very
Lujan is my personal assistant
and stuff and the makes
appointments for me keeps me
straight she's amazing and that
always makes it very easy for me
to to manage my my very hectic
schedule and then we have Mary
Beth who is one of my education
analysts and Albert and you may
have noticed we have Marianne
very Lou merry Beth sisters and
my sisters around eight times
more utility so if in doubt
about the first thing that they
all do use those names up in our
office more you usually get some
heads to at least turn seven and
then Albert Gonzales who is the
our other education and.
And they've been this will be
their second here with me as far
as analysts
do know center print going to
come is not Senator if you'd
like to introduce yourself
please thank you Mr chairman
good morning it's good to see
everybody out here and welcome
to the the new session and we're
looking forward to doing good
work in this committee
appreciate always Senator souls
chairman lease leave at eight
very good committee and we're
glad have our new Senator cross
over there get to good to have
you on this committee thank you.
To which is farming.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman pleasure
to be here my name cell phone
last us on the new center of
appointee from Senate district
twenty six which is an
Bernalillo county west mesa west
central corridor it dips into
the south valley after school
neighborhoods so some you may
have seen me around I was in the
house for sixteen years and but
never served on the Education
Committee so I'm really looking
forward to this Mr chairman and
and getting to it working more
closely with the education
partners thank you.
That that that
any good morning everyone it's
great to see another year here
we go I am district three had to
school districts got McKinley
County schools and CCSD and a
lot of work to do thank you it's
great to be here thank you Mr
chairman on the staff and
I'm legislators that here thank
you Center pope.
Thank you Mr chair center of
hope junior district twenty
three northwest Bernalillo
county it's pretty much
zigzagging west of I'm west of
Coors up to Santa Fe County line
to the north will be up to the
real quick on the east side and
touched down on I. forty in some
areas now with the new district
I'll be going down to central
been here distributed third
session and I'm proud and
humbled to be the vice chair of
this committee and learn so much
from a the gentleman here thank
you thank you senator and he's
very modest when I in presenting
or other places he runs the
committee very very capable so I
appreciate having the a
wonderful vice chair who also
serves on the LTSE so here's
lots of the education bills and
issues in the in the interim
sessions I'm bill soul state
senator from Los crucis the east
mesa side of it I've been very
fortunate this is my seventh
session I think chairing the
Senate Education Committee and
great to see all of our friendly
faces and and people back from
around the state and the various
agencies also would like to
introduce we have the pool
analyst and stuff from the from
the Senate area so if you all
would like to introduce
yourselves please.
Round these numbers so.
My favorite toward.
Thank.
Rick.
Morning Mr chair.
Jordy analysts.
Early century that's one that we
use.
I was sitting in that.
And the majority and Shannon.
Trying to hide.
Is yeah but if you'll introduce
yourself please.
Methadone you are welcome we can
provide you just
discontinuously you.
Yes hello.
And are we going.
Live in Senator Kernan.
Thank you and I I think that's
kind of the staffing people
level up here will get lots of
introductions of the other
education staffing round as they
come up to do presentations out
first up and a lot of today is
to get updates from the
departments from what their
priorities are what expectations
you might have as well as that
we start to get to know each
other a little bit better of
this committee's been relatively
stable so we know most of our
advocates that show up regularly
but for people watching on zoom
on the webcast and others to
start putting names and faces
together is always important so
secretary state house if you
would please.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee on nice to see
you this morning and beyond with
all the education partners it's
an honor to have the opportunity
to to present to you I worked
really hard on a very concise
summary it looks like this it
should be sitting in in front of
you and said if if there's extra
copies I we made enough for
members of the audience as well
that's okay Mister chairman.
Would you like me just to jump
in and.
Okay so I'm on page two of the
presentation.
And let's see looking at Senator
Pinto there I before I jump into
the presentation I mentioned
that today is the state and
federal funds or pueblo about
twenty minutes down the road and
and when I talked to the
leadership there this morning
they wanted me to extend an
invitation for you all in your
free time to stop by and enjoy
the state
on page two is the outline of
what I'm planning to present
our word this is an Education
Committee so we're gonna start
out talking about education and
the numbers associated with it
we've got a few propose bills
that will be working with you
all to introduce and I'm was
that dissipating some questions
about extended learning and so
that's a topic and then happy to
answer any questions so moving
on to page number three there's
a picture there of New Mexicos
teacher of the year Terry Hughes
she teaches just down the road
at the night early childhood
center in an inclusion pre K.
classroom and the woman standing
back there with looks like right
here smiling as her principal.
We have one single goal Mr
chairman we would like to work
with you on and that's moving
the lead needle.
And that's tied to what the late
great judge singleton said in
her Martinez Yazzie rolling and
she also said in a ruling that
while you're increasing student
achievement you need to close
the gaps between the student
groups that are listed in so
that's R. one single call.
And in order to achieve that
goal we have three objectives
the first one is leadership and
those of you and many of you
have been looking at schools and
you visited schools when you see
a school that showing great
improvement nine times out of
ten it's because of a strong
leader in that school so that's
why our it's our number one
goal.
the second one is to continue
the momentum that you all helped
us get started in reducing
teacher vacancies and we still
have about six hundred
classrooms today across New
Mexico the need to fully
licensed teacher.
And then the third one is time
for learning we want to make
better use of the time we have.
I think it's important to
restate that we want to make
better use of the time we
already have.
And then a provide the kinds of
extended learning opportunities
that allow our kids to catch up.
From the pandemic because we
have a long way to go and we
lost quite a bit during the
pandemic so that's our third
goal and that's what we're all
about.
So I've got three slides one on
each one of those strategies so
I'm on slide number four Mr
chairman members of the
committee and under leadership
for learning we would like to
work with you to continue to
expand the early literacy and
reading and Senate pro tem Mimi
Stewart has been the leader on
that for a couple years and we
we have included in our
elementary schools across New
Mexico extensive learning about
the science of reading and we
don't have every single
elementary teacher trained yet
so this is to get all our
elementary teachers trained.
The second one is you know this
is the year mathematics steam is
science technology engineering
arts and mathematics and so
we've got some proposals in
there too particularly address
mathematics at the middle school
level algebra.
That seems to be the key turning
point for kids of mathematics is
algebra in middle school and our
proposal to you for mathematics
is at the middle school because
in elementary school we're
focusing on literacy and there's
only so much you can do with
training.
And then attendance for success.
The for those of you that have
been in the legislature before
you'll remember several years
ago a very well meaning group
from Albuquerque
that was working on increasing
graduation rates came to you and
had a bill and that led to the
attendance for success act and
that was the best thinking at
the time and we've learned quite
a bit from the implementation of
that act and we need to clean it
up so we've got a proposal in
there to to clean up the things
that are not working and to
attendance for success act and
move forward with the things
that are working because we know
if we can get the kids to school
we can get any of this done so
that's a big part of it
underneath this may seem kind of
strange but I've intentionally
put these other items under
attendance so if we can expand
career technical education
attendance is going to improve.
If we can address and do a
better job with addressing the
needs of our at risk youth
attendance will improve.
If we can expand the number of
community schools in New Mexico
the tenants will and the same
thing with high dosage tutoring
all of those are part of
increasing attendance.
And then thanks to you all we
had a great expansion in the
Indian Education Act for this
school year and in working with
tribal leaders and our
government to government meeting
we've learned about their tribal
priority so there is a request
in there for twenty five million
from fifteen to twenty five
million dollars for the Indian
Education Act and also about
thirteen million dollars to
provide a whole suite of before
and after school extended
learning programs for all of our
students enrolled in the
nineteen pueblos and pick Karia
Mescalero Navajo Nation.
So that's a summary of what
we're proposing under
leadership.
Under educator workforce which
is slide number five Mr chairman
our request to you is on average
four percent raise for staff.
And that would mean a local
decision at the district level
if they wanted to give a
variation of that four percent
raise that seems to have worked
the last couple years.
We are also like all of our
school employees to get more of
the health care covered and this
proposal here of a hundred
million dollars would would give
every single school employee ten
thousand dollars of health care
coverage and if you're an
individual a single employee
that will cover again at the the
the high plan that will cover
most of the health care costs if
you're carrying a family plan
it'll it'll cover probably about
sixty five percent so that'll be
a big increase in helping us
increase the workforce because
they'll be better benefits and
health care coverage teacher
residencies you all have
supported for a couple years and
it's working and we'd like to
expand that and continue it.
In New Mexico we've got hard to
fill positions special education
elementary teachers is a
surprise there are several
positions that are really hard
to fill in the teaching ranks
and then outside of the teaching
ranks Revenue trouble provide
enough bus drivers and so this
proposal is funding to go to the
local school district so they
can make a decision based on
their local needs to address the
hard to fill positions and then
seventeen million dollars for
educator recruitment so that's a
quick summary of our suite under
the educator workforce and then
the third goal time for learning
and staff work.
So the extended learning
proposal is about students
getting more time with their
teachers engaged in learning us
doing a much better job of the
time we already have but it's
also a proposal to give teachers
a chance to work together and
staff and Mr chairman
when you heard Attorney Willie
brown talk about us working
together in the past one of the
things we did several years ago
was to work with the L. E. S. C.
and the LFC to send a survey
called the pre legislative
survey and I asked our partners
if they would do that with us
together and they did so we have
surveyed all of our charter
schools and school districts to
get information to help you make
an informed decision and one of
the things that came screaming
out of that survey from school
districts and charter leaders is
more time for their staff it's
funded by the legislature and so
that's part of the proposal
we've got here it's total three
hundred eleven million dollars.
And then related to that is a
request for educational
technology for our kids to have
extended learning they need
access from home we call that
the homework gap and it's more
of a challenge in our rural
rural tribal communities that it
is anywhere across New Mexico so
this is a request for funding
for the learning side of
technology.
Thirty three million dollars to
expand the services for special
education and that does include
it optional extended learning
especially for those kids with I
eat peas individual education
plans.
Thirty three million dollars for
instructional materials that was
a another item that we've heard
from our survey of school
superintendents they are not
getting enough money right now
for instructional materials so
we actually calculated the cost
of what the materials would be
for next year and so we're
requesting an increase of thirty
three million dollars and then
Mr chairman and members the
committee you likely have seen
an newspaper a request for
school meals in our schools for
all children and the expert
that's been working on that
Kendall Services is behind me
somewhere and we're happy to
answer questions about that did
you raise your hand at their
table yeah she smiled back there
okay
one of the questions I always
get asked is on slide number set
seven okay Mister secretary
what's missing from the budget
that's in your proposal.
And here they are.
we're missing two hundred fifty
thousand dollars for the EDD
plans so for those of you that
were part of the legislature
three years ago you'll remember
House Bill five it requires
school districts to fill out it
had planned to go with their
budget it was a really good
piece of legislation it's good
for accountability and we need
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars to run that had planned
electronically there's also a
request for three million
dollars for the management
system the legislative finance
committee did an evaluation of
to school districts
we could go seven days ago and
in there was a recommendation
that that we fully purchased the
campus modules and so we're
requesting that that's not in
the LFC budget microgrid
initials is an idea that some
teachers really like instead of
having to do a dossier to move
from level one to level two
we're implementing a pilot
initiative to let them do what's
called micro credentials like a
mini course and it seems to be
really well received and so we
need a million dollars for that.
Five twenty licensure holder
Senator Pinto knows all about
this we have teachers who are
licensed by the tribal
leadership to provide language
and culture training within the
school and that was so popular
this year the one point six
million dollars that you
appropriated wasn't enough so
this is a request for three
million and then seven hiding
hygiene prod products is is
really important for all of our
female students out there and
there is research out there Mr
chairman members the committee
that if you find those in the
schools at a place where the the
where that the young women can
go to the bathroom and get those
it increases student attendance
so that's a request for three
million dollars.
And so Mister chairman ed how's
the pace of my going too fast is
about right.
So.
A couple of questions of.
For questions okay I'll be happy
to answer questions we do have
some bills that we're hoping
will be introduced this week one
an extended learning and one on
your so universal free lunches
for in our children and I think
that's also breakfast.
the educator health insurance
that you heard me talk about.
And with leadership from a whole
team of people we're going to
introduce a bill that will
create an office of special
education in the public
education department and raise
the importance of that and do a
lot of things to address and do
a better job of us serving
special education students
students with IEPs I'm really
excited about this bill and then
you heard me talk about the
attendance for success act on
the next page page number nine
the other three bills that we
hope to introduce and hope to
get a good hearing this
committee one on digital equity
here me talk about that
technology alternative license
for special ed and this one this
last one on this page Mr
chairman is I can't emphasize
how important this is we have a
background check agreement with
the FBI and that has come to an
end and we're on a waiver right
now and they've told us to the
best of our knowledge that it
doesn't look like we'll get an
extension of the waiver so the
FBI is expecting us to update
that bill and get it passed this
session if we don't get it
passed I'm really worried that
we can issue teacher licenses
and that's as you know
absolutely essential.
Slide number ten gives a really
nice concise comparison of the
different extended learning
bills the public education
department the LFC and LESC.
And I will tell you there's pros
and cons of each one of those
and be happy to answer questions
about that.
The next slide slide number
eleven.
talks a little bit about
more information regarding the
extended learning the
differences.
And same thing with slide number
twelve I'd we put in quite a few
slides on here because this is a
topic that's already generating
a lots of discussion so slide
number twelve Mr chairman room
really close to being done let's
talk a little bit about that
professional work time this is
the thing that our school
districts told us they want to
increase dramatically the public
education department proposal
has a minimum of eighty hours
for either extra training or
sitting together in reviewing
student work and looking at
what's working and what are the
strategies we need and the
country's that are doing better
than the United States if you
look at how those teacher spent
time that's one of the ways they
spend time more than we do so
our proposal and there's for
eight hours eighty hours of that
professional work time the LTSE
proposal is for sixty hours and
that's built into the one
thousand one hundred forty
hours.
And then the LFC proposal.
Does not have a minimum or a
maximum of that professional
work time so that's one of the
big differences that kind of
gets buried when you're talking
about extended learning time.
And Mr chairman the last slide
is also additional detail here
about paying for time above and
beyond so is a school
superintendent IAD wanted above
and beyond time in several areas
I had a group of parents who had
to be at work at seven AM so
even though we didn't really
have the staff they drop their
kids off at seven AM and instead
of just having the kids
unsupervised on the playground
we created programs for kids to
get into during instruction in
mathematics and English language
arts and also to do science
activities we didn't get funding
from the state to do that we
also had a high school students
who said if you will reserve
three and a half hours on
Saturday morning I will
volunteer to come in my teachers
will give me the work and I'll
be there with other teachers
working that Saturday we call
that Saturday school it wasn't a
punishment it was something very
popular with our kids and we
didn't get funding for that
either and so what's on slide
number thirteen gives you the
ideas that we're proposing to
provide school districts for
that extractive ET here's
another one I wanted to do I
wanted to have a boot camp for
freshman before high school
started I wanted to bring
together for an entire week and
do a bunch of fun activities
with them so that they were
ready to succeed in high school
and so that is it R. three
concrete examples of what the
proposal here is and what it
would provide.
So how's that for time Mr
chairman.
Happy to answer your question
thank you you did quite well any
quick questions I mean we're
gonna get into the depth of all
of these through various bills
and things but any questions
from reporters.
Yes there develop.
Just a curiosity she uses some
but the FBI you have your own
waiver what what's the issue
there could you expand on that
just a test Mister chairman
Senator bell thank you for
asking the issue is conducting
background checks when somebody
wants to get a new teachers
license or renew their license
and it's something that was
started way back when Gary
Johnson was governor and it's to
make sure that the adults that
are in the classroom with our
kids have a background check and
that they can be with kids I
understand that wire is FBI not
willing to continue this for
schools or what's the issue
what's the I understand why you
do it but what's the issue
that's the problematic Mister
chairman Senator the agreement
we have with the FBI expired and
that FBI requires us to update
that agreement and it's in
statute is there a problem
getting that updated.
Mister chairman Senator who we
are not sure
we've been working since the end
of the last session with
secretary Bowie from
Department of
would see from
Governments now.
Safety thank you and he's been
very very helpful and we've been
communicating with the FBI but
they are so busy we don't have
specifics on exactly what they
want changed okay fair enough.
There Pinto thank you thank you
Secretary thank you Mr chair.
Are we decided on assessment.
What we're going to do as far as
assessment because when we're
asking for all this money we
know we want to make sure
there's accountability and even
with these programs that we're
implementing now with the past
money that's been put toward how
we really measuring
Where we're moving the needle.
Chairman center Pinto the answer
is yes in.
In two different pieces one of
them is a is what we like to
call interim assessments that
are given at the beginning
middle and end of the year and
every school district is
required to do in terms
assessments and report that data
and then in April we will be
having every single school
district implement a statewide
standardized assessment grades
K. through eight at I mean three
through eight we've got just a
different assessment for the
early grades and then we have a
an assessment for high school
students so we are settle on it
we're moving forward with that
it didn't happen during the
pandemic Mr chairman center as
you know but it is now in place
and moving forward.
Thank you senator other
questions Senator Kernan thank
you Mr chair just up quickly on
page six of the additional money
for instructional materials
seems okay for the other day the
LFC that if the approved list
would that be a requirement that
did those dollars be spent
selecting from an approved list
mmhm madam chair Senator Mister
chairman Senator Kernan
depending on how you choose to
appropriate the money if you
choose to appropriate at middle
of the line that it would have
to be off of approved last right
now this year it's above the
line and that gives school
districts the option to choose
the material that they think are
most appropriate for their
students I thank you Mr chairman
that's certainly have in flight
the idea that that flexibility
is there for the districts you
know we're very first state and
what may be approved for one
area might not fit another so
hope that stays in place where
they put that about the line
thank you Senator Kernan as
center Maestas thank you Mr
chairman.
Secretary St house you said some
very powerful that the schools
are sixty when they have strong
leadership principles
administrative teachers is there
something that that PED's does
to enhance that leadership or
something I believe leadership
training or.
Working for do you suggest we do
something statutorily Mr
chairman center my Estes the
answer is yes we have a very
successful data driven program
for developing leaders and I I I
think that our request is to
take that successful program and
expanded and allow more and as a
school superintendent I was a
part of that program and found
it to be very well organized in
a good way of us developing
leaders as you know it's really
hard to find good employees it's
even harder to find really good
principles out there and the
leadership also exists beyond
the school principal the
assistant principal department
chair and a high school and the
school superintendent
particularly in our small rural
districts.
Thank you at last the secretary
any of your staff here that you
would like to introduce
particularly ones will be with
us on a regular basis yes one
sitting in the front row.
Thank you senator cells are
great for us that is in charge
of our legislative office and
There are several others that
I'm sure will be with you on a
very regular basis is there
anybody here that I don't see.
I everybody in the room is part
of our end partners I feel
really good about who's here.
Thank you very much Secretary
thank you.
will now transition over to your
amendment.
So I'm sorry yes we need to
introduce our security people we
have in the back that always
watch out for us if you reduce
yourself please Sir.
I think thank you I appreciate
are you going to be here
regularly with us.
Okay.
And Melvin stepped out so Melvin
stepped out and also I know we
have at least two people from
the governor's office.
Mr begin ski and Kendall yup do
a brief introduction.
The governor sophistication
policy adviser focusing on K.
twelve and higher education is.
Welcome you always or you are
welcome here every day there's
M. L..
Now.
Well I'm sorry I'm looking in
the back and fell right here.
Morals are.
Thank you you all are always so
helpful.
For the work that thank you.
Welcome.
Nice to have you.
Stand if you like to come up
and.
About fifteen minutes but maybe
questions about from our
coalition of education leaders
group thank you Mr chairman good
morning.
You have in front of you a one
pager the front of the looks
like this weather riding.
This a cool device.
It's.
It's even a good school device
will break mines Mr Chairman
good morning I'm stand rounds of
the executive director of the
New Mexico coalition of
educational leaders and the New
Mexico school superintendents
association of a given Committee
member just a quick remember
remember reminder the cost of
education leaders are all the
folks that administer school
districts in New Mexico for
special ed director's to billing
managers to principals and
assistant principals to
superintendents to central
office workers to food service
directors the whole gamut of
things are there within our
organization and so the the the
the input that I gave you is
from the administrative
standpoint Mr chairman so always
a delight to be before your
committee thank you for the
opportunity to spend a few
minutes we did present of the
LFC about our educational
platform so rather than
iterating all of that I thought
I would hit the most salient
points of debate and discussion
are likely to happen this
morning.
there are major three major
categories in our proposal the
first our tools for recruiting
and retaining quality
educational person as you heard
the secretary say we're doing
better as far as teachers and on
field classrooms but we still
have a dearth of openings in
teachers and on field classrooms
so students don't get
particularly good education we
don't have a qualified teacher
in the classroom and that's
always a high priority of ours
everything we do begins in the
classroom.
And to that extent Mr chairman
I'll kind of deviated from the
script used to have before you a
question about how do we do that
the instructional time.
And you have a number of
recommendations you'll be
looking at the century look at
increasing the amount of contact
time for students.
You're the secretary talk about
the the how those deviate in
proposal.
We contend that we need to be
cautious thoughtful and
well developed and how we put
this question together we don't
object to eleven hundred forty
hours as an example never remind
you that under current statute
instruction is ten hundred
eighty hours for secondary
students and nine hundred and
ninety hours for elementary
students the proposal those
before you essentially raises
those by sixty hours except that
some of the proposals in fact
all the proposal settle Levin
forty so the deviation from
elementary.
Is in fact more than sixty
hours.
We have a concern about that
will be honest with you.
As students have resiliency
issues think about a
kindergartner.
Having a longer school day.
Back when I started the business
kindergartners had half days.
Because we didn't think that the
resiliency learned over that
period of time we've learned if
we do our job right engage the
students writing Care for the
student family correctly they in
fact do well in a and extended
environment so as you here's
debate the bills you'll hear me
talk about that.
It is that they were adverse
here this it's not because are
adverse to extending learning
time it's how you do it this
just as important to hear my
colleagues say that more is not
necessarily better.
Better is better.
And that's our what we're
striving to do we can't have the
graduation of scenarios that we
have in the state of New Mexico
graduation rates are not where
they need.
And as a superintendent of
twenty seven years in the state.
We move graduation rate in each
of my districts because we
understood that issue Senator
souls you and I work together
Los crucis public schools right
we bought about twenty four
eight percentage points of
graduation over a ten year
period as far as increasing
graduation those are the kinds
of things you want to have
happen.
The other thing you're gonna
hear me talk about is the
difference of eighty nine
districts there eighty nine
different districts in the state
with eighty nine completely
different personalities
different needs of students
happen while others saliency the
things that our sameness between
all of them.
There are great differences also
in communities and in those
students as we develop them up
for the very smallest district
about fifty kids K. twelve the
largest distributor of eighty
thousand kids.
I finish my career at Los crucis
which is the second largest
district about twenty five
thousand kids I started my
career and one of the smallest
districts at one hundred and
twenty five kids in the morning
New Mexico so we understand that
and as we do we do we hope to
give you advice so we can build
the right mouse trap and invest
in the right process.
Then if I can stop you for just
a moment to take a point of
personal privilege I'd like to
shout out organ mountain high
school government classes
watching us now and just kinda
want it want to thank them for
tuning in and stuff and think I
give a shout out to my old high
school and stuff so hi guys and
in the eight Organon by the way
one of the high schools that we
have the the that I have the
place for two years to have in
my bailiwick of responsibility a
superintendent Las crucis great
school great kids great
community and I have got a
couple Los crucis and so false
administer sitting back here in
the right hands thank you for
letting me break in from all Mr
Chairman as always this is your
committee and you always do well
do a good job of remembering
what we're here for.
And those kids are what we're
about.
Not I will tell you that.
You're the secretary talk about
professional development for
teachers part of the script and
how do you get better is better.
Details of how you develop what
are teacher corps and by the way
all those who support education
so there training abilities
rights so they can do more
salient job of dealing with a
broad array of educational needs
that our students have.
And we're gonna support release
proposals for professional
development is married.
With the instructional day.
As was said if you look at
international models that's what
they do.
And so we're going to have that
debate within I wanted my kids
with you at this point we also
have an issue in small districts
Mr chairman members of the
committee small districts in
rural New Mexico our law are a
long ways apart.
And their ability to resource
what they do varies tremendously
we're so the call regional
education cooperatives REC that
we do in the state of New Mexico
do you know that they were
formed in nineteen eighty four.
And they were funded a hundred
thousand dollars each.
They're now funded at a hundred
and ten thousand dollars a.
Mr Chairman were to suggest you
do something about that we think
you need to put off of five
million the this is that's a
that's a one million dollar mark
for one point one million dollar
marker because our ten of them
we recommend you increase that
five times to start with so we
can begin to build up those
support educational support for
districts on a regional basis
because that's how we cost
effectively do professional
development that's how we cost
effectively do support for small
districts you see in the and one
of the smallest districts the
president of our students
association of Bonny light puts
in house New Mexico.
She is about seventy five eighty
kids in a house New Mexico she's
the sole administrator.
How do you bring professional
development through here today
to your teaching team owner The
Salt administrator doing
everything with the keys and
regional education cooperatives.
We're gonna want to talk with
you about that as we move
through time Dr the state many
of you do I do I have sixty
thousand miles this year driving
this state district to district
just to be there so I can see
what's happening on the ground
Mr Chairman will bring that
information to the committee.
We believe that.
To retain our employees not pay
is important.
We're in a better place than we
were thank you for your actions
of last year because you raise
minimum we also gave some pay
increases we support of five
percent increase on the average
or more so we believe CPI should
be part of the indicator with
that you have a budget packages
it's important.
Important benefits package
you've you're talking insurance
here the secretary talk about
that we haven't Torrez
increasing the contribution
forward health insurance for our
employees of in education.
we're gonna want to debate with
you what the best format is for
that.
I'll give you a little history
lesson brother this is my
fiftieth year in education in
New Mexico the my forty of the
legislative session I have
attended the start as a staff
member member forty years ago
for the education study to been
Mr chairman and what I reflect
on is we have a the stratified
amount that we pay our employees
right now is based on historic
decision that was made about
nineteen eighty eight.
On the salaries being paid they
on the set up the three tiered
system we've never tweet that Mr
Chairman we left the numbers the
same hence the problem we're
looking at today so as we
consider this would love to
share with you the rationale
behind why was done the way it
was done and help you make an
informed decision about your
best solution for.
But it's important aspect
retirements another one.
There's two parts to retirement
the educational retirement fund
or E. R. B. educators retirement
boards the the the that money is
an important way we attract
teachers.
I'm gonna ask you to pay
attention to the contributions
on those and we should we
maintain that as a valid level
it's gotten much better over the
several years because investors
must chairman you made and we
hope to continue to do that
including perhaps increasing
employer contributions there's
also the departures side of this
it is we've had the reduction in
teacher availability last year
use the legislature passed a a
law that allowed us to take
return to work and change it so
would have a lay out created
just ninety days and then thirty
six consecutive or non
consecutive months of service
the could fall of that so we
could bridge the gap in our
teacher availability and it's
working we didn't have as many
teachers go there about seventy
of them have gone there but
that's seventy more than we
would have had we want to talk
to you about some changes to
could be there to expected to
that with the R. B. boards as
they come to you with
recommendations about how to
move the.
The other piece that I want for
Mr chairman is is the retiree
health care fund.
That started about nineteen
eighty eight would begin to put
money in there as a reduction
out of salaries of educators as
a one percent others want to
percent given that they've given
to bill the ability of the
specter that when they retire
they will still enjoy health
insurance as a long term benefit
that sometimes under fire may be
under fire this time want to
talk with you about the efficacy
of that Mr Chairman final point
and then I'll answer any
questions you might have been
please read this because I
didn't because I know you so I'm
in New Mexico native I'm a
graduate from New Mexico high
school and elementary school
etcetera I'm a product of New
Mexico universities spent my
entire career in the state of
New Mexico and I continue to be
a proud New Mexicans so one of
the things Mr chairman in this I
know you read you can read
because I can't.
This so Mister chairman of final
point I'd like to make.
Under our public school capital
outlay process Mr chairman
because of the Zuni lawsuit
which is most of you probably
know about but not all of you we
put in the process of taking
credit for.
Any direct appropriation to you
may cause a legislator
legislator to your school
district.
These are we call them offsets.
Senator what offset is if you
give ten thousand dollars to
your district and they come out
for public school capital outlay
the first thing to do is reduce
their amount by the amount you
gave them ten thousand dollars
and that appropriation for PS
two soup reduced but also there
was to maintain equity because
some folks are better getting
capital outlay into schools and
other.
However.
We have reached a point where
there are a number of offices
out there that are unfortunate
in the system toward a time of
twenty.
And we're recommending I serve
on the public to capitalize
oversight task force
recommending to you the remove
the offsets for a short period
of time remove all the prior
offset some for move that
because here's the deal.
The superintendents and boards
that he entered into the
agreement to get the money
mostly gone and now you have
people have inherited that ten
fifteen twenty years down the
line let's let's wipe the plate
the plate claim let's allow us
to start a policy on offsets we
also some areas All of offset
moving forward we're gonna
recommend you focus on is a
public policy things like
technology things like safety
things like a high building
needs that are there would like
to talk with you about that also
so Mister chairman I'll stop
there and feel like when times
pulling in amended look at the
clock that you're running I had
Mr Chairman minutes so five
minutes question were perfect
Mister Merrett may I answer
questions and members the
committee I'll be one of your
usual suspects I'll be here
quite a bit I'll be in your
office I'm available to you.
To talk privately about anything
what I promise use I'll give you
my best professional
understanding in history so you
can make your best decision I
won't always agree that all
agree with the.
But I promise I will always give
you my very best input so you
can make your best decision I
respect the process respect each
of you Mr chairman Sam question
thank you Senator Kernan thank
you Mr chairman thank you Mr
Branson you what you do have a
wealth of information history
and and I would invite
encouraging people to take
advantage of that so I want to
talk about the offsets a little
bit and
Act I don't think I've
Been pretty clear about my
concerns with the general gist
waiver of all the offsets just
eliminate him because the way
the different legislators
appropriate capital outlay
varies from area to area and
input the purposes that we
provide capital outlay we in my
area we don't do much for our
schools and haven't for many
years because they would have to
take the offset and they need
that money to build a new
school.
In some areas the state those
capital outlay dollars that
legislators appropriate are for
things that are particularly
necessary for the education
children it's more the nice
things playgrounds and and
soccer fields and things like
that and it concerns me that
we're going to eliminate
Those offsets.
I do appreciate the fact that
they will eliminate an offset if
I believe you're going to spend
the money for things like school
safety C. T. E. I think there's
a very appropriate places to put
those dollars that I'm looking
for to really strong
conversation that just a general
Uh elimination of Aust offsets I
don't think it's fair and even
though we've got a lot of money
right now we're not going to
have that money always in those
if you've been around long
enough and you could certainly
give us a history lesson on when
we have to cut schools so I
think that that we ought to
consider the match as well and I
think that's part of the
legislation that we're we're
evening that up a little bit in
my area we we are really we're
we're in it in a bind because
we've bonded everything and may
be the match could be reduced to
a very low match if if we have
our bonding capacity spin you
step and we can't do anything
about increasing bonding is what
I think I learned from you but
we could make that.
kind of mail the and with the
match and so areas that have
used up all their bonding they
don't have anywhere else to go
that match ought to be very very
low because we have work to do
in my area as well and quite
frankly
you know I I I don't know how
many of you realize that the
money for capital outlay comes
from severance taxes which comes
from oil and gas which comes
from my area and yet we're very
limited on how we can improve
our school facilities with
regard to adding new school so
we need some fairness here you
know match in the the
elimination is going to occur so
we need to also add something in
there that will allow the match
to be more fair that's all I
have that thank you thanks for
but I just address that surely
Mr chairman so this is part of
the policy discussion I think
we're going to have an I'm
certainly willing to have.
There's a lot of variations are
very nine things if you will
there's different capacities and
we did we need to decide
and I do let's let's have that
talk was figure out how we're
gonna go but not just backwards
let's also talk about what is
the prevailing policies you go
forward and you see here and our
recommendation we've chosen
career and technical education
we've chosen technology we've
chosen early childhood and
things like that as.
Areas that are worthy of perhaps
a differentiated way of getting
there Senator to your point and
so love to have the plan was to
thank you thank you Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr rounds for
your eliminating discussion here
today are you mentioned
something about the retiree
health care us already and
over the summer I've been
studying that I back and
the governor is also talking
about in terms of the health
care story because as you
probably know the beneficiaries
and name SEEA pay much more out
of their total salary for health
care benefits David do any the
other entities and we've got to
get that.
To become fair across the board
but I'm not aware of I know
there are some issues within the
retiree and it's a completely
different animal and that's
governed under Rhys up so it may
not very well may not that these
the the senior portion come
under this health care sorority
what whatever revolves in that
but the just the fact that you
mentioned something there can
you elucidate a little bit on
that so I could be better
informed Mr chairman Senator
Hickey thank you for that and
you're correct when we
originally set up NMPSIA we also
set up the retiree health care
we began at that point.
Deducting from active employees
salaries so they could enjoy
when there are costs of health
care would go up health care
coverage and their time
retirement hand I agree with you
that there's differentiated
contribution.
and what not that have happened
over time between the various
B. R. I. back in and and Nancy
and the others.
We need to correct that not we
need to solve that you'll hear
me and I'll advocate hallways to
retain retiree health care there
are those who like to be
laminated because it's so high
cost well they're retired people
that we gave a promise to we
have taken their money for we
need to manage into the system
and we knew on the front end
that there would be back in
escalations that we not come to
grips with and so I would be
delighted Senator Mr chairman to
sit on a me within give you what
I know of the history as we
chart which I know was chairman
centers your interest as a
charter reasonable future policy
right to get into sure the
people are are provided for.
With that excessively doing so
I'm putting ourselves in
financial jeopardy and that's
that's a tricky little deal but
there's they're not easy answers
here but we'll be happy to a
last point of members chairman
I'm not a proponent of
consolidation of the different
plans mostly because of the
history and the differences of
how we have gotten where we are
and all of that the liabilities
of one at that have gone a long
remember what we also the
Albuquerque public schools is
the only public school and St
that is not inside of what we're
talking about as far as their
core health insurance and so
that has a one off if you will
issue that we need to talk about
as a superintendent Las Cruces
New Mexico we were the largest.
School district in the name see
a program and so I'll be happy
to share my knowledge with you
to save time of the committee Mr
Mr chair just very briefly
that there are two tax here
they're actually and and and we
should have a sit down and I can
take you through give you a copy
of the paper that was put
together there are answers there
are ways
to bring everyone in and use
what insurance because a lot of
large numbers because that
really lowers costs but there is
also what we discover and
amounts waste of money through
poor contracting and what have
you and so we can build up we we
we can we can create more value
and I know right now what
happens and it's is it just take
benefits away we can actually
increase benefits and have it at
lower costs and from my point of
view is a position actually have
health status improvement for
every individual on the plan and
follow that track it because
that's the most important thing
we could do chairman thank you
look for discussion Senator
thank you any other comments of
that thank you stand as always
and very very clearly stand
indicated if you have questions
he's a wonderful resource I'm
very fortunate every Thursday
morning I think it's seven in
the morning but have a zoom call
with the superintendents around
the state just updating as to
what's going on in the education
field is what we're doing if
you've got input for any of that
did you wanna make sure I get
out to the superintendents
please let me know I'd be happy
to to try and do that nicer we
think we have so many new
superintendents that you are
trying to mentor and nurture
along that that's a real
valuable tool for them to
understand our process Mr for
the committee eighty nine
superintendents we now have
fifty four in the last twenty
two months New.
So that we're working with a
fairly steep learning curve and
leadership so consistency of
leadership something we we talk
a lot about as we move through
the process Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you next we've got the two
unions NEA and AFT and both of
you if you're a little bit
shorter because you're kind of
the same group so sure so if you
would please give you have about
ten minutes.
It was an update of your
people's priorities.
Good morning of Chairman cells
and is the members of the
committee my name is merry par
Sanchez I'm the president of any
in New Mexico I'm also the co
chair of the statewide coalition
for community schools I'm a
veteran middle school teacher
who left eighth grade classroom
to do home visiting and.
Investigate why kids aren't
don't go to school and from
there was elected president I'm
here this morning with to do she
and she is president of NEA Los
crucis our largest local she's
also herself an English language
learner when she began school
she began she was save
monolingual Spanish speaker but
today of course is beautifully
us speaks very well in both
languages English and Spanish
we're here to present our areas
of focus of that were derived
from extensive surveying of our
members statewide okay so the
four things we're gonna be
talking to you about today are
fully funding educator health
care
and I'll be talking about that
along with the reducing class
size so just as we heard
the superintendents and my
former superintendent Stan
rounds state
More is not better better is
better and we're going to
address that looking through the
lens of cost size Denise is
going to be finishing up with
brief conversation about
community schools and planning
time so rapidly increasing
medical insurance increases are
are significantly impacted
educators over the last five
years the issue has been second
only to salary increases this
year the number one issue for
educators is health care.
Many educators cannot afford
their health health care and
So.
In our surveys we have found
that a fully funding
It and applying that ten
thousand towards the employee
paid benefits in the governor's
budget would be our
recommendation to
of for health care this the
session and following are we in
with constitutional amendment
one and the approve the voters
approved a historic change to
the constitution with early
childhood establishing the first
permanent fund for early
childhood education and a yearly
investment of a hundred fifty
million dollars we believe that
this is really going to
transform the foundation of the
support that we can give to our
students that will set them
In the in a transformational
path of.
And and we know that other
states many other states are
looking at New Mexico in
following it this early
childhood education investment
so
We.
I want to also talk to you about
class size a an adequate
staffing so we know that
educators are better able to
meet the needs of their students
when they can provide more
individualized attention this
isn't rocket science with
smaller class sizes an adequate
staffing when classes are small
enough to allow individual
student teacher interactions a
minor miracle occurs teachers
can teach and students can learn
so that is the the quality piece
so please we're a class size
bill we're hoping will come
before you that will prohibit
class size waivers and remove
the word average from the
statute we'd like of reporting
portal an enforcement mechanism
by which breaches of statutory
class size limits can be
reported and addressed
So
With that I will turn it over to
Denise.
Morning chairman so
the committee
I'm really excited to the ATM I
first actually second hearing
over thank you for having me so
community schools are important
to you because they will
ultimately improve educational
outcomes for New Mexico's
children.
And when combined with the
passage of constitutional
amendment one this improvement
will be impactful and long
lasting out you have changed and
improved the lives and education
of children who have not had
this opportunity without your
actions.
We commend you for your actions
and the voters who
overwhelmingly supported with
seventy percent favorability we
believe that early it with early
childhood education plus
community schools but we will
have high performing happy and
prepared for life students.
So any New Mexico believes that
early childhood combined with
full service community schools
and smaller class sizes are the
path to success for New Mexico
students so first school
transfer me transformation
requires schools and communities
to partner together we have the
assets right here in New Mexico
and we need to get to work
together.
Second teaching and learning
needs to be central to the
community schools strategy to
providing a food pantry and
after school programs is not
enough.
We need evidence that strategy
that the strategies work and as
we start to scale them out the
state we need to keep track of.
The strategies.
So LPI the learning policy
institute combined it data from
a hundred and forty three
reviews.
Studies so community schools are
impactful and the increase
student academics if they are
well designed and fully
implemented so what does this
mean.
From LPI with the support of the
statewide coalition there's six
essential elements of community
schools and those are integrated
systems of support expanded and
rich learning opportunities
empowering students and family
engagement collaborative
leadership shared power and
voice rigorous community
connected classroom instruction
culture belonging safety and
care.
All six must be happening at the
same time rigorous community
connected classroom instruction
must be part of the central
functions and while many of
these elements seem simplistic
and similar to what we're
already doing we must hope so
hold our schools accountable I'm
in implementing the and the
strategic and intense focus and
plan that demonstrates the
presence of all the elements.
If you support team was to go
into a school artifacts of the
six elements need to be easily
demonstrated.
it so this needs to be tracked
are the six elements happening
and if not why not.
So our policy ask.
eleven point five million below
the line twenty million it to
the reform Fund which will help
with technical assistance and
establish a one your multiplier
through SCG this comes from many
a New Mexico and New Mexico
coalition for community schools.
So our next priority is planning
time planning time is essential
to meeting the needs of our
diverse student and family
populations without paying for
more planning time during the
day.
Deep parent and community
involvement is greatly hindered.
This is a systems barrier that
you have the power to change
planning time is identified by
educators across the state as
the most important educator
condition student learning
environment issue.
The districts that offer
significant planning time should
be rewarded with increased
funding through the SCG many
districts across the state cut
planning time in half in two
thousand eight during the
recession and that time has not
been restored.
Educators simply cannot do
better if we do not have the
time to plan and prepare for
rigorous lessons for our
students.
In October in October statewide
survey of our educators twenty
five percent of respondents said
that they did not have any
planning time and this is it's
untenable it's an untenable
situation and it must change it
will further drive our educators
out of the profession even with
the genesis increases in salary
so we ask for your support
because working together I know
that we can move forward for
students in New Mexico.
Thank you any quick questions
for the NEA Representative
Senator Kernan Mr just quick
clarification on your statement
regarding the early childhood
permit etcetera you suggesting
that the money that's generated
from the additional percent
taken from the land grant
permanent fund is to be used for
a new permanent fund for early
childhood.
I didn't understand what you
were talking about with an early
childhood permanent fund I was
talking about the constitutional
amendment that passed by that
that in it self that fund is
going to help early childhood
with early child care and early
childhood education seven
hundred fifty million that's
going to be generated out of the
constitutional amendment taking
out a higher percentage okay and
so Mr chair so that money will
go to the general fund correct.
Excuse me yes as chairman sells
to Senator Kernan.
Is that the way it's going to
work Senator souls go from the.
The withdrawal from the permit
funds that go directly to the
general fund center developing I
don't I think that's there's
some legislation that's going to
be working out some of the
details I think it does go to
the general fund but when people
voted and passed it they are
expecting it to go towards early
childhood education and so I
know with.
Yes some courage also.
I think that's how the final
piece was was set up.
So thank you at Mr chair I'm
sorry I thought I heard you
mention a new permanent fund for
early childhood we are you have
the trust fund with about four
billion dollars and it so I'm
not sure how you're going to
spend all that money plus the
additional chairman souls
Senator Kernan no I'm I busted
misspoke in it we are not we're
not out advocating for a new
permanent a new permanent
funding to the one that was
already created with the passage
of constitutional amendment one
that that money goes Mr chair to
general fund it's not going to
go into a permanent fund it's
going to go into early childhood
education and care for the
general fund yes ma'am thank you
yes this clarification thank you
thank you senator the other
quick questions if not thank you
ladies will transition John
durch with the A. F. T..
Good morning.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's John urchin
with A. F. T. New Mexico and
currently being passed out to
you is a much larger policy
guide to we're not going to be
talking about that document
today we're really I've got my
timer on to keep myself short
and on time and we're actually
gonna talk about a subset of the
legislation that we spoke to
about the LESC meeting in
In December we really try to
focus today's presentation on
some bills we are already
introduced that have numbers
Sanchez and a lot of which you
will be familiar with for those
who are not as familiar with F.
T. New Mexico Representative
early educators K. twelve
educational employees higher ed
and as of last Thursday we had
our first health care unit
certified in Sandoval county so
really proud of that we spend
all the way from Carlsbad in the
south in Gallup McKinley county
schools in the west all the way
to deal state trauma valley
schools in the north and we'll
jump right into it our first
bill that we'd like to mention
this morning is an L. E. S. C.
endorsed bill house bill one
twenty seven which would
institute a minimum salary for
educational assistance
instructional assistants and
those members of our educational
community who are licensed under
the area of statute currently
the the state law says that
their minimum salary ought to be
twelve thousand dollars a year
many districts if not all
districts are above that right
however in the same breath most
of the representative of the
folks that we represent in that
job role are making anywhere
from like seventeen to twenty
thousand dollars and that's even
with some of the extended school
year we believe just as we work
last year to really focus on
filling some of those teacher
vacancy positions educational
systems are really an incredible
part of our school system and
those vacancies exist high rates
just as they do for teachers
this bill if I heard correctly
during the LFC hearings was
scored at about fourteen million
dollars and we're actively
working to try to get that money
into the budgets currently not
there and so you'll hear a lot
about us on that bill working
for the session good morning
Mandy Vigil and president of AFT
New Mexico our second bill is
house bill one thirty that is.
The eleven forty with sixty
hours of at adult time in that
it I was a third grade teacher
for nine years and I
wholeheartedly believe that
special extra set of adult time
talking about mentorship
coaching planning observing
other classrooms is key that
brings us to one house bill one
twenty six the high school
graduation redesign also in L.
yes the endorsed piece of
legislation modernizing our high
school graduation requirements
to better reflect both local
needs and flexibility also
moving towards capstone projects
as an end goal.
another bill that we're going to
be advocating for the session is
one that you're very familiar
with its modernizing our
national board certification
standards this is the sixth time
that I've personally worked on
this bill in the legislative
session and many of you have
voted on this all six times in
voted affirmatively it passes
generally without any opposition
however it had been vetoed in
twenty seventeen and so we're
really trying to keep our
statutes modern to match the
areas where someone can become
nationally board certified and
to Senator my assistance point
earlier we believe that this
bill also can help us develop
quality principal and
Administration because as a
teacher if you know what good
teaching is and you've passed
muster and you can take that
certification with you to a
principal ship you're going to
be able to recognize good
teaching in the classroom as
you're coaching and developing
your staff we are working to I
have this bill advance so that
as an opportunity to be signed
under this administration the
funny part about this bill
that's funny and sad at the same
time is to as of right now this
bill would only affect about
nine people in New Mexico to
counselors and seven
administrators to hold this
certification currently are
actively in an administrative
role very narrowly focused bill
but it has an opportunity to
help a springboard to future
things and better recruitment
for our school leadership.
On the next bill that we are
going to be working hard on this
session along with many of you
house bill one oh two a couple
of the prior speakers had
mentioned this is the governor's
effort to really increase the
coverage for health care for our
school workers this bill does
two really important things once
it helps get health care
coverage for educational workers
up to a higher level than even
some other health care coverage
plans for other state workers
however we really believe that
it's well worth the investment
given our collective efforts to
fill those vacancies make this
job attractive and also at the
same time health to one or two
if passed as written would
achieve another longstanding
goal they have to New Mexico to
remove the eighty percent cap
the district can fund towards
health care coverage we're not
advocating that that exist in in
every scenario by in in this
bill it allows the district the
flexibility to prioritize health
care should they want to use
that as a way to attract and
retain people into that district
we just want to remove that
barrier so that those local
decisions can be made at the
local level another item that
stand spoke about in his
capacity of the leader for the
education leaders is the health
care retiree health care fund
we've long supported efforts to
shore up the investments and
increase some of the
contributions to this fund we
are supporting the upcoming
legislation that would increase
contributions by one half of one
percent with a point one seven
share for the active employee
and a point three three share
for the state of New Mexico or
the employer this is really
important to our many retirees
who existence to work in this
educational arena will be really
working just for the
unfortunately this bill has
passed with many of your support
and.
Prior legislative session and
had been vetoed under this
administration so hoping to
reverse that this legislative
session.
A new bill for our you this year
really focuses towards higher
education the public service
loan forgiveness program has
wide latitude for states to set
the terms and conditions on how
they calculate the time that
higher education I jumped
instructors and other contingent
faculty have their service loan
forgiveness calculated many
states a handful of them both
on the west coast and the east
coast of introduced a multiplier
saluted knowledges that forty
three twelve hour class that
someone teachers in the fall
semester it that multiplier is
then applied to the three hour
credit food knowledge is that
their student advisement there's
teaching time there's grading
time there's office hours so it
better represents the totality
of efforts spent on those
students and it allows that
public service loan to be
forgiven at a faster rate than
would otherwise be.
Also thirty nine with the line
dual license staff to the three
tier system so last year we saw
amazing races for Iraq are
classroom teachers but by the
nature of the three tier system
some educational professionals
were left behind most notably
our social workers so what we're
looking at is adding our social
workers and other dual license
professionals into that system
and then our last piece is about
the SCG funding money and that
consistent permanent way through
the SCG that allows for local
priorities local flexibility.
We would stand for questions
how.
I just about eight minutes or
whatever would have that
questions for if to partners.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair you mentioned
at the and about the bill
addressing the social workers
and folks look which what bill
is after the house bill thirty
nine that's being carried by
Representative Liz Thomson.
Thank you Mr other questions.
Not thank you very much and we
may also add we also relocated
to Santa Fe are like the rest of
you so anytime you have any
questions about anything we're
advocating for we will obviously
make ourselves available to you
and the committee thank you Mr.
This is more association in so
what I'm cert together with our
so ciation back in the late
night.
These servers that organization
for from our years.
this sage advice about.
And seven like a situation
school.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the Senate Education Committee
first of all let me thank you
for the service that you provide
in the many hours you'll be
putting in this legislative
session as well on key education
issues my name is Joe Gideon is
the chairman mentioned of I've
been with the the school board
association I was executive
director for little over sixteen
years prior to that I served as
a Honda school board for twelve
years and then my first career
was with state government where
I serve half my career of twenty
eight years at the state
planning office and was the
actually the last day planning
director in the state before was
transferred and then I went over
to DFA local government division
rose director and deputy
director there for many years so
for a long range of experience
hopefully to to come to your aid
when you're seeking information
so your packets today include
our of complete legislative
program.
Of our.
Insert that includes our top ten
priorities and an invitation to
a appreciation luncheon for the
house and Senate Education
Committee members next Friday
and I'll go I'll go over that
with you at the at the tail end
also nice pen that you can wear
with pride of supporting the
local school boards.
So let me get into the provided
program itself as you know the
New Mexico school boards
association is charged with
advocacy for public schools also
leadership training and of
course a whole host of other
activities that are members of
receive services from us since
nineteen fifty eight the
operational for sixty five years
so again of the long standing
commitment every year are of we
issue a call for reports of
resolutions from our members
generally in July of every year
as a result we received those
are of priorities that school
boards of feel need to
legislative attention so we this
year we had thirty three
resolutions we call on our
legislative resolutions
Committee that is listed on the
backside of the of the program
you can see that that Committee
is Representative statewide
there's three it's twenty four
members three members from each
of our regions and they go
through these resolutions come
up with recommendations and
present them to our full
membership of four hundred fifty
school board members eighty nine
districts at our annual
convention in December every
year I should mention that this
year another years the
superintendents association and
the public education department
said in our deliberations and
provided information whenever
possible so we were it was a
very productive process
you can also see on the front
page our officers this year our
of our our
of different maker from
Lovington is our president
Christine luti from out west Las
Vegas president elect polynomial
Terry o'brien and Marvin economy
O. R. of course find statewide
representation you open up your
program you can see that it
contains a whole host of up.
Positions on a whole bunch of
important items probably over
eighty positions on resolutions
that have been passed.
Obviously they're listed in
alphabetical order but you can
see they range from broadband to
do credit health insurance costs
paperwork reduction of school
students staff and safety and
security teacher and principal
salaries of transportation on
the back page we have a whole
host of positions on capital
outlay those that are coming
forward again the the local
matching the reduction of local
matching requirements and and so
on and then accountability in
governance is very important you
can see that our top priority
there is student achievement and
the quality of learning also
accountability so without with
that is the overview and like to
go through the insert that
provides the top priorities for
our legislative program this
year
and of course of local decision
making is one of our key pillars
we try and
of find information to you that
so you can support local
decision making and propose
legislation that restricts or
does not include that you know
there's an ever changing needs
on and our communities and we
feel that the the this the the
more decisions can be made at
the local level the better we
also ask for flexibility
recognizing that one size does
not fit all on for all of our
programs and allowing local
board members that are elected
to make these decisions to talk
to to make these decisions about
school the school week reentry
instruction based and other
relevant to of items.
number three education
recruitment retention
preparation compensation and as
many of you were heard at the
just previously today at the LDC
meeting in
December our education partners
are really focusing on this
again this year making sure that
taking off on the of minimum
salary increases that you'll
find it last year and looking at
health care costs although we do
mention here that we support the
eighty twenty deal we feel that
the hundred percent.
payable.
Employee health care costs is
very very much more in line with
the needs of our of our staffs
we ask for a number for of money
for the court education mission
making sure the world able to
open doors and meet the new
mandates of all of our districts
which was mentioned earlier
large medium and small these are
all
that have unique needs on the
this back page number five
school district operating
revenues we request that two of
the protect those as the state
also has reserves we feel it's
very important that our local
districts have reserves to be
able to take care of operational
costs as well as special
projects that they have found
the need to save money for
course the number six student
and staff safety.
Also.
Okay we're both trying to cover
house education and
identification so again thank
you for for letting me know that
they were out she's here so
again
the safety is very important to
our to our districts on the
extended learning program of I
guess we this is changed a
little from the time that we
adopted our resolutions but the
key considerations that we're
looking at and and reviewing the
proposals that have
been presented our flexibility
funding and options for
districts to move to the to
additional of class time.
Also number eight cultural
cultural and linguistic
responsive curriculum we
continue to prioritize that
making sure that our
curriculum and materials reflect
New Mexico an important cultural
and historic facts here
number nine capital outlay we
support reducing the local
matching requirements for
standards based and systems
projects and removing matching
requirements from school safety
pre K. and career and technical
education facilities as well as
removing the offset penalties
issued by service tier of the
public school capital outlay
council and we're very
supportive of the state of
amendments I want to make sure
that that money that is
available for school
construction can get to realized
just because quickly as possible
to meet the needs that are so
evidently needed.
finally number ten unfunded
mandates course from time to
time we get unfunded mandates
and it can.
Well we continue to receive
those for many important issues
is you know and then finally we
we try and and make sure that
you take into consideration some
of those probation but we will
be letting you know when there
are mandates that come before
you.
So again.
The but you're taking that let
me introduce living may Ortiz
who is kind of the.
They're a team in a partnership
so that they can cover both
house and Senate at at the same
time that we see regularly in
our meetings are welcome the
NMAA those teasing Joe about the
unfunded mandates because back
when I was on the school board
in the late nineties that was
always one of our policies is to
try and avoid any of the
unfunded mandates where we put
in legislation you have to do
something but we didn't give any
money to the districts to do
that.
So that that pretty much is the
the the tail end of our top
priorities just as important but
again you'll be hearing from us
during the session as you get
bills on these particular items
that are included in our full
program and of course anything
that we can do to assist you in
making your decision thank you
very would be pleased to do that
I'd like to go now to the
invitation as you know Mr
chairman when he served as
president of the association and
we've continued that practice
inviting the house and Senate
Education Committee members to a
of appreciation breakfast at our
annual board institute we
schedule the board institute
next week February second
through fourth and we are asking
that to maybe allow your your
Committee to become in a little
late that morning so that they
can accompany us at the at the
of the Santa Fe convention
center will be having it this
year US and so please let us
know if you can make it will
have one of we already have over
three hundred of school board
members and superintendents
registered for the conference so
would like to have you and
you'll be allowed an opportunity
to speak and then of course you
and the chair of house education
will be on our on our full
agenda for update on the
legislative session so again
we're available for it to answer
any questions and again thank
you all for your service thank
you any questions.
Board association.
If not thank you very much Joe
always appreciated the always
being in here and making sure
that our other Education elected
officials voices being heard on
a regular basis on the day when
the practice we usually tend to
start later to to make sure that
members have an opportunity to
attend that and then the house
chairman I tended to show up a
little bit later so we will have
a delayed start.
Might even be a snow day who
knows will have a snow delay
that day but will have a delayed
start that day so thank you
always have to all of your
members a couple of final things
I saw when the executive
director of the LFC came in and
when if you would if you
introduce your members please
where you're at staff.
There's
a.
Other staff yes.
So if you introduce your staff
were scattered about the room
certainly thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Gwen Perea Warniment I'm your
director for the legislative
education study committee very
very privilege to serve you all
anything that you need I'm going
to introduce W. W. director
Johnson of.
Of fiscal analyst.
You know just to be on and a
policy analyst Bridget Condon
thirty three the only here for
okay.
Great a senior policy analyst
just halfway.
The senior policy analyst more
and use senior policy analyst
Emily Hoxie.
we're here to serve you.
Thank you very much a people are
working on bills need some
expert advice they also are
available to to do research help
the whole idea is to get good
education policy past and poor
education policy not see a long
future.
I was trying to say that
diplomatic.
Regular action at she was over
the house side I have a new
associate with maybe running one
form right Marla shows many of
you know who are we working with
the station.
Thank you welcome bye that
chairman members of the
committee.
Education.
Thank.
And also many of you may
recognize in the back of the
room Tim hand who'd been part of
being a committee in education
policy and part of the the
public get department for for
several years as well so he's
joined us this morning.
The I think that kind of covers
the main pieces a couple of
logistics is this committee we
try to start on time members
please try to be here on time I
will work closely with the.
The head thank you ranking
member I always try to yeah
another one of the title
differences.
Two out.
It.
Would you like to be called a
yes okay out this committee also
has a commitment that we will
make it to the floor on time and
not run long and so depending on
when the floor session we will
be ending fifteen minutes prior
to that the less there is a
compelling reason that his guys
approval from essentially all of
the members to continue the
people who have built in front
of us various groups.
If the bill is getting close I
started say we got five minutes
until we close down and we
you'll be first in line if we
don't get to a voting completed
at that time that has worked
very well for this committee
tends to help make is very
functional and and move things
forward but we tend to follow
very hard time commitments to
make sure our members get to the
floor on time also up for people
giving public testimony whether
it's our regular advocates you
know of this or others I do time
them and limit public testimony
to two minutes and so please be
respectful of others who have
comments to make or that you're
not repeating exactly the same
thing that that others have to
say to help us be more efficient
with our time as well any other
comments about process Senator
Kernan thank you Mr chair what
about appropriation bills that
come through this committee are
we going to take a look at those
kind of at the end.
I guess I would like to ask
committee how would you all like
to handle this we have done once
before where we help them and
then sent them through as a
package with more our
recommendations we have also
done it where we passed him as
other bills but I.
Both have benefits and both have
problems and so I don't know
that there's a one of a good way
of doing that.
Any comments from committee.
On some of those bills would.
More likely baseline here first
and Senate finance second
finance almost always secondly
often these of those one page
bills five hundred thousand is
appropriate to UNM's department
of.
Science and technology.
What happens is they usually get
over there and if they have been
put into the budget some of the
bill of.
Carries appropriation it makes
the committee the finance
committee aware of.
Sills typically never pass yeah
less they're already baked into
the budget most of them don't
have much chance that are
introduced here that are already
part of the budget but there's
lots of non recurring money this
year so things could be
different so Senator Mr Chairman
at the thought on that you know
often times I think it's
important for the committee to
send to the finance committee
bills that we really support I
mean it's really hard to sit
here vote no on what we think is
a really good idea but we know
most likely.
Maybe not the best idea and so I
don't know how we can do that I
I do want to send everything to
finance because it's just you
know why even present the bill
here just ended on but I think
we need to be careful as a
committee that we really do
support and believe in that
particular appropriation in that
bill so I don't know how we can
do it but I agree with senator
Neville most the time date if
it's not in the budget by now
most likely it's going to be
difficult even with that
additional funding to get
through that if there's
something that comes through
that's not the budget that we
really believe in we need to
send that on with a strong
recommendation so we need to
have a meaningful conversation
and when we send it forward it
needs to have meaning that we
really do support.
It just kind of thinking about
that idea we could send general
ones through with the no rack
and ones that this committee
this is important to move
education forward and and send
those with a positive
recommendation I don't know that
that's going to change how would
you want to get over to finance
but but that would at least
differentiate between ones that
we're not opposed to but.
From the ones that have strong
support.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Kernan for that
observation and how do we do how
do we do this at I'm carrying a
bill like that and I'm trying to
remember I think it was in tax
and business last year we kind
of took the appropriations we
took the bills and kind of put
in together so that we could
look at them in comparison to
one another rather than is that
just came along and of course
things will come late but it and
and course with finance you
don't want to wait forever
but if there was some way if we
got an idea of what's coming in
appropriations so that we could
sit down in some way to look at
what's there and then
maybe we have a discussion on
what should should be advance
but I think a priority to the
Senate that we already screen
and got down would.
Hopefully hopefully increase the
chances of some of those bills
getting passed out of there I
had an idea which it which is
got no where those been around
awhile would understand why but
that each committee chair be
given an allocation of like ten
million dollars so that we could
prioritize the education bills
that we think that money ought
to be spent on that lands with a
thud in the finance committee
but.
I still think it's a good idea
for exactly what you're talking
about that when we have things
that we think are really
important that we're able to to
move those forward but.
The gentleman I I tend to agree
I think some of these here is a
great hearings maybe have
fifteen twenty minute hearings
on these types of bills and I
think a good distinction would
be no record rack on and you
could you could talk with the
finance chair with some of the
some of the key bills but I
don't think we should hold them
up thanks up I think of because
we're gonna be seeing more of
the you know the culture may
change in which folks start
dropping more appropriations
bills and we gotta figure out
how to how to move those alone
thanks.
But the problem is is that when
the house finishes up with the
but.
New York state.
Gentleman Jim.
It started out.
House tweeted.
Tries to make the governor happy
and then whatever's left over.
Description that's a problem
yeah.
Senator.
Mr chairman I just want to go on
record and say I love your idea.
So that so that we could make
some distributions into it with
thoughtfulness and examination
of this the description that
senator Neville describe that I
learned about that I think
sometime this summer I was like
why really okay I understand
that appropriations historically
in this country start in the
house but somehow I seem to
remember in the in the national
house and Senate.
Different expenditures do come
through and it's I think it's
giving respect to those of us in
the Senate to can vet bills and
can set priorities so I'm not
sure how to go about it you're
right it could be a thought that
you know I I heard an earthquake
last week so maybe maybe go into
that's what I was water our
leadership about doing that yes
thank so it anyway Mr children
and we're very fortunate that
both Senator Kernan and senator
Neville served on the finance
committee during the interim and
have been long term members of
that and so they've got lots of
inside knowledge is to if we
have really good ideas and
connections that we might be
able to that some of those a
little bit so I appreciate that
very much
any other comments questions
about process procedures or
things in here as always no
personal attacks on the we
shouldn't even have to say any
of that but I do have a a big
double in ninety two and.
if not thank you all for being
here all of our wonderful it
partners thank you for being
here we will initially be
starting the meetings at nine
o'clock provided were able to
keep up with the workload will
continue that if we get behind
will move down to eight thirty
to get a little bit more time to
get things going all can I get
yes yes absolutely you can do
whatever you want.
Just one of one item that I
would like to tell everybody in
this committee including our our
senators
We had a meltdown in our
computer system during the inner
and therefore we lost all of our
contacts and so it'd be you want
to be on my contact list would
you please stop and see me R. if
I'm not there drop on business
cards are whatever you can of
the other thing is they changed
our email addresses so I'm no
longer maryanne Roberts skins
route I am now.
SEC call one at it was a stock
that so if any of you ever see
something coming along from an
SEC com one Senator is the
Senate education Hey so please
read those emails.
Thank you we think we're going
to be having zoom connection for
testimony possibly for expert
witnesses for public testimony
that is not all up and running
that really requires that we
have a TV that we can all see
you see that is not in here at
this point so that's still kind
of up in the air but hoping that
we'll be able to do manage that
also and we'll discuss that if
we need to.
If not thank you all again for
