I'm bringing you house bill
three eighty one it simply
creates a Hispanic it it simply
we create an education fund out
of the a Hispanic.
I'm going out of the reform Fund
to try to get funding for
advisory members we didn't have
them before and we need to now
pay them per diem and mileage
and
that's that's pretty much all it
is the the act actually exists
that was created by Madam
chairman Rick Madden.
And now we're actually signing
up for change.
And I stand for questions.
Thank you.
The the quick easy I think those
in support following our process
here anyone in opposition we
would like to come in.
And speak.
Keep it short.
If you don't know prologues
mobile.
That's right.
You can pull a share for if you
want.
Mr.
Representative Medizin in the
audience this is something that
the we had visions of that would
give us good advice from folks
so would be able to come in and
help us with our Hispanic
Education process we've not
really done a good job of
finding it so this is a great
move to assure that working
continues so on behalf the
superintendents of state in
Mexico we want to support this
thank you.
Thank you come on up thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee well I stand up and
transported this particular
piece of legislation as stated
before I was very honored to be
able to do this medic Education
Act at that time there was time
put some money in that put some
money and the the the truth of
the matter was you know we
needed to status you know what
were the ground zero with
regards to spending Education
Act and we're there now and so
we did put in a fund because we
didn't know how to spend it but
I think we know how to spend the
money now we know where we need
to spend it and that's an
enjoyable part of this
particular piece of legislation
I think it's the growth I think
it's going to be really well
looked upon by the
judge from the Yazzie Martinez
of lawsuit case and then in the
final it's that the we also have
a statewide the.
Support program that drives the
this panic Education Act and all
those individuals that are on
Hispanic Education Advisory
Council they're not getting any
per diem and it's a long way
somewhere as we all know that so
that's what this particular
piece of legislation doesn't I
think that is really important
making sure we get the right
people making sure we have a
quorum that they stay with us so
with that center on to tell you
please vote for that members of
the committee please go for but
mostly I want to thank you for
all the hard work you've done
it's been a pleasure joining you
I am This in one those they say
Spanish here in the Senate so
thank you so very much thank you
I'm gonna need to remember that
when talking about in New Mexico
it's a long way the long way
somewhere that's a good
description wherever you are in
New Mexico it's a long way
somewhere else.
Thank you Mr thank you any
others want to speak to anyone
on.
Anything else board and Mr
chairman it's it's due time to
get this passed and funded and I
thank you for your support thank
you any questions in the
committee just appropriate.
It's coming out of Mr chairman
it's coming out of the.
Okay and then my understanding
this is just a fun per diem and
other things for the committee
to be that had not been funded
in the past that people did it
out of the goodness of their
heart in the past yes Sir okay.
The questions.
The second.
A second and seconded if you'll
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Yes Senator Kernan center Myles
Senator Neville Senator Pentaho.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator told yes.
You have a do pass thank you and
then as I told you earlier I
suspect this will get read out
on the floor today they're gonna
roll the clock and then it'll be
on the calendar the Senate is
from my view anyhow is not
terribly backed up that we're
going to get to most or all of
the bills that are there there
are big things that are going to
hold a lot of things up but as
you know anything can happen in
the last twenty four hours Mr
chairman I just want to tell you
I took a tumble day before
yesterday and I hurt myself so
didn't come in yesterday but I
was thinking I could use the
pity vote if all else fails.
There's no.
What they're saying there's no
pity in this committee long
enough to know that doesn't
work.
Thank you all so much I don't
see Senator Lopez and fabric
problems here sure there are
other ways.
I was happy to come down is the
real started I know we've got to
Jackson we've got other people
who'd like to access it get them
right so the focus of the
meeting that works for everybody
but whether it's something we
can't control much of your.
Yes.
The school.
All right Mr chairman of the
floor.
Thank you and this is a memorial
requesting the developmental
disabilities council to convene
a working group to address
restraint and seclusion
techniques in New Mexico schools
this committee is heard some of
this each of the last couple of
years
There is certainly concerned
within the public schools about
hello those are being used what
what is allowable pancetera this
works to put together a to have
the developmental disabilities
council and.
Have a better you just.
Okay but but we have several of
the the advocate groups are here
with us today but that the
working group be composed of
representatives I'm on the third
page representatives of the
public get department the early
childhood education care
department school boards
superintendents from rural and
urban schools and others that
serve native American population
that I think it has L. E. S. C.
and others we do evaluate see
here's so it's getting those all
those groups together to look at
what's happening in our schools
with of seclusion and restraint
in areas of that sort to come
with some sort of a
recommendation then to the
legislature and with that and
Senator Pinto were you part of
this memorial would you like to
come take over for me or.
Yes.
That is I think traffic.
That works.
The that we're.
Young gentleman gentleman just
presented but will give you an
opportunity want to add to
anything else.
So I understand it it's also
some of the some good news as
far as the federal government
really looking into perhaps some
of the about the bed of the
disabilities and really putting
some places on notice of states
on notice in that sense so
Senator Lopez
is wonderful sorry no problem
thank you Mr chair I just did a
brief introduction so we were.
For public comment thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator Lopez
If you wanted to add anything
else the chairman pretty much
laid out what was in the
memorial and we're ready for
public comment but I don't know
if I Mr chairman thank with that
in the audience is anyone in
support of this memorial the all
right if we can have folks come
on up and.
Comment on this about your
support and grabbed the
microphone and.
All the button of course I think
we've learned that by now.
A good morning Mr chairman Stan
rounds of the school
superintendents the coalition
educationally there's.
This is be looked at we have the
need for clarity of
understanding all parts what I
really appreciate about the
center bring this forward is
listed in the US are perfect all
the pertinent players the need
to get together and work
ourselves through policy but I
especially appreciate Mr
chairman is inclusion of the
alley a state that's my opinion
that the LFC is the policy body
of the legislature.
When you look at things that
have to the education public
schools so the right way to do
it we certainly endorsed this we
look forward to participating we
thank you Mr Chairman for your
support.
These.
Sure.
Good morning Mr chair Jim
Jackson for disability rights
New Mexico
we particularly want to
appreciate the Sanchez
steadfastness in pursuing this
issue the the use of seclusion
and restraint is just such a
critical issue for many of our
students with disabilities it's
a highly traumatic situation.
It causes a lot of people to
have the serious issues with
their whole educational program
so trying to figure out exactly
what's allowable what's not
allowable what's good practice
what's not good practice it is
important to get all of the key
players together and figure this
out because is an issue that's
not going to go away this is an
issue that you all really have
to deal with as a legislature
but it is important to get input
from all of the key stakeholders
and we appreciate the Sanchez
memorial that will bring all
those folks together and
hopefully come back with some
recommendations to you thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Ellen pines
representing the disability
coalition as Mr Jackson said
this is a really important issue
in the disability world these
are traumatic offense and all
too often involve children with
disabilities who can be
permanently scarred by the we
think that this memorial is a
great idea because it will bring
together all of the interested
parties to work out some solid
recommendations in this area
thank you very much.
All right did we have any
opposition to this memorial.
Current CNN online any support
opposition.
We have been a.
Until the.
All right we can now have Mister
Davis we will give you two
minutes.
Thank you chairman urged
committee thank you for during
this legislation restraint and
seclusion are serious issues in
the state the dramatic for all
the parties involved with with
the other students watching
teachers
and we think this will go
towards addressing some of those
issues we would like to point
out on page three line for like
to see techniques remove and
amended to say reduction or
elimination from the
developmental disability
accounts were concerned that the
term techniques is too limiting
for the purpose of this working
group
it only refers to restraints
inclusion possible the
escalation
This is to look more at
preventive positive behavioral
support training notice the
panelists about the incidents
and reviews of restraints
inclusion incidents to prevent
further future incidents us we'd
like to.
Expand the focus of this group
to ensure that we're limiting
the issue and the but before we
get to restrict.
Thank you.
The next person support.
no opposition alright with that
we will go to the committee.
Any comments questions from the
committee members.
Mr.
Which was a bill yes.
Senator.
Thank that Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and I I
really support the memorial I
think it's time to take a look
you know as a as a former
teacher sometimes in the
classroom when you have rare
situations where you are worried
about that students and with
that student potentially could
do to another student and and
it's it's something that we have
a responsibility to make sure
that we have looked at it
carefully that teachers are
really clear on what is and
isn't acceptable and I think the
memorial is is the perfect way
to begin to look at it in in
really provide some guidelines
because
our kiddos or they need to be
said when they go to school both
the child that perhaps has a
disability and then all of those
students surrounding that child
in the and again I'm gonna I'm
gonna take out what we need to
do about aces I mean our
teachers have got to understand
why some of these kids our
students are the students may be
acting out and I think that that
should be part of what we look
at within this study if it's
possible to include that thank
you.
All right any other questions or
comments from the committee.
Senator Maestas first thank you
Mr Senator Lopez thanks for
bringing this for that I also
like the the clarity on page
three in the middle.
The developmental disabilities
council be requested to convene
the working group to include
this that the other there was a
moral couple these with it was
unclear as to who actually like
convened it or staffed it so I
look forward to to the work that
that this group does and the
recommendations because their
connection there are there ought
to be a bill there are to be a
bill to to define the policy for
best practice with regards to
these interactions thank you Mr.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for bringing this
forward.
Incredibly important and I just
want to echo
my colleague Senator Kernan in
her observation about aces I I
just want to remind the
committee that literature is
demonstrating and that Levin
year span between onset of
symptoms and diagnoses of mental
illnesses or other stresses and
it really if if we can learn to
pick up the signs early on in
this process it'll be huge and I
know that echo is coming forward
with a bill next year to through
their methodology help train
teachers and school staff in
recognition of symptoms and pre
K. type of behavior so that and
and and the literature also
demonstrates that earlier you
make a diagnosis and intervene
the much better the outcome so
really important thank you very
much thank you Mr chair.
Senator Pinto thank you Mr
chairman Senator Lopez so Joel's
comment.
The
thing that the.
On page three line to.
The use of restraint and
seclusion.
Take out techniques and add
reduction or elimination I think
that's what he's saying.
Senator I I believe that's what
is that but you so when the
amendment.
I'm Mr chair Senator if you wish
to go ahead and make the change
I'm I'm I'm happy with that
would be acceptable okay so
motion to amend page do you
think to check out to make an ad
reduction or elimination.
The.
By listening for.
All right on page three line to.
Yes.
Miss out right.
All right we have a.
Option on that amendment.
Do is.
Do I need a second are.
Is there a second and second on
a all right committee members
any opposition to that
amendment.
Saying none
the memorial is now amended.
Do we have any other questions
or comments on the amended
memorial.
There we have a motion from the
committee what's what is the
will of the committee.
I'll move it to pass.
We have a second
all right.
Sehmat a motion and a second at
the committee secretary to take
the roll Senator Brandt Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Center my SS yes Senator the
bell is Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Senator soul
yes thank.
Senator have a due pass as
amended.
I didn't even get to use the
gavel but it's okay.
And I will and I will pass it
back over to the chairman thank
you Mr chairman thank you
committee members thank you
we closing up things for this
committee I want to thank all of
our regular partner standards
always here Greg is always here
certainly L. E. S. C. and
staffed when John all of your
staff always so very helpful our
sergeant of arms to always make
sure we don't get a fist fight
started in here over education
policy you guys are always here
are wonderful attendance to
foresees every time my copy is
out that she's already here
getting it ready of my analyst
the minority analysts are are
zoom operators said pending over
on this side.
Certainly Maryam.
Who keeps us so.
I want to point out merry and
it's kind of the lead committee
secretary in the Senate and
early on was training up a bunch
of the other secretaries while
doing all of this job as well
and certainly yeah my amazing
committee we almost always got
started on time or within five
or ten minutes which probably is
better than any of the other
committees in the Senate.
Indian here I break on this
committee all the time because
as it should be education policy
is rarely partisan we're all
looking at what's best for for
kids and and trying to make good
policy to do that and so thank
you all for for making me look
good as a chair by being here
and and having good engaged
discussions so thank you.
Mr chair I and at.
You make us look good but
we.
That you lead us to make you
thank you and as I said to you
before that that that is my
experience which is not brought
but I now just the the
functioning of this committee is
one of the smaller this well
round it that that I experience
and I just want to commend you
for that thank you.
Anything else.
If not Senator education is
