Secretary and and others about
that we'll continue to the carry
over bills of two eighty nine
three oh four three twenty five
and then jump down to health
bill forty three and then
through the new business that
we've got sitting on the table
we're backing up a little bit so
it looks like we're probably
gonna start at eight thirty on
Wednesday unless we up last
through bunch of bills this
morning.
Any questions comments where we
get started.
Their current thank you Mr chair
and I just you know with this
deliberate before
before we start the meeting this
morning and I guess.
Typically I think it's really
important here the Senate bills
and I I understand you you want
to send a message to the house I
hope they reciprocate but it's
unusual to see here house bill
this certainly at this point so
I'm a little concerned about
that and hope hope that the
house we reciprocate as we send
our bills over pandemic second
thing I I guess I want to
mention
we just continue to hear more
and more appropriation bills and
I hate to vote no on those
because I think the meaning is
good but most of them are
directed to the same
universities two year colleges
over and over again then we just
send a brought on up to the
Senate finance with their their
Senate finance Sanchez so I
guess I'm just going to be
really honest about that I I
wonder if we ought to consider
that we are to send those up
with the no recommendation I
guess we can make that motion as
they come up that I I am
concerned that we are continuing
to to go outside of the
appropriation process which is
through the LFC I understand
some things left off in people
want to get those in that you
know these are just a
continuation of a lot of money
and I'm gonna tell you again it
this money is not going to be
there in about four years so we
need to be really careful thank
you and senator I absolutely
agree with the appropriation
side of it the if these are good
programs the universities need
to be putting this into their
based budgets not trying to do
it through extra Appropration
because members on the finance
committee might supported or for
other processes the.
Anything else where we start.
If not we were to a committee
questions on SB two eighty three
Senator secretary where are we
with that or with anything
that's happened since Friday is
the from your side.
Mr chair with the flow of the
secretary Mr chair I did have a
chance to talk with the number
of the committee the centers and
we do consider moving the the
data collection up that Senator
my Estes mentioned as a friendly
amendment to the to the bill but
we do want to continue looking
at the data in a holistic way in
that early six weeks through
second grade we think there's an
opportunity here for us to truly
understand what's happening in
our early childhood classrooms
all the way through early
elementary and use that data to
drive better decision making
better supports and help the
classrooms are classroom
educators truly be able to
support to the social competence
and emotional maturity of our
youngest learners while they're
also teaching them their
cognitive in their language
skills so does that is the one
amendment that we think would
help strengthen the bill to to
move that data collection up
starting July one twenty twenty
three with implementation as we
have the amendment that passed
on Friday moving that to July of
twenty twenty four.
And and again the pandemic
starting over with committee
questions at this point Senator
Kernan.
Mr chair just a clarification we
had a good visit this weekend we
already know that our public
schools are collecting that data
it's being reported that we're
not getting that information
from the PED do do pre maybe
someone from the PED could
explain do we collected for pre
K. in the public schools
currently I know we do for
kindergarten first and second
that that data is being reported
what about pre kindergarten
could someone from the PED the
answer that question.
Good morning Mister chairman
Senator Kernan yes we do collect
to discipline data there there
is one piece of data in the
bill.
Thank you sorry yes yes this is
great frosted from the public
education department and that
there is one piece of data and
as B. two eighty three the
antecedent to the discipline
infraction that the agency
doesn't current we collect for
any students thank you very much
and so for the most part.
Mr chairman I have I just feel
and I I told the secretary this
that we need to remove the part
that's already being reported
and I I don't know if you want
that in the form of the
amendment along with the the
change in the the time frame
that that I can't study you know
I just think it's it's a
duplication for public ed if if
they can't get that information
to I guess the receiving party's
which I'm not sure who that is I
think it would be.
I don't I don't know who gets
all the data once it's all
collected maybe that you see you
see do that I do not think it's
appropriate to ask them to to
redo all of that if we're
already receiving it that's one
issue that I have but I want to
continue a little bit with
another concern that I have with
regard to
the in rolling entities and of
course any child care
facility that accepts state
dollars those children of course
I think that's who we're talking
about when they enroll a child
that is receiving state dollars.
Not all of our child care center
state that that a good number of
them do.
And so my concern is when their
hands are tied and they are not
allowed to have control over
their disciplinary policies and
children within that facility
for some reason could create
harm for another child.
The liability for that child
care center rest with that
center
and not with the state whose
impose that a particular
requirement serve real concerns
about the liability when when
they're not allowed that to to
address those issues I know in
many places you can transition
but in many places you can not
there is no place to transition
and as sad as it is for the
families at some point there has
to be some accountability and
and certainly help going to
those individual families we can
do that while keeping the other
children safe in a facility and
so at I still have concerns and
I'll listen to other debate that
that I do hope that we can amend
out public education from pre K.
through second grade and not
require them to duplicate their
their responses in their data
collection that's all I have for
now make of that.
Companies are less than full
time posted thank you Mr
chairman Senator pope secretary
can ski thank you for
considering that that amendment
As I don't see the point in
delaying the data collection
that kind of a quirky bill Mr
chairman that it
That the start date is July
first The effective date rather
July first but then the
provisions in the bill are for
after July first
So just in terms of the
language.
We want the up.
Want a prohibition against
expulsions to begin January
first of twenty twenty four on
I'm looking on page two line I
so we want to maintain that
correct Mr chairman.
Mr chair Senator Mrs on the
amendment was passed on Friday
to move it to July one twenty
twenty four for implementation
okay fantastic and then on and
then what what the proposal is
to begin data collection.
January first twenty twenty four
or July first twenty twenty
three Mr chair center message
you raise that on Friday and we
see that as a friendly amendment
to move that up to July one
twenty twenty three for data
collection to start so that we
have a okay I'm to collect the
data and before implementation
to that amendment has not been
adopted Mr chairman secretary
has been and then we could do
one of two things Mr chairman we
could up.
We could change January first
twenty twenty five to July first
twenty twenty three or we could
just simply delete beginning
January first twenty twenty
five.
Since the accident the act.
Starts July first.
One.
A page correct page three line
nineteen I.
I move that we strike the words
beginning January one comma
twenty twenty five comma.
But there any other places where
that same data shows up for fun
times.
Not the same day Mr chairman
over excellent point on page
four line twenty two.
We should probably change twenty
twenty five to twenty twenty
four.
So all of you that motion so my
motion Mr chairman and is up on
page three line nineteen strike
the words beginning January one
comma twenty twenty five comma
and a page for strike twenty
twenty five insert into their of
twenty twenty four.
It's just moving all the
collection data up one year.
When you're to start collecting
in one year to more than have
require the reporting of that
data.
Correct everybody else read it
that way.
I'm on the brink of a second Mr.
Thank you any other discussion
on that particular motion.
If not more are you caught up
with.
Yes.
I'm gonna take care you more
than anyone else in this
committee.
You will sink my committee if I
don't.
If you call the roll on that of
the amendment.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Yes etcetera myiasis yes the
Nobel.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes centerfold yes.
So we have to I.
By amendment amended on their
of.
Economist.
You're up Senator pulled
secretary the
I think this.
We learned what with the
probation department that.
We did a bill in twenty nineteen
that was vetoed but eighty
percent of that bill could have
been done administratively none
of that stuff has happened.
So you need you need that
statutory framework to move.
Remove you know institutions or
in this case the.
The culture of suspending and
expelling students and so I
think this is necessary to to
move that forward I think the
dates are reasonable and I think
that you know the training will
fall happened might consider
what I'd ask you to consider is.
Is all the situations in which a
child should be suspended that
don't involve fighting that
don't involve threatening bodily
injury
not necessarily being disruptive
but the being harmful to other
students are just consider that
and see if there's language that
fits their or or if not we can
monitor it as the as the data
collection becomes available
thank you Mr secretary thank you
senator.
Other questions.
The yeah and I'll get back to
you let me make a comment or two
and I'll I'll get back to you up
well on Friday I I would ask you
of the nine hundred and whatever
suspensions did we get any data
as to what those are what they
were suspended for what kinds of
things.
Mr chair and thank you for that
we did do an analysis of the
looks like a thousand eighty two
instance actually and
And I will let PED describe if
there's more data but there is
the largest one is assault and
battery aggravated with hands
feet and best have those
children were children with
special needs and a hundred and
thirty three were kindergarten.
Disorderly conduct was the
second biggest so that could be
not following directions getting
out a line
you know taking a toy or to it
taking something from a friend
to in the classroom so it's
unclear and I don't know if
there's an that's part of what
this bill does is provide more
information about the incidents
so that we can better understand
what the issues are so we can
use that data to drive better
supports and decision making.
Was there any pattern as to
school districts anything of
that nature I did not look at
that we did not look at that
level of analysis the of the
third largest was assault
battery simple and Mr chair and
I'm you know I think my concern
is that we're we're using
criminal terms on our littlest
children when they're in
classrooms where this is where
this is what they're supposed to
be learning how to be an
community how to be in community
with others and share and
persistent make friends and use
their words and not their hands
and so it's I guess that was a
concern for me I think and I
don't know if it is for the
Senator that we're we're already
beginning to criminalize our
young children with terms like
this.
And and I I don't disagree with
that again having been an
elementary principal for awhile
and it has on page two a whole
section that
only with the rolling entity
that the student or child is
causes tempted yep that's
essentially the principal of the
school making that determination
as to so what's going on with it
the sounds like the majority are
a sole types of things I don't
know that we've got a better
word the calling it fighting or.
Push it.
Again I don't know the details
of any of the particular ones
I've.
Keep trying to think in as an
elementary principal in the.
Five six years that I was an
element I can't remember any but
I do remember becoming good
friends with some of the little
guys that typically it's voice
that we're having a tough time
managing in the classroom my
other concern along this line is
we have an incredible shortage
of behavioral health
particularly for young children
and we're we need to make sure
that we're getting them help for
behaviors and other kinds of
things as well as there's always
the concern teachers getting
bitten of others students you
know and how do we protect both
sides of and that's where the
real balance and stuff comes
with all of it Mr chair I think
there's some excellent evidence
based professional development
that all early elementary and
early childhood professionals.
Should be taking and to make
sure they have when they're
bringing together groups of
children some of whom may have
been in group settings before
some have not and so that's
where the learning is happening
in as we're paying for our
public dollars to have these
children learn how to engage to
make friends to use their words
and to learn their math and
their literacy in their science
but I think this is part of what
the issue we're this is what
we're hoping is happening for
young children that they're
learning these things from their
teachers but their teachers need
to be supported by
administrators and having access
to this high quality evidence
based professional development
so you may need behavioral
health in some cases but a lot
of cases it can happen right
there in the classroom with
teachers who who had that
support and professional
development.
Okay and then Senator secretary
I guess my concern this is one
of those issues I can kind of
play both sides of it because I
fully understand what you're
trying to do but the practical
side of being a principal where
you've got.
Situations and you're trying to
decide how serious is this and.
We don't know from that data
other than the principles how do
we get that additional
professional development to the
academic leaders the principals
and the teachers to reduce this
rather than say you can't do
yeah you can't suspend we don't
I mean from the data there's not
enough evidence that those nine
hundred or a thousand we're
fully legitimate reasons.
Yet this is centrally is saying
you can't do that.
Without knowing the the details
of those specific pieces because
some of them certainly were
legitimate I'm sure.
And I don't know Mr chair
excellent questions thank you I
think this is again what we're
dealing with is the reported
data are this bill would also
require even those children who
were sent home middle of the day
a breast understand that level
of suspension and you know
twelve states require this some
just recently Texas Colorado
Tennessee have done this you
know early childhood through
second grade because I think
what we know from the national
research is that this this is
potentially a systemic issue but
they can be addressed up with
upstream strategies like good
quality professional development
and I do know that there is that
funding in the executive budget
to support that level of
professional development and
it'll be a priority of both
ECECD and PED to make sure it's
available to administrators and
teachers across the state.
I guess I would prefer.
Seeing those things implemented
you have gather the data so we
have a baseline see those
implemented see that reduces the
number rather than starting with
a ban on suspensions and
expulsions.
Because then it's gonna money
any of the data as to whether
we're making a difference also.
Mr chair yet it almost seems
like we've started with the the
end in mind and and trying to
provide data to support it is
what it feels like some Mr chair
I I just want to comment on that
and you know this is just
reiterate this is reducing the
suspensions and expulsions were
not totally getting rid of it
we're just going reductions just
wanted to emphasize.
I guess my question comes
because it says that.
The rolling entity has willfully
caused or attempted that's what
of principal has to write on
every report.
That they reviewed this they're
not being suspended by the
kindergarten teacher they're
being suspended by the principal
who is determined that this is
appropriate based on current law
and the children have been
endangered.
Mr chair that's why the
additional information about
what was the incident what
actually occurred I think will
help us understand that how
that's being interpreted because
they still have that exactly
that discretion to say this was
this but we want to understand
what happened because this level
of data doesn't really tell us
what the actual incident was and
then also how was the child and
the family and educator
supported in resolving the issue
that occurred that resulted in a
suspension so I think that's
getting good data that will help
us make that the secretary if
this is coming in who's going to
be looking at a thousand of
these reports a year and
determining you know where the
line was dead because often in
the report.
There's minimal information they
can be doing an interview with
principles for every one of
these how we're going to drill
down into to knowing.
Whether this was appropriate or
not.
Mr chair thank you for that
question I think what we're
gonna do is we're gonna learn
from the data and then that's
gonna help so again there are no
penalties associated with you
suspended a child it didn't fall
into that but I think this is
the purpose of collecting the
data and understanding it at the
same time limiting suspensions
to three days not currently the
ten days that are allowed and
also collecting again collecting
better data and making sure the
children in that early childhood
six weeks up through
kindergarten are also part of
the data collection and then
limitations and so secretary of
those thousand or so how many of
those were for more than three
days typically done with early
childhood when you put a kid in
timeout it's a few minutes when
they're very young it's a little
more as they get older.
How many were more long term
suspensions as opposed to just a
one day cool off type of thing
which is what I would imagine
the majority were but I don't
know.
Mr chair I did I did not do that
part of the analysis but we they
do have it as part of the data
collection so we can get that to
you because certainly of all
thousand or ten days because
that's what they're allowed to
do that very different than a
principal who's.
You're trying to to get a the
situation calmed down pulled off
a little bit suspense for an
afternoon because according to
this that would count as of a
full suspension suspend for an
afternoon.
That still shows up in the data
the those are very very
different situations.
Mr chair I agree I mean they're
they're different but they still
I think because the same level
of you know from what the
research is showing that that
stress both on the family that
those out of school suspensions
which also we have seen relate
to later poor performance in
school negative views of their
self as a student as a learner
so all the things that are in
the fact sheet are things that
we know happen even if you're
suspended for half a day if
you're suspended for three days
and we want to.
Talk we want to it have better
exclusionary discipline policies
happening in those early years
this is as you know so well the
formative piece you know part of
the humans Development is in
these early years so the more we
can with reinforce positive
identity strength based
approaches to helping all
children as they learn I think
we're going to have better
outcomes all along the way.
That Representative I know you
had some.
Right now okay.
Germany finish if you'd like.
Are you done I'm done yeah thank
you I just had a couple of
questions as you were talking
senator
So on page two you madam
secretary keep talking about
this just reporting but it's
really not go to is is
prohibiting.
Certain things and the expulsion
being one of them.
Help me understand why we're
saying you cannot expel a
student.
No matter what.
Because that's what you're
saying here chair Senator Brandt
thank you for that question
we're saying only in the case if
they bring a weapon we have
actually doesn't say that the
amended on Friday because it was
the statute was improperly
reference their false report so
if a student to be in line with
both federal and state law that
would be the only reason to
expel a child but there's also
an opportunity for a planned
transition we're if the the
child and and the family and
teacher they don't think this is
the best
setting they work together to
plan a transition for the child
to another setting so that's the
opportunity versus just
expelling a child and not
providing the family or for the
child other options.
So when it's a Mr Chairman madam
secretary when it's a
The situation that the school.
most these probably in the
special needs do those private
facilities get the same funding
for special needs students as
our public schools to.
Mr chair Senator Brandt thank
you for that question the I when
you talk about the childcare
programs do they just funding
the they do they get funding for
the child care we don't right
now have a extra support for
children with special needs but
we do have our early
intervention programs and in
some cases of special education
programs that do go into those
settings and provide support.
So Mr Chairman that secretary so
they're being asked to provide
the same.
Supports as or public.
Schools but they're not
receiving the same funding.
A lot of R. I. E. P. students
special needs students receive.
A huge amount of funding over
what a normal.
Regular student would receive
but they don't get that.
Mr chair Senator Brandt state
that we don't fall into the same
funding formula as schools do
they get the funding for the
child care assistance program
and they get other supports from
our quality coaches and quality
supports if they are serving
children who receive child care
assistance but no they don't
they they don't fall the same
funding formula as schools.
Thank you Mr chairman and
secretary but we're requiring
that they not expel them even if
they can't meet their needs what
you're saying that's where you
can have this planned transition
but what if the parent doesn't
want to do that.
Mr chair and Senator Brandt I
think that's what we're saying
is that that I mean the the
impact of expelling children is
profound not only on that family
in the child but on a our
overall system so we are at
putting this bill forward so
that we can keep our children
that we are paying to be in
Karen education settings that
they're getting that care and
education so of the perfect
family may not want to remove
them but the family may want
additional supports and they may
need additional supports and so
I think it's bringing the
community response together so
that we help all of our students
and all of our children that are
in the care funded by our public
dollars.
Mr Chairman Representative
secretary at I appreciate what
you're wanting to do here but
the liability on those private
institutions you're not
considering.
And you're not giving them the
state we don't give them as
government the same sports
provide those like those what
about all the other children in
that setting about all the other
children that and and Senator
Kernan I listened in on you on
Friday from home sorry I was
sick but you know what about all
those other children that are
being built what about all those
children are being assaulted.
Are they just it is the
childcare facilities disposed to
ignore that.
Because they can't do anything
about this now.
Mr chair Senator Brandt and
definitely not ignoring and
that's what I talk about with
that evidence based professional
development that educators
working with young children and
groups of children this is what
this is where we learn how to be
in groups and how to not hurt
our friends keeper thing safe
keep our toys safe keep our
friends save and with those are
all the concepts and strategies
that early childhood and early
elementary teachers need to have
to be able to support all
students in their learning
because children learn from
being the children who have
different abilities and
difference in so it's a it's the
ability of those educators and
administrators to support them
to make sure they have all those
tools and strategies so I think
we're we're concerned about the
impact on the many students and
families who are being expelled
or suspended and the ripple
effect that has in our schools
in our communities so.
We do we do know that all
children need to be addressed
all the needs of all children
and those are sometimes the
learning that happens when we do
have children who are having a
harder time or maybe that
administrative and the teacher
that classroom in the
environment is not conducive
adopted children and so getting
that outside support which we do
provide to our child care
programs as well as funding and
other infant early childhood
mental health consultation.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative secretary I guess
risk of disagree on this one
because
I think the liability you're
opening private institutions up
to that we don't give the same
support to that we do shining
stars preschool in Rio Rancho.
is is too much
you're you're expecting them to
be kept in that setting.
And not be allowed.
I am sure that this isn't the
first time that they try to it
take someone out of those you
have a expel child is not the
first time it happens sure
they've tried all those other
things and it's still not
working at some point for the
safety of the other kids you
have to be allowed to say I'm
sorry you're gonna have to find
somewhere else.
Mr chair Senator and I would
point out that the all the major
organizations that work with
child care and child care
providers an early childhood
professionals have endorse and
support this bill and stand in
strong support including A. F.
T. who spoke on Friday as well
and so many many of the people
impacted by this bill actually
stand in support of it.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary you don't want me to
get.
Start on a discussion about a
fifty thank you Mr chairman
that's all I have the two
Senator Pinto thank you thank
you Mr chair and thank you for
the bill.
When you talk about the funding
formula and that it doesn't
incorporate certain aspects that
other formulas do so does the
formula need to be revamped so
that funding can be provided for
these certain aspects of
students.
I mean are we missing stuff in
there missiles
Senator Pinto thank you for that
question I think it's just that
they're two different settings
so one are are.
Private nonprofit or for profit
or faith based institutions and
the others are public schools so
I think but we do consistently
look at the funding that we're
providing to our childcare
programs and we adjust those as
as we come at it as we learn
more information to the
executive budget includes a
significant increase for funding
for child care programs
In the in twenty four so I think
that they're just different
mechanisms for how we fund the
to set setting sectors I guess
you'd call.
So these two funding formulas
are not really.
Going to address the needs of
the child.
Mr chair Senator Pinto I think
they are the the way that New
Mexico looks at our funding for
our child care programs we do it
based on what it actually costs
to deliver high quality care is
that we we go through a
different mechanism because
we're funded both through the
federal child care development
block grant as well as a state
funding and so it does address
it and again the executive has a
very significant increase in its
budget for child care to address
exactly this issue so that we're
raising the salaries and that
we're addressing the needs of
providing high quality care to
our.
Children birth up to
kindergarten entry.
Mr chair but if this child needs
specific care are specific
behavioral changes we don't have
any funding to help them address
that and I don't just mean like
just for the child I mean
realistically when we talk about
the family or the guardians that
are
that have the the child in their
care.
We don't have any it doesn't
follow them in that manner or if
we don't address that
specifically within how we
provide either institution.
Mr chair Senator Pinto I think
what we I don't I can't speak to
the K. twelve and how that is
funded but I can speak to the
up.
Both New Mexico pre K. as well
as the support in child care in
terms of always looking at both
the funding for that direct
child care but also for the
additional supports that a
program needs so that's the
coaching that's the consultation
that's the access to a
clinically trained individuals
who can come in and support
those educators so we do support
them some with the direct pay
for the child and they're right
but also a host of other
supportive services that come
into the New Mexico pre K.
classroom are the come into a
childcare center to help
administrators and educators.
Mr chair and I'm thank you for
the bill but it sounds like in a
way those that need it the most
those that need the special care
those that need the the
specialists we don't cater to
that we're just saying well
we're just gonna fund to the
norm that all these children are
in the north but does that
really need it we don't have
these facilities out there in
the state to help
So that they can be home we just
kind of say okay we're gonna do
this generally over here over
here for the norm of the
students but yet we we know we
have the secretary that is very
special in which even the
guardians you know it's not
anybody's fault it's just
whatever happens happens to them
that they need extra support
extra funding to pay for that
support just to get them to to
have a little bit of
participation in all the other
students that we we deem as
normal
in this chair Senator Pinto I
think some of the research that
maybe I haven't emphasized
enough is that research around
implicit bias and some of the
other areas that are coming into
decisions around suspension or
deeming a child's behavior
disorderly or activated and so
that is some of the strongest
research to show that why it's
important that states take
action around limiting
suspensions and you know
limiting expulsions and limiting
suspensions because we see that
it's disproportionately boys
boys of color that are being
suspended and expelled we see it
in our own data we see it in
national data so it's not that
there's anything wrong with the
child necessarily their earth
societal impacts that we have to
also take into account that's
why I go back to we do
developmental screenings we ask
the teachers to do that we're
we're looking at the child well
being and educators need help in
accessing good evidence based
professional development which
PED and ECECD both have and we
have in the executive budget so
I think it's important that we
think holistically about what
this issue is addressing and not
just put it on the child that
the child is done something that
is a danger but potentially
something in the system that we
need to address as well
including implicit bias.
Mr chair and thank you for that
answer because that goes on to
the next thing about the process
and the oversight so this has
occurred these incidences the
data we've collected that has
happened that has happened so
many times.
What I here are what some have
conveyed to me is the door shut
on them that there's no way for
them to have grievance there's
no way for them to go up the
chain to make it known what is
happen to their child it's like
this is it you're suspended and
wherever the school board are
whatever whoever's the next
entity really does not have that
door open for them to continue
to get in the way
into a program or where either
some arbitration can occur for
the child to stay in for those
that are the adults are the
guardians of the child will have
to enter into certain programs
because when we just try to
tackle the problem just at the
school setting we know that is
not enough we know it is deeper
than that and especially at such
a young age for those impacts to
occur on them but it seems that.
They can set the doors and the
doors not open where.
Who should have been able to say
no this is not going to happen.
The staff needs enough we're
going to go to school this is
what we're going to we're going
to intervene and this is how
we're going to intervene so that
this child this one child versus
all the other children you know
they should have a voice in that
sense
Or somewhere to have gone to we
have all these hot lines we
create all these things due to a
lot of these issues but yet when
we have our children still seems
like we're not listening to that
more than not having the ability
are those that want to advocate
for them whether or not be the
guardians or it could be the
teachers to advocate for them
knowing that their
Probably some issues at home but
yet we don't get we don't get
that far with the we kind of
just let it he's out deal with
the problem explore expelled
them suspend them discipline and
and then say OK that to you
should have learned your lesson
we'll see if you come back but
not really doing much much out
I'm but thank you for I and I I
think your tensions are well on
the good side but I I think
there's a lot of work that needs
to be done thank you Mr chair.
Their content yes thank you for
a second time appreciated and
you know it's been a good
discussion and and I agree with
Senator Pinto I don't think this
solves the problem the problem
is first of all I don't
understand why I don't know how
ECECD has.
any oversight over our public
school pre K. through second
grade maybe I'm wrong on that
but that to me that P. should be
pulled out and then on the other
side of it I don't see that this
really solves a problem I would
rather see a bill that comes
through
of funding of the type of
professional development not
only for our public pre K.
programs public child care
centers but those that accept
state funding and they take
children because there may not
be any place else from to go so
they take that money but they're
not being assisted in helping
those kiddos that that have
these issues the other problem
we're going to run into when it
put a private center
accepts a child that is funded
through the state and then
realizes that that child is
going to be there regardless
they can be very careful about
who they take at I think that's
going to really create a concern
on the part of some of those
centers that.
I don't know what kind of
enrollment process are going to
go through I don't think they
have to take everybody and so
we're putting a lot of liability
on those private centers and no
support that I can see I mean we
say their supports there but I'm
not sure that that's reaching
those private centers at the
level they should but in any
event Mr chair.
I really would like to offer an
amendment on page two long
eleven and twelve to strike in
pre kindergarten through second
grade I I just think they're
already reporting I don't think
we need to to ask them to do
double duty not sure where the
reports are going if if that's a
problem that PED needs to
release those reports to whoever
wants them and then use that for
analysis but I'd like to move
that we remove that part on page
two everybody see where that is
on page two starting online
eleven.
I'm sorry.
line seven.
where would that be.
Seven yes it does you're correct
so also line seven
Three million in pre
kindergarten through second
grade online eight.
In other words just remove the
the public school piece of their
already reporting.
The motion is there a second.
Thank you by Senator.
Everybody understand what we're
talking about where.
That this be a friendly or not.
It would be an unfriendly Mr
Chairman that.
The discussion on the amendment.
No discussion if you'll call the
roll.
Schools.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey help Senator Kernan yes.
Senator biases.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto the Santo pope.
No Sanders Sauls yes.
I.
The amendment doesn't go
anywhere at that point so.
Okay back to the bill is this
the.
See other comments on the bill.
I move to table Russian to
table.
Under the table of million again
whenever you're ready if you
call the roll.
Senator Brandt yes.
Yeah Senator Kernan yes Senator
biases.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
No.
Senator pope no Senator souls
yes and explain my vote.
Another talks okay it might my
biggest concerns with this and
explain to my vote is I
absolutely agree I don't think
we've got in place.
The supports that the kids and
families need some of the
biggest communities maybe but
smaller communities they are not
there they're not behavioral
health people and others to
support all of that
But we're still stuck.
And Mister chair I would like to
clarify that ECECD does oversee
pre K. and both school based
settings and community based
setting so that is not the part
of you PED that is us.
Not alternative motion anyone.
I'd make a motion for a no
Representative.
The discussion okay your call
the roll Senator Brandt so
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes senator
bill no Senator Pinto yes
Senator pope yes Sanders Sauls
yes and again a short acceptable
nation but it will move forward
to Judiciary where they are
likely to have some of the very
similar kinds of concerns that
we have
certainly and and secretary
we've had long conversations so
much of this issue is certainly
we're seeing the symptoms when
kids get their but it's poverty
it's a lack of behavioral health
care for parents it's the
substance abuse all kinds of
other things of which the
schools then.
Get get the blame for credit or
other things that we've got to
make sure that we're we're doing
all the upstream things so the
kids have a fair chance that we
that are seeing when we have
some of the behavioral things
come in the to our state so
thank you thank you Mr chair
Senator and thank you Mr chair
thank you for it committee
member for break debate great
discussion thank you thank you.
Senator Hemphill.
Bill please come up you waited
through lots of our meeting last
time and.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yeah always keep this warm.
What the windows open that day.
So.
You ready for me it was a heated
discussion.
I I felt about.
Maybe it was that was one of the
harder bills we've had the
session.
Kind of a Mr chairman it more
intense Committee that and I
would have expected here in
Senate education.
Whenever you're ready so Mister
chairman I have Senate bill two
eighty nine this morning members
of the committee.
This bill requires the public
education department to
establish an outdoor and
environmental education program
for all public schools it
updates the academic standards
across all subject areas to
include outdoor and
environmental education and to
develop a scope and sequence to
integrate outdoor and
environmental education for
kindergarten through twelfth
grade it also requires the
public education department to
coordinate with school districts
and institutions of higher
education to integrate outdoor
environment mental and education
into the curriculum for
professional development for
teachers of all grades and
teacher preparation programs and
it also encourages informal
education resources be
implemented in school districts
and so Mr chairman the the
history of this bill started
with the wild friends bill back
in twenty twenty when it was
Senate memorial one it created a
task force to meet throughout
the this school year to with
different stakeholders in order
to decide how best to encourage
school districts across New
Mexico to.
Create outdoor learning spaces
and so with the passage of
Senate memorial one we had a
task force we met throughout the
year and it was determined that
we would create an outdoor
learning department or program
and we hired somebody to run
that department there is also a
support person and it's funded
there was one point so we
started with half a million
dollars to fund that program
under the PED and there is of
recommendation and executive
recommendation for one point two
million this year because of the
extensive interest in creating
outdoor learning spaces for
districts especially because we
have COVID still and in addition
to many other viruses and
outdoor learning spaces are
healthier physically and also
mentally and so as a former
school psychologist it's
definitely important to me to
help encourage these types of
programs my son is very
privilege to be part of a school
that has a lot of outdoor
education and I asked him what
does it feel like to learn
outside compared to when you're
inside in a classroom any
thought about it for a moment to
and he said it feels like peace
and I thought if we can make
sure that every student in New
Mexico has access to learning
outside when the weather is safe
I know Senator Kernan did have
some concerns about the quality
of the air outside at times so
we definitely aren't expecting
this to be utilized year round
or in all circumstances but to
have that as an option when it's
appropriate and when the
weather's conducive to outdoor
learning I definitely want to
make sure that every.
school district can take
advantage of this program if
they which like to Mr chairman
and with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Up to the audience those in
support to just raise your hands
thank you anyone opposition.
A couple of you would like to
come up please please keep your
comments.
Two two minutes or less.
It looks like we have to in
support on online so.
And please everyone does nothing
to say exactly the same thing.
Please go ahead.
Mr chairman committee.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name's Pam Roy here
on behalf of New of farm to
table in New Mexico for an
agriculture policy counts we
stand in full support of this
and really appreciate Center
handful answer Gonzales bringing
this forward there's a lot of
great experience learning
programs here in New Mexico and
it would be wonderful to see
them just that much more
coordinated as many of you know
we work on New Mexico grown
getting fresh fruits and
vegetables that are grown by our
farmers in the school meal
program we see this is a great
hi to that and we see and
there's some really wonderful
programs food court ag in the
classroom that could be further
bolstered by this bill really
appreciate this effort of great
examples in the has a beautiful
indoor outdoor they've got
hydroponics and school gardens
and we see that and schools
across the state we look to see
more thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mr chair committee members thank
you very much for hearing this
this morning Centers Hempel and
Senator Gonzalez thank you very
much for sponsoring this bill my
name is kind of my thought this
I'm executive director for
environmental education in New
Mexico we are in full support of
this bill there are three things
that we find very important here
first of all this bill not only
establishes a structural
importance for environmental
education in the state of New
Mexico but it right by that
environment education does not
necessarily have to be in the
stem programs this is something
that every single subject can be
taught through outdoor learning
and environmental education
the second thing that I'd like
to bring up is that through our
own ethnographic research we
have found that educators really
find their biggest obstacle is
in professional development so
within this bill we provide
support for professional
training and professional
development which is so
important to establishing by
middle education in New Mexico.
Finally
This is such an important
subject for every single student
every child in the state of New
Mexico every child in New Mexico
deserves the opportunity to be
outside and to learn about our
environment and to really become
life long learners.
So environmental education New
Mexico supports this bill and we
really do hope that you vote to
pass thank you thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Hi hello the thank you Mr chair
members of the committee and
Senator Hemphill thank you for
your sponsorship as well as
Senator Gonzales my name is
Allison Martin I'm also with
environmental Education of New
Mexico and it is such an honor
to be here thinking about last
year being here and being with
Senate bill thirty two and now
seeing those two positions out
there of the Public Education
Department and seeing all about
funding for all of the schools
but the momentum is not finished
yet we have so much to do I've
been in environmental education
for thirteen years and I've
connected thousands of students
and adults from across New
Mexico and even further than
that to environmental education
programs and I've seen how
important this is but I've also
seen all of the things that are
not working and I've sat in a
room with principles and I said
this is a home run for me I have
all of these principles my
programs going to be implemented
and it wasn't and it wasn't
because the principals were bad
or anything it was because the
structures were there to
implement it and those
implementations are so important
the professional development is
so important and getting an
outdoor ambassador at every
school now is the next step to
support outdoor environmental
initiatives as well as getting
teachers comfortable with going
outside all teachers want to
take their students outside but
they don't know how and so
having the funding and support
and programs that we've been
we've been talking about for
years now and getting those put
forth is so important thank you
so much thank you.
Thank you.
Yes Sir thank you chair members
of the committee thank you can
members the committee my name is
Jeff Clark and I'm the parent of
a five year old who spent the
last two and a half years and
four school.
And in those two and a half
years she is those close to
reading she's doing fairly
complicated addition and
subtraction but more than that
as a young person who has some
serious sensory struggles all of
her needs are met there's no
point in the forest with bird
song where she becomes
overwhelmed I deeply want to
send her to public schools and
the thought of taking away her
access to the outdoors to the
place where she feels at peace
is a little too much for me to
consider I would be thrilled
with the support of this bill
thank you and thank you thank
you we have to online so the.
We see Camille Romero.
Media.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members can you live in Maryland
in New Mexico State Land Office
the Land Office stands in
support of this bill Land Office
also welcomes the use of state
trust land for the development
of outdoor and environmental
education programs by both are
beneficiaries and other informal
educational resources thank you.
Thank you and Emily wheeled out.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I've been labeled
out with New Mexico voices for
children we support this bill
and thank the sponsors for
carrying it and for all the
reasons you've already heard
we're in support of this bill
and would ask that you join us
in in supporting SB two eighty
nine today thank you thank you.
Questions from the committee.
Mr chair and senator that's
certainly don't disagree that
our kids need to be outside more
in in all of this is is a great
idea but I'm a little concerned
about
the scope and sequence
kindergarten through twelfth
grade and re vamping that and I
wonder if Mary anna is in the
room still did she leave.
The path.
I was gonna ask her how
difficult I know anytime you
address the scope in sequencing
you change standards and we did
it for social studies and that
took what two years to do and
we're talking about doing this
across subject areas so seeming
all the core areas re math
science social studies language
arts plus others as it states
that there be any way to maybe
reduce our contents that so that
that effort to redo all of the
you know all the scope and
sequence across that that is
tremendous work and so I wonder
if the PED would have a comment
and could tell me how long
that's going to take what kind
of requirement that entails as
far as re riding
the standards and putting those
out training the teachers it's
not as easy as it sounds I think
that maybe someone from the pit
could tell me and I'm sorry
merry on is not here I'm sure
she could fill us in.
Three hundred.
There.
Good morning a great frosted
from the PED Mr chair and
Senator Kernan it is a a
substantial piece of work to get
standards written for any
particular area and it you write
it it takes time for teachers to
get together around the state to
to be trained and then to create
the document and then it needs
to be put into rural so it is it
it is a substantial undertaking
thank you Mr chair with would
you have a cost estimate on
that.
Mr chair Senator Kernan.
As as a very rough estimate I
would anticipate it costing.
One hundred to two hundred
thousand dollars.
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for that I you know I
guess that's the only concern I
have I love the idea of the
kiddos being out but I wonder if
it makes sense to to kind of
step back a little bit and pick
whatever core subject maybe one
that would fit that
in a better way that could be
done actually maybe less less
cost involved less
collaboration across the state
maybe just reduce that a little
bit is there any thought that
maybe you could reconsider of
the the broad spectrum because I
do like the idea I just think
it's a little bit too broad.
So Mister chairman Senator
thanks for highlighting not you
certainly have much more
institutional knowledge about
these things than I do giving
your time in the Senate so I
greatly respect and appreciate
your input and if there's an
easier way that you recommend
I'm definitely open to hearing
suggestions so thank you Mr
chairman I'm not sure trying to
figure out whether it's it's at
it may be one core subject of
one subject in may be.
I don't know if you could do it
kindergarten through twelfth
there maybe pick it really do a
good job but I don't know where
to start because I think our
older kids needed just as much
as the younger so I'm not quite
sure time wise are greatly
scrape level that certainly
would like to see maybe a little
bit smaller
Pick a court pick one subject
and let's see how it goes I
don't know maybe at let me hear
from everybody else because I
don't know.
We remember.
For.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks
Senator
Yeah I think so you're a little
bit perplexed.
That
When we went to the audience.
A couple of groups didn't stand
up in opposition to something
else being mandated and not
funded.
Because this will cost across
the schools to do it cost the
district to do it yet you don't
have any funding for it will
cost pead.
To do it yet you can find the
funding for Pat so can you help
me out with why we want to put
another unfunded mandate on our
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing that up Senator
Brandt so I would not consider
this an unfunded mandate since
we were able to increase to to
find that line item for it
directly in house bill two
Secretary Stein house was
supportive of the outdoor
classroom program and so the
reason that there's not an
appropriation here is because
the programs funded we were able
to increase that from the
original amount of five hundred
thousand to one point two
million so legislative house
bill two everything goes as
planned there should be funding
their to help accomplish these
goals.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I appreciate that I'm
glad there some funding but I
highly doubt that one point two
million will fund this for
eighty nine different school
districts for every single child
in the in those districts plus
spans so it is just again you
know it's amazing to me that
certain organizations only stand
up when it's Republicans wanted
to put something and that they
think is an unfunded mandate but
not when Democrats do.
Not on you that's those
organizations I do have a
question you know what's going
to be talk when you talk about
environmental education.
what is that and what what is
going to be taught in that.
Mister chairman Senator at yep
thank you for that question that
gives me an opportunity to
clarify so out environmental
education really is about
learning any type of subject
while you're outside so it can
be learning about the
environment learning about rocks
learning about ecosystems but it
can also be providing education
in terms of just really bring
books outside and talking about
the surroundings that it it the
sky is the limit quite literally
and it really is about the
understanding that that
particular state teacher has
which is why the professional
development is so critical
because teachers some teachers
are going to have the intuition
to be able to do it quite
naturally and their other
teachers to really used to being
in a classroom who may need some
additional support to get an
idea about what that looks like
so environmental education can
be very broad but in my mind
it's really about learning about
our our surroundings and our
environments our communities the
way that ecosystems interact
with each other my son who
attends Aldo Leopold charter
school they do a lot of work on
trail creek building trails
trail maintenance learning about
the way that though water flows
and to making sure that they're
addressing those issues and so
in my mind that's what
environmental education is but
they've also created these
outdoor learning places areas
around their campus where we one
of their beloved teachers that
was in charge of the culinary
arts program past.
Away in a fatal car crash
earlier this year or last year
in October and the memorial.
right after the it's students
return to school that Monday
and.
there is a memorial service that
was done in those outdoor
learning spaces so I think that
those are environmental
educational opportunities to so
it can be very broad and I think
that when you're teaching
students and the actual setting
so that your providing education
or the curriculum for like if
you're learning about rock
singer actually outside and
interacting with rocks and
interacting with the environment
it's going to create a much more
A stronger way of learning that
subject area than if you're in a
classroom in your learning and
more abstract way to students
with different types of
disabilities autism are ADHD
they're going to be much calmer
and.
The NM position where they're
going to be able to learn at a
much deeper level outside.
Thank you Mister chairman
Senator I and I appreciate your
What you're saying on this but
as someone who's passed bills
and have go to PED and then the
rules going places doesn't do
anything the bill's up to do.
it will concern me that we're
leaving this up to PED to decide
what the curriculum is going to
be without it being spelled out
a little bit better in the bill
I I'm concerned about it being
coming someone's agenda
and some agendas that some
parents may not want talk to
their children and so mainly I
can't support the bill because I
believe it's an unfunded mandate
but secondly I'm concerned about
the scope when it comes to the
environmental studies I have no
problem taking the kids outside
and having them you'll learn
outside I do actually did that
quite a bit in my school years
growing up in this year and
about this California we have a
beautiful setting for that
but
there there are certain agendas
that I don't want to talk to my
grandchildren it's no longer my
children and my grandchildren
that I'm concerned about and I
know there's a lot of people
like me in my district that do
not want those things taught and
I'm afraid that that sorry will
put that into the curriculum
thank you.
Senator Neville.
Thank you chairman the Senator
at one point in time this may be
ancient history but the solar
conservation districts and I
believe some of the ag groups
used to support of an outdoor
classroom project is that still
in place or do you know if that
is active still think I see a
couple people my contention the
back room that.
Mr chairman if there's somebody
who has that information I don't
know maybe not to I'm not sure
miss okay chairman that that was
a.
Paid for I guess by local folks
in in the various communities
and I don't know if that's a.
I'm just curious though so
operate operating because it it
did teach more about agriculture
talk more about to.
Those kind of things were years
where does your food come from
and how does it get to the table
and those kind of things so
would you envision that those
kind of concepts would be part
of your curriculum Mister
chairman Senator that's exactly
right especially in rural
communities like mine that would
be one of the the main things
that we'd be focusing on
recycling and sustainable food
and where does your food come
from and taking students out to
farms and ranches and really
gaining an appreciation for
local food sourcing I would
encourage PED Mr chairman to
incorporate to some of those
organizations like the salt
water districts they're they're
state funded you might as well
incorporate their talents and
resources thank you Mr thank you
of this couple of questions as I
look at this it says they.
Shall establish an outdoor
program there noted no time line
for those.
Whether the expected to do this
and I will ask the next question
after so Mister chairman thank
you the program is established
and there are two staff members
that this is really about
creating the curriculum and the
providing the support that
additional support to educators.
The fact the same question then
is so when is the curriculum due
to educators.
And Mr chairman that is open for
discussion I would like to add
some dates on their.
Because as it is now it's very
it's aspirational.
Then say anybody really has to
do something that to do
something sometime somewhere but
it it doesn't really say
when do teachers whether the
suspected to start doing this I
mean some certainly are doing it
now.
But this reads very much almost
like a memorial of this is good
things please do this.
And Mr chairman so the idea
would be to give up this is
providing the.
Director of the outdoor learning
program
some additional guidance and
what her role is going to be
moving forward so I I don't know
the exact date that she was
hired or he was hired or I have
not met that person but this is
providing a little more guidance
so we funded the program half a
million dollars and then there
was a lot of interest in it so
we're just trying to find a
little additional guidance so if
you have some other suggestions
I'm definitely open to that and
I hadn't been part of the
drafting of this that was
Senator Gonzales who's out as
you know right now so I had
signed on to help support him
and because of the my history on
the bill and I'm definitely want
to make sure that we're moving
forward with the bill that's
gonna
help provide PED it's much
direction and support to make
this
To find this outdoor curriculum
in the way that we intend as a
legislature and as I look at it
again thinking putting my math
teacher had on you know and
every year we go out and do
things yeah with geometry and
provide circles and measure and
calculate pi based on the
diameters and some of those I
know some of the calculus
teachers in the spring would
take things out the where they'd
want to potato across the way to
do parabolic arcs and you know
how far is it going to go based
on the how you know the kinds of
things like that how much does a
teacher need to do or is it like
did one project you're good.
You all take and what happens if
teacher never goes out side with
the class are they in violation
of a law somewhere.
So Mr Chairman the way that now
this is just my personal opinion
what how I would like to see
this implemented is not forcing
any district or forcing any
teacher but providing the
support I just I feel like any
time we can inspire teachers to
implement something that that's
going to work much better than
them forcing students so if
we're providing the professional
development and we are creating
outdoor spaces and providing the
curriculum and teachers would
like to use those outdoor
learning places and follow along
that curriculum but I think
those are all things that we can
be discussing as part of this
bill whether we want to write it
into the bill or have those
discussions moving forward with
the public education department
about the best way to create the
curriculum whether with that one
we want to make that mandatory
or not my opinion I would rather
just have teachers who feel
comfortable doing that and see
if we want to encourage more
teachers or make it mandatory
can certainly be part of the
discussion or leave it up to
each individual school district
and and senator I.
I fully understand what what the
goal is you I support outdoor
education I've seen in my own
students weird sometimes we we
relaxes them you get a different
kind of learning going on.
This bill didn't do anything.
And I think that's my biggest
concern is it doesn't do
anything there's already people
at PED's who are working on this
and at best it kind of says
please do your job.
But it doesn't do anything
that's my only by real concern.
Third.
Thank you Mr chair and I think
it I think it kind of does a
little bit more when you do when
you direct them to change the
standards and teachers Mr chair
required to teach the standards
it's not an option I don't think
am I wrong on that I mean I
would think if it's if it's in
the standard you've you've got
to teach it and that's what
that's the only thing I would
love to see you maybe take it in
re work it a little bit limit
the subject matter to may be and
then maybe even think about
limiting which grade levels
initially with an expansion
later on and I don't even know
where to start with page great
level of service that that I do
think when you put something in
the standards that's what the
teacher looks at and that's what
they teach throughout the year.
Operator that in their lesson
plans and have to teach that
maybe I'm wrong about that but
that's what I recall it once in
a think there's anything that
keeps teachers from doing any of
this.
The new requirements against it
and that's kind of where I don't
see that it was does anything.
I guess Senator I mean we could
certainly take it to a vote if
you want to take it back and
rework it and see if it's
something that's a little more
substantive what would you like
so Mister chairman I would love
for Senator Gonzales to be able
to address some of these
concerns since he was really
this is his bill and I'm here
presenting it on his behalf and
haven't really had an
opportunity to ask him a lot
about how this bill came to be
if he had had a conversation
with stacked secretary Steinhaus
and this was a request to give
them some more guidance or
or if this was just what he came
up with on in his own and since
he's out right now
For medical reasons hi I think
that would out of respect for
him we would like would you like
is to just kind of lay it to the
side not would be no that would
be my preference ready to bring
it back up for me that work okay
that works fine with committee
yeah okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
If you think that common.
Senator Tallman while you're
coming up if anyone is here for
just the three forty for the
small business development
center program with Senator
Campos is just that that not be
heard today so that is going to
be rolled over to Wednesday.
Senator if you please keep
things quick short we have a
deadline of ten forty five AM
we've got quite a number of
other bills that are sitting in
the queue.
Okay thank you Mr.
Sure good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee very pleased to have
the opportunity to present
Senate bill three oh four.
Which would procreate million
eight million dollars to fund
the innovative non credit.
Short term boot camps at C. N.
M..
As you know Mr chair employers
part requiring fast agile and
relevant training for existing
and upcoming job openings this
funding will potentially serve
hundreds of additional students.
To enroll in programs not
covered by the opportunity
scholarship repeat this program.
That this program does not cover
is not covered by opportunity
scholarship.
In addition Mr chairman dispute
can't funding will help support
the development of new training
app offerings as employers and
unemployed workers in the state
emerge from COVID packed from
the COVID pandemic to a new
economy with new opportunities
and workforce training needs.
As you know the Mr chair
This there's a lot of a.
Folks out there who
Our under under employed and
they haven't had the opportunity
for more training for one reason
or another.
So they they really so wonderful
opportunity for people in that
situation
however.
They they are able to afford the
tuition which can run from
anywhere from twenty five
hundred dollars a thirteen
thousand I see out CDL training.
His forty six hundred.
Yet
As I've already pointed out of
there are a lot of folks can't
afford this and there's no
return on the alternative in the
state that is less expensive.
As fast to complete is this
program.
This program Mr
Here is probably the best
program you're going to hear
today.
And and maybe the best program
we got here all week and even
Senator Brandt because left.
Would I think we able to support
this program.
I thank you for the reaction.
I'm sorry is not here.
You know after everyone your
graduating the average deep dive
coding graduate income increases
by forty seven percent so
typically allow others to
students are making thirty
thousand dollars if they
complete this program thank you
making fifty thousand dollars
not unusual
Local companies such as are just
twenty one smart phone
technologies boom time hello
wharf that rural sourcing have
implied.
Senator graduates as well as a.
Senator yeah this is a straight
appropriation bill it's going on
to finance that okay really need
to make your big pitch I think
thanks.
Thanks so save my breath.
Okay well one more fact they
want to give you Mr chair is
that this funding will
potentially serve a thousand
additional students over a four
year period and with me Mister
chair I have two expert
witnesses am I right I have
missed this is a straight
appropriation bill that goes on
the Senate finance save your
perfect fit for that my date of
so I guess I'm not getting the
message.
I stand for questions thank you
Mr chair thank you so hands
people in support of this.
The one in opposition.
Anybody feel compelled to have
to come and say anything.
Well number one more factor with
my words this morning.
Hold hold it against them.
Hold it down can you hear me
hello okay good morning chairman
sold members of the committee my
name is Joe and Pruitt I'm here
to express my support of Senate
bill three oh four I'm from a
doctor's on I'm a tribal member
of the Navajo Nation I've lived
in Rio Rancho for thirteen years
with my husband Dominic and our
three children we moved from
Tucson Arizona after I left a
nine year career at IBM to raise
our family we are owners of the
software development company
tech your solutions LLC which
started in twenty fifteen and
twenty eighteen I completed CNM
ingenuity is ten we can deep
dive coding full stack web
development boot camp in
Albuquerque that's a mouthful.
This program allowed me to
quickly re scale and improve our
company and its services it also
expanded my network and the New
Mexico technical community since
the book camp I have develop
websites for local artists
businesses and tribal
organizations including work on
a tribal language preservation
project I also provided my
technical skills to the inter
tribal ceremonial office which
is an agency of the New Mexico
tourism to harp Department for
the Gallup inter tribal
ceremonial this past August
having a short term non credit
boot camp option was critical to
the success of our company and
my own professional development
I believe the requested funding
is necessary for CNN to continue
to develop and offer training
programs to support New Mexicans
are workforce and our economy
thank you for your time thank
you I guess everybody felt
compelled they had to say
something of the I suspect this
is getting passed on to finance
we've got some other bills but
if you want to talk please do
will be brief my name is Tony
Corrado I'm the director got a
hold of early go for my name's
Tony Corrado on the director for
a small Albuquerque company we
employed currently for graduates
from C. N. M. boot camps they're
making in the mid five figures
and above and frankly our
company would really be
struggling in this kind of
talent was not being developed
in New Mexico so we strongly
support continuing this.
Thank you.
The whole.
The.
Hello Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for letting me
speak today my name is Daniel
Martin and I am I also a
graduate of the deep dive coding
boot camp actually took to and
both of them aided me in
creating professional
development skills that allowed
me to double my salary and I am
currently a contractor is Sandia
national labs and recently
closed on my first house these
professional development skills
are needed now we have it people
and open positions at Sandia and
other technical companies here
in New Mexico who need people
with the skills now to work in
tech and continue to live and
grow in New Mexico and as part
of this bill a look forward to
it passing.
Thank you.
Please.
My name is John strong work with
companies like are just twenty
one Debbie and electric plate
House companies are taking
advantage of these programs and
I just want to comment how
necessary they really really are
when we talk about the need to
build out the infrastructure for
things like the broadband we do
not have the labor force here to
do it so they're gonna have to
be brought in outside and I
wanted to just make sure the
committee understands too that
when you take these young people
and bare subsistence jobs and
double and triple their income
in addition to the economic
benefits that we also clearly
see from that there are a number
of social issues that come into
play too because you remove a
lot of the stresses from their
lives that
because the increased alcohol
and drug abuse domestic violence
and things like that so these
are these educational programs
are critical and frankly funding
is only available through a
means like this because none of
these programs qualify for
student loan type programs.
Thank you.
Questions.
Thank you Mr chair at you know
it sounds like a great program
and I don't disagree with that
and certainly CNN has been the
recipient of quite a few bills
coming through here directed
money just to see in in and I'm
wondering because this kind of
program would be very helpful
throughout the state I know in
my County
we have a of the.
Our unemployment rate is higher
than Bernalillo county we have a
great need for this as well and
wondered few considering
amendment to and maybe take this
money distributed across the
state to all two year colleges
that that have an opportunity to
utilize some of these funds I
know we struggle with my junior
college they get no funding for
for programs like this and just
wonder if you would be
interested in in maybe
broadening and and letting other
communities take advantage of
this before moving on to
finance.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman thank
you for that answers are
reviewed directing that to me or
to the C. and and people well I
and your caring the bill Mr
chairman.
So the.
That's.
Just simply would be able to.
Mr Chairman Senator so I
appreciate that question over
the years that we've been
running these programs last
eight years we have developed
them to be license and shared we
have in fact had Dona ana
community college as one of our
partner schools in delivering
this and should there be an
amendment we can attach to this
in order to provide that funding
across the state that would be
acceptable so Mister chair have
would that be distributed if it
were amended what what date what
with the individual colleges
need to do to be able to access
some of those funds would have
to apply to see you I with the
higher education department
redistribute that money in some
manner.
The previous model that we use
with this was that those schools
that chose to implement these
types of boot camps on the
technical side for deep dive in
particular
the extended the request and
granted that licensed to them
they have to identify a
principal teacher with whom we
train and then as they put
individuals through it as the
vast majority of this funding is
to individuals to go through the
programs
we would we would distribute
this funding as it comes through
to those individuals in those
other boot camps were founded at
the other community colleges Mr
chair what would be the cost for
those individual colleges to
obtain the license to
what administrative fee with
seen them charge those
institutions to provide that
same service in their community.
I'm.
The license fee for one of these
programs is fifty thousand the
fee for the full time instructor
is really contingent on how the
school which is to do that
whether choose to do it through
full time faculty or through
in our case we do have to our
research park entity that
provides training and they have
to identify the salary range
that they want for those
individuals that is range from
sixty to ninety thousand
depending on the type of skill
that they're trying to transfer
so thank you Mr chair and I
think my intent was not
particularly for these
individual the two year colleges
to go through seen them that
rather take this particular
funding put it in the higher it
department let them re
distributed according to the
applications from each
individual school rather than
tie everything back to CNN and
that would be my request I would
be interested in and just
promoting one particular area in
the state to be the person are
the into institution that would
More less have a handle on
everything everyone else wanted
to do so I don't think we're on
the same page on that so
basically I appreciate what
you're trying to do that this is
another example of funding that
was not requested by the NM in
their budget proposal I don't
believe they get coming through
this route to get to finance and
then having that discussion
there you know I have no problem
setting it off within a
recommendation but we we are
getting more and more of these
bills there kind of by passing
the appropriation process and
getting up to finance so
whatever the committee wants to
date thank you for the thank you
Mr chair and thank you Senator
Kernan thank you senator
Clemente for bringing the bill
for because when you're talking
about distribution into higher
ed welcome it's not like in
workforce solutions and I I'm
that sums to throw that out
because I don't know
it's for that but thank you Mr.
Chairman members members of the
committee I appreciate both of
these this was requested through
the C. N. M. budget in
particular to the R. P. SP
process hi Education Department
That was a treat but felt like
they needed more data collection
associated with skills in
credentialing based programs for
supporting through the
governor's budget.
I'm reason this doesn't fit
necessarily with an apartment
workforce solutions is that
tends to be a recovery program
so if you're a dislocated worker
or an employee worker most of
that funding goes to folks who
have been moved out of their
current employment
and are seeking re skilling not
in its entirety so this focused
programming really sits outside
of both what we seen developed
through the opportunity
scholarship or what we currently
fund and provide through
the department of workforce
solutions is a supplement and a
in a gap where there are
individuals that don't have that
capacity of their own funding to
go through this kind of dance
industry needed training
but really can benefit from it
and have a tremendous outcome
and change both in their
communities economics in their
individual economics.
Mr chair thank you for that
response but when the young lady
from when the rock was talking
about having to come over here
do that
take the training but it's
really the employees to have to
go through the training it
sounds like in that manner.
Which seems like that when you
time out skill skills are
uplifting either to go back to
school or go.
Through this what so seems like
both places would be probably
advantageous especially talk
about areas that may not have a
facility and Community College
but and strong that out there
but thank you Mr chair thank
you.
The question Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator
So.
Are there not.
The students get some kind of
certificate once I go through
this program certifying that
there.
And it is that an industry
standard certificate or what are
they getting.
So the rest of these programs
cover a number of different
types of immersive training
programs.
in some cases there extremely
robust industry certified
credentials such as immersive
training for your CDL program if
you look at your C. L. a
licensed driver tractor trailer
you have to successfully pass a
driver's license in other cases
we work with
well based organizations such as
Mexico we're alignment
cooperative who's built a
laboratory at ingenuity at C. N.
M. at the Rio Rancho campus is
an immersive program over
multiple weeks with the finish
with both their CDL license and
the ability to work in the real
collapses lineman over the
course of about
I think that one is sixteen
weeks sixteen weeks long in the
case of the technology based
programs over ten weeks they get
a certificate of completion but
in order to fund the certificate
of completions from other
funding sources that are
available such as we US
Department workforce solutions
or the VA we work with the
industry an industry recognized
organizations such as Mexico
tech council and with their
approval the state is authorizes
funds either flow through we or
flow through the VA
so there so there is that range
of either industry recognized
yes at the end
and or the support of local
organizations and industry to
ensure that these are the
programs developed specifically
for their industry that they're
trying to grow.
Thank you and and so help me
understand why it's not Mister
chairman Senator why doesn't.
Qualify for the opportunity
scholarship.
The chairman members of the
committee I am admittedly not an
expert on the Opry scholarship
I however have look at it
closely with with the C. N. M.
organization the operation is to
the scholarship is for credit
programs so there are they're
meant for academic based
programs and to carry through
for economic base programs
starting its tickets to the four
year degree these fall outside
of that funding stream I will
make one note is in addition to
that many of these programs
however to qualify students for
credit for prior learning so
that when they finish a ten week
program and you dive in our full
staff program they're eligible
for twenty four credits at the
college they can walk over a
transcript and they would need a
couple of additional classes
enrolled at the college to get
there for certificate thank you
and and for the Mr Chairman
center at I just have another
question on.
Understanding the budget request
you said it was requested but it
was not included in the budget
so was that not included in the
budget that CNM report submitted
to finance.
This little clarification on
that please.
As C. N. M. developed its full
budget proposal and we look at
the funding opportunities the
funding opportunity that was put
within the budget
to the governor and AGD was in
the R. P. S. P. process to fully
fund positions
from a continue training
standpoint this is an additional
funding methodology through
appropriation that we requested.
The.
That you requested that yes that
we request that we requested.
So Mister chairman Senator but
not the not the.
Not seeing that.
Chairman and members the
committee on and I'm sorry if
I'm I'm sorry if I'm Vince I'm
picking this one up it was
presented through C. N. M.
approved by the C. N. M.
governing board as a request for
an appropriation in addition to
the request as part of our
budget the IPSP process for
specific positions an additional
program development thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you other
questions.
And.
If not is there a motion Mr
chair moving over.
The motion for a no REC.
Their second second.
Second is I center my us this
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey we have Senator
Kernan yes center my Estes yes
for the Nobel yes Senator Pinto
yes Senator pope yes I like this
one ago Senator souls yes.
So move forward to finance with
the no Representative for people
or maybe not be aware of no
Representative what that means
is we're not saying yes we're
not saying no and we've talked a
couple of members on both sides
that where we get these
appropriations that I think as
you've heard from some of the
conversations ought to be going
through the more normal process
instead of an outside
appropriation process just let
finance sorted out.
That that the of our committee
really doesn't have any control
over it we don't have that much
control over.
Thank you Mr thank you everybody
this committee shut down in
about three minutes.
Of explaining so I'm sorry pope
Sir Senator Mr chair and members
out there I just wanted to
reiterate just the points that
the chairman made I support this
program but we're getting these
appropriation bills at right now
that you know there's no
appropriation for and I have a
bill coming up in the same
situation so will be consistent
just want to let folks know the
reason I did that.
And for those I know the number
of people here probably for
health bill forty three there is
no way because I know their
number of people are going to
want to talk on this both online
and others that we're going to
be a get this done today so we
will move that and we are behind
on schedule so this committee
will start meeting at eight
thirty on Wednesday.
souls I believe that your bill
Senate bill three twenty five
should be fairly quick.
if you want to put that on I
would if you all are doing that
I don't want to over eight jump
mais mais is that's my only yes
votes today so.
I'm happy to do so.
What.
Is that gonna be one of the day
are Senator Browne or one.
Or what.
I wanted to ask about.
I will.
All right Senator souls your
before for Senate bill three
twenty five.
Thank you this is just an
extension of the teacher loan
repayment but we have now added
school counselors and in that
discussion then with secretary
Rodriguez we want to make sure
we had school social workers on
that and with that will stand
for questions.
Thank you senator anyone it
outside here in the committee
can I get a show of hands for
people in support.
Do we have any opposition.
Being that there's no opposition
I'm not gonna allow public
comment I think we know where
folks are at
so I will go to the committee
members Senator branch.
Mr Chairman it's not really a
question and I did bring it up
with the governor staff just
just want to remind people that
there's a big difference when it
comes to counselors between when
we talk about school council
retirement academic counselor
they are not licensed to do
mental health counseling I just
think maybe in the future maybe
even on this bill we might want
to men that to make sure it's
reflective of that it's an
academic counselor and not a
a mental health counselor
because if they'd academic
counselor does mental health
counseling that is a violation
of the law on they could be
charged and so we need to be
very careful about that and so I
would just like to bring that up
and and I don't want to address
here but I think that something
needs to be addressed thank you
in some more license to do both
but in general school counselors
are more academic guidance
counselors instead of maybe we
want to put both in there as far
as school academic and mental
health counselors being allowed
to get this funding so thank
you.
Senator Hickey.
The
second we have a new path in a
second.
The questions comments I think
we're good to go.
Many secretary if you could take
the roll Senator friends yes
right yes Senator Kernan.
That.
Yes
yes all yes.
Thank you you have a do pass
Senator.
Can address our.
And I will let the Chairman come
up here and take back over and
closed the meeting to.
In general we are we have kind
of slow down or gotten behind on
it they'll be a few more bills
are going to be getting dropped
the more house bill's gonna be
coming over so the less we catch
up substantially will we're
gonna move to eight thirty.
From now on the less we start
getting ahead of the game again.
Use the mile office SO please DO
and members the sooner people
get here the sooner we start the
better we do a get through
things so thank you with that we
will adjourn until Wednesday at
eight thirty.
