and the first one and it's very
nice having Senator Stewart a
long time member of this
committee presenting the first
bill Senate bill three family
income index distribution
flexibility and I believe this
is a L. E. S. C. in Dorset bill
and so Senator if you would
please kick us off.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm happy to be
here bright and early this
morning where pink when state.
So you may recall that two years
ago we began a pilot for the
family income index this is the
sign after many years of people
coming to the L. E. S. C. saying
you know we would like to see
money really follow the students
so this is designed to send a
small amount of money to the
schools in each of our districts
that are the most of high
poverty.
So it's it's determined by the
Texan rep Department they take a
list of all students in New
Mexico and they pull income tax
data for all those families
they're classified into five
categories extremely low income
very low income low income
moderate income and above
average income.
So this bill is designed to put
fifteen million a year in two.
Those schools that are in that
very lowest extremely low income
or the second very low income
category.
it was going to be a two year
pilot then the pandemic kit and
kind of up in to
this effort in the schools so
this bill proposes to do another
year another year for the pilot
fifteen million dollars
and at the end of this next year
then we will have a better
evaluation from the PED PED has
sent out a survey of they had
from the hundred eight public
schools they got their survey
return from fifty one of them
and they basically said was very
positive pay San better scores
in math or reading or they were
able to deal more with social
emotional issues the climate of
the school so so far the
anecdotal evidence is that this
is well received.
So we also in the beginning till
the schools that they had to
either spend a third on evidence
based reading a third on
evidence based math and the
third on all those other
categories social emotional
curriculum development
whole school interventions
services to engage and support
both students and families so
this bill does that one third
one third one third is probably
my fault that got in there and
it just hamstrings the districts
know if you get two hundred
thousand dollars and you want to
buy that our math program and
that its base map program it
costs two hundred thousand
dollars that but you can only
use a third of your money up
that just doesn't work so this
takes out that one third one
third gives each of those
schools more flexibility
continues with the determination
of these area I part of the
school's and uses another
fifteen million for the year and
that is the bill I'm happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you.
Senate pro pro tempore and for
starting things off of it we're
gonna go out to the audience
first just burst a show of hands
people here in favor of this
particular legislation.
Anyone here in opposition.
If not we'll start over on this
side I do times please try to
keep your comments short concise
into two minutes I don't like
when I have to drop anyone off
and so if people would like you
Sir if you'd like to start us
off please.
For the two of them would be a
false.
Okay thank you.
Other questions comments.
Support yes Sir.
We stand in support of.
Thank you Matt.
This is the chairman members of
the committee more information
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters Mexico and
American Association of
university women who are very
very pleased.
Sanchez mentioned in the this is
very important if we're going to
have a.
Money to the most the thank you.
Thank you yes merry.
Very far Sanchez president any
New Mexico we stand.
Thank you anyone else on this I
would like to speak.
Over on the side stamps.
This is been a good.
In addition to our land.
This is your first.
Provision what is.
Well intentioned that we agree
with what I came in but it's
time to make that change so.
Thank you Stan.
Don't.
Director New Mexico school.
The school board.
And we will.
Thank you Joe percent.
The chairman of the board or
senior medical superintendent
Las.
For this this has made a
positive impact on our students
with the New Mexico district.
Support of it and I one of the
things that you want to say is
that the the dollars that are
that are put forth this bill are
actually spent a with the
intention.
There are discount ability bill.
Thank you others on the side
John.
We support first time I went
through we're happy to support
again today it's a really good
example of the ability.
Thank you others on the side
that would like to comment.
If not the first Senator any
reaction any of the comments if
not we'll go to questions from
the committee.
I don't think so Mister chairman
okay the questions from the
committee.
Representative Mr who passed a
motion for a do pass also.
Second by Center renewable
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chairman and madam pretend just
clarification the one third the
one third that's fine to be gone
but they still have to spend
that money within certain
parameters thank you that's
that's exactly right if they
don't have to do one third one
third one third all of those
parameters are still there.
Center my is this thank you Mr
chairman.
Photo those mention of all the
one year extension of.
This is.
Mr chairman chairman I assist so
we started this two years ago we
wanted to be a two year pilot
then the pandemic and you know
the schools kind of went haywire
and it you know it sort of
didn't work and we didn't have
the data so we have anecdotal
data that people like it it's
making a difference they want to
continue it so this just
extensive another year another
fifteen million so that we and
on does those requirements so
that we can get a good idea of
what kind of a benefit this does
for these extremely high poverty
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you any other questions
from the committee.
Now we have a motion and a
second Marianna to call the roll
please Senator Brandt yes
Senator Hickey.
A pass.
Senator Kernan yes center my
assistance yes Senator Neville
yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes and back to
Senator Hickey yes.
And senator so yes we have a two
pack there you have it to pass
and thank you very much be back
soon that's what I know you've
got some others we look forward
to it.
Next up we have the Senate Bill
for help the university's
university healthy universal
school meals etcetera parodia
and center Mikko.
When I.
Center for the I know was over
in finance I think he was.
It was going to pop back but
he's on his way okay if he's on
his way we stay in place for a
minute or so while he gets back.
By the time we get the other one
up here to get started he'd be
here in the house of.
separate you weren't here for
the organizational would you
like to do a brief introduction
yourself.
Although some might not.
good morning I'm Sir Craig
Brandt I think everyone knows me
Sir for years in the range of
school board of served on this
committee for eleven years
after.
Thank.
The the we're on Senate bill for
healthy universal school meals.
Good morning committee.
Where I spent nine years of my
life.
Having a really good thanks.
Finance this morning and college
eyes for walking a little bit
late we have Senate bill four
before you this morning I do
have some experts that are gonna
join me we do have an amendment
right out of the gate how would
you like to proceed Mr chairman
I can introduce the building go
to the the amendment
Then we'll get.
Okay well thank you very much Mr
chairman we do have Kendall
Chavis from the governor's
office the food and nutrition
director for the governor's
office we also have I want to
make sure that I get this
correct because I'd be very
thankful that they're here this
morning Marie Johnson who is the
New Mexico school nutrition
association president and she's
also the Farmington municipal
schools nutrition coordinator
thank you for being here.
Mr Johnson and Sonia more of
Hobbs municipal schools and
she's the food services director
there as well so these three
will service experts for me this
morning
before I jump into explaining
what we're here for this morning
I just want to remind the
committee and thank you many of
you who were here in the
legislature the time when we
passed and signed into law the
hunger free student of the
rights in two thousand seventeen
that was sort of a it's a big
lift for all of us we got it
done in one year but but it was
a really positive wonderful
thing that happened for New
Mexico that you're and I
appreciate all the support as we
went through that process that
you're.
Fast forward to this legislation
we felt like gosh you know we
still have a lot of missing
pieces all over the state with
regard to to who's getting lunch
who isn't and and why not just
take this completely out of of
of the worry of the school
district on terms of in terms of
funding also take the the worry
and concern of the student out
of the way the parents etcetera
and so we're coming forward with
the universal free breakfast
lunch etcetera the legislation
healthy universal schools meals
school meals act but essentially
what it does is it provides a
free breakfast and free lunch
that you can take it take part
in if you'd like if you're in
pain that school
we we do
Ensure that the school is
already operating the national
school breakfast and lunch
programs that exist we do
include tribally controlled
schools private schools that
they and they can they can opt
in and we're offering a free
high quality meals as I
mentioned so just because we're
insuring that you're that you're
gonna get a lunch every day
whether you can pay for it or
not this is just simply a free
option now and just because we
would that lunch is there
doesn't mean it's a healthy
lunch and so that's essentially
what we're going with this piece
of legislation we do have a
thirty million dollar ask which
were already working on on the
other side of the hallway here
on this floor the inside of the
building the thirty million
dollars essentially helps to
increase the value or the cost
per meal to ensure that there is
a healthy component to that new
as well up to just take a look
at my notes here up to twenty
five percent of the of the
additional monies that you're
going to receive that that the
districts are going to receive
it can be used for value added
quality of foods that are New
Mexico grown so farmers and
ranchers will suddenly begins
and knocks on their doors to to
bring their products and
services into into the school
districts it also will allow and
require a twenty minute that sit
down seated lunch period which
is going to dramatically reduce
waste
be in in the districts and so I
think that you know essentially
that that's where things are
right now we we do move again
the meals become incredibly high
quality so that'll make it much
healthier that way and I'd like
my witnesses to say just a few
things before we get started
I'll start with a candle from
the governor's office Mr chair
members of the committee thanks
for the opportunity to briefly
talk about healthy universal
school meals central for here
today I want to flag this slide
right here I'm sorry there's no
page numbers of the has the
wheel on it.
and so so we are very proud to
organise Center Padilla and
partners on this really exciting
piece of legislation want to
remind this body that this is
building off of a legacy of work
that this this body and others
have invested in school meals
over time since twenty fourteen
every three years we have
invested financial and statutory
support for school meals that
things like breakfast after the
bell there is price copay and
the hunger free stability rights
just put up a DSL and so this
healthy universal school meals
is really as a senator said
closing the gap and so we just
want to make sure this body
understands that when we say
help the universal school meals
that's going to have to be
further defined of flushed out
through the through the rule
making process with padded with
our community partners well when
we say healthy school meals I
just want to draw your attention
to this we all we know we know
what we're talking about we're
talking about scratch semi
scratch cooked meals bills that
aren't microwave in plastic wrap
and put on a tray we're talking
about foods that look and
reflect the place they're being
served that are locally sourced
New Mexico farmers and ranchers
and that smell and taste good
and really something that the
kids want to sit down and eat we
in the governor's office and
with our with our sponsor here
do not want to invest thirty
million dollars and school meals
for them to go in the trash
which is also why we feel pretty
strongly about that required sea
time for students K. through
five.
Before I pass it to my our other
expert witnesses I'm gonna bring
you to the slide title kids
kitchens.
So we spoke with six five other
states have already passed
similar bills we are proud to
say that ours is the most
comprehensive out of every other
state that we've spoke with
including California Colorado
and others
we fill again strongly that we
are committed to a making sure
that everything has access to
meals and again that quality
pieces really be prioritized and
we have a crystal clear focus on
we want to make sure that these
investments are targeted in that
we're not mandating things
across the board that we're
really using incentives to get
schools and districts up to the
quality of meals that are really
looking for and that we're
investing in the ecosystem at
large so again looking at the
time looking at supporting local
farmers looking at workforce
development investing in our
schools and our districts
looking at capital improvements
in kitchens as well as the
actual coverage of the cost of
meals that parents and families
and school districts are
currently observing.
And so I won't get too into the
weeds on the mechanics but just
so you know there is a break
down on the next two slides that
spells out the mechanics of how
the financial in that revenues
will work for schools and
districts and with that I will
pass it to my dear calling re
Johnson and she's going to be
speaking on the slide titled New
Mexico students deserve healthy
moms actually Mr to before we
perceive them just at one thing
I want to recognize senator Leo
how to me was also one of my co
sponsoring this piece
legislation is passed.
Thank you good morning Mr chair.
Committee members before I get
started in my conversation I
wanted to share a few.
Statistics with you.
One in every five children
experience food insecurity here
in our great state of New
Mexico.
One in every third grader and
one in every fifth.
high school student our
experience of the city.
And only sixteen point three
percent of high school students
eat five servings are more of
fruits and vegetables a day and
I know these are all statistics
you've seen it you've heard but
unfortunately that is the status
quo in New Mexico where one in
every five children experience
food insecurity this reality
definitely does not support
healthy well nourished students
that are ready to learn.
So looking at the stats I come
from Farmington I see firsthand
everyday student hunger health
issues that prevail because of
poor diet choices are poor
access to healthy foods so I am
imploring you to really consider
making this investment in our
children who are feature every
New Mexico child deserves access
to healthy breakfast lunch and
more while they're at school yes
I would provide books and other
items they need to learn food
has to become part of that
equation.
We take this reality very
seriously in Farmington our
students many are low income and
are in desperate need of high
quality foods.
In this bill just before we will
definitely promote and encourage
scratch cooking at a higher
level in our districts.
And one thing that I'm very
proud of is the purchasing local
The New Mexico grown component
of this this bill which will.
Require incentivize districts to
really go in deep to adding New
Mexico grown products and now
guess not fruits and vegetables
but value added items I'm very
proud to say in my district we
incorporate a lot of native
American foods during the native
American heritage month we
shared with all of our students
blue corn mush last year we even
had months to what's the
students really really enjoyed
many had never been exposed to
so these are the kind of things
that this bill is going to
amplify even more in our
districts.
The other part that this bill is
going to really enhances
teaching our kids about exactly
where foods come it.
you be surprised how many kids
are not aware that French fries
are they come from details so
being able to do through and
reinforce these type of learning
experiences are not only going
to teach them but hopefully a
encouraging them throughout
their lives to make healthier
choices the last thing I want to
talk about is in our district
because we are for thinking we
even have a composting component
to our nutrition program we have
procured a contract with the
local
company caught a MF that picks
up all of our food waste so it
doesn't go into the landfill and
they recover they compost it and
that is a better way to handle
food waste but if we are able to
allow for that seat time more
kids will eat more on their
trays and hopefully we'll have
less food waste.
Thank you miss more service at
Fenton miss more safety words
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today are allowing me to
speak
I'm gonna miss on you more from
hops on the food service
director hop schools I want to
share a couple of statistics
with you.
More than sixty nine thousand
children in the state of New
Mexico pay full price for meals
at school.
On average.
Thousand fifty one dollars is
spent annually on school lunch
alone.
Districts are reporting one
point two million dollars in
unpaid meal debt.
This is the status quo this is
what families and schools and
districts are experiencing and
dealing with at the moment the
reality.
Does not support high quality
freshly prepared meals.
In many programs.
From a district perspective of
here's a bit of background
information.
School programs operate with
federal funds.
Receiving little to no funding
from the local school from their
district.
This is how the system was
designed to operate by the USDA.
The federal funds are not
keeping up.
With the cost of preparing high
quality meals for kids the cost
of food and labor.
For example.
When state minimum what wages
increase the USDA is not.
Keeping up with those costs so
in turn the nutrition
department.
Have you know has less money to
work with for that meal.
Just as a quick example.
Breakfast mmhm our average
reimbursement which is the money
we get back from USDA right now
for this school year I get a
dollar ninety four for every
breakfast that I serve that's
the average it cost me two
dollars and seventy five cents.
Lunch.
I get back three twenty seven
average right now and it's
costing me for twenty five so
you can understand the deficit
that the program is dealing
with.
We do make up the differences in
our programs I you know doing
all part sales at school other
funding opportunities to
supplement our programs by
catering different forms of
revenue in order to make up that
difference thank you our program
whole.
The mark of a successful school
nutrition program is that they
operate solely within their
federal budget and money did in
revenue that they make without
the support needing anything
from the school districts we
don't take out of the classroom.
With the waiting federal waivers
that we're experiencing at the
the waivers from COVID are going
away.
Our hunger problems are
magnified.
While many of our school
districts operate C. P. the most
the majority of them are
operating close support in the
red.
To assure that all students eat
free Hobbs with C. E. P. this
past year so that we could
continue to offer free meals to
every student regardless of
their ability to pay.
That was a decision that we made
locally because of the
experience that we saw when
participation went up from the
federal waivers and allowed
every kid to eat for free our
participation went from about
fifty percent of students eating
before these waivers when
everybody were it was allowed to
eat without paying we went to
seventy five percent so that
tells you.
When the meals are free got more
kids that want to eat.
Please invest in this program it
in this in this bill we need it
thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
so we
are ready to take some questions
what if you'd like to first act
on this ammendment we'd like to
do that we brought this to use
to your committee secretary
copy purchased through this.
The.
A second second second second by
Senator pope so discussion
committee on the amendment I'm
not sure of for the public the
amendment on page four line six
after schools inserts other than
virtual public schools that
virtual schools to have a free
school meal probably ludicrous
or.
The classifying them out I think
it makes good sense to those
people that Mr chairman we know
that we have virtual schools and
yes yeah trying to get a kitchen
each virtual that's just didn't
go work.
Any questions or discussion
about the amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
None bill as amended thank you
and so we have enough of the
couple comments regarding the
budget and the few items
missteps Mr chair members of the
committee I'll keep this brief
on a directed to the slide that
says a budget request to match
work the field is important for
the conversation for this
committee to understand so when
we talk about Senate bill for
their other wraparound budget
supports in the food initiative
budget which is the executive
recommendation and DFA is budget
for the broader food initiative
happy to provide that detail at
a later time if that's of
interest in that budget you'll
see all of these lines it's
listed under kids kitchen
funding plans I briefly
mentioned earlier and in
addition to these bullets
there's also F. T. and
contractual support for PED to
administer this program we
definitely understand that bit
of extra work for the agency in
comparison to the LFC funding
plan which currently has
nonrecurring seven point five
million funding for this program
there was comments made in
Senate finance the other day
about potentially federal grants
funding this program there is no
such thing there's no funding
source there are no grants to
confront this type of the
program and in conversation with
the schools and districts they
reminded us consistently that
this needs to be recurring
perennial funding to expect the
districts to do higher quality
scratch cooked meals and so with
that I just want to help pass it
on to to Senator took close up
images the only other thing I'd
say about the thirty Millicent
schools are not going to have
our districts are not going to
have all the equipment
immediately available that they
will be able to tap into this
thirty million dollar fund to
ensure that their kitchens are
properly equipped thank you.
Thank you go out to the audience
first a quick show of hands the
people in support of this
legislation.
Thank you anyone in opposition.
So again that please keep your
comments shorten concise but
we'll start over on the left
side the but you would like to
comment about this particular
bill yes Sir.
Senate bill four.
Yes yes.
Servers speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you yes Sir in the back in
outcome for them Mr chairman
members of the committee
received a.
Thank you yes ma'am.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is colonel Martinez and I'm here
representing the Human Services
department of the state of New
Mexico and we stand in strong
support of this bill as you know
hunger doesn't care whether
you're young or old as we know
one in five children the state
New Mexico suffer from hunger
impacting their ability to
concentrate and learn and really
worry about of what we want from
the gonna play with that recess
instead of their hunger pains
and our children in the
community should have to worry
about that and this bill is well
thought out and and the intent
is in the right place we know we
need to create a safety net for
children no one program alone is
going to care child hunger in
New Mexico but this bill is
making tremendous strides in the
right direction leveraged with
other programs available to
these children and families to
be able to support your with New
Mexico thank you for bringing
this bill to table.
Thank you very.
Good morning Mr.
As president of NEA New Mexico
we stand in strong support of
this bill as well feeding
children in the state of New
Mexico is always anyway we can
do it it's it's it's a good idea
to do it twenty year veteran in
the classroom kids are hungry
let's.
Yes ma'am.
Chair
Mister chair by members of the
committee thank you for
verification and I'm speaking on
behalf of two legal women voters
and the American Association of
university women and but I also
like to add a perspective we
strongly support this bill I'd
like to add perspective of
having been a educator mostly at
the higher a level for thirty
eight years and I was a liaison
provided by president Santa Fe
community college in liaison
with the public schools of Santa
Fe and I would have to go over
to the you know the high schools
and a lot for dual credit
programs and so on and the did
to that what happened and high
schools after lunch you know
people go out for lunch and they
never get so it really affects
our whole drop out rate plus and
you know as a liaison with the
rest of the public schools I
noticed just how stigmatized the
lunch to issue can be as kids
who have you know fancy lunches
compared to those who have you
know almost nothing to eat and
then those who would have
thought the default even you
know often times they won't even
sit with anybody and because
they don't want to be
embarrassed itself I think it's
really a dropout prevention and
a you know it's like an anti
bullying it's really a bonding
for you it's part of the mental
health investment in our state
to have kids of different
socioeconomic.
The other on the basis and get
to know each other fifteen
seconds please in school.
Thank you.
That.
Mr chair members of the.
New Mexico we support this bill
think centre PDF.
State there are three things I
want to highlight.
In the bill first you'll hear
you've heard from someone you'll
hear from more about what this
the impact.
Schools will have a two.
One that's unique to us and
another just.
You talk to a charter school
leader they're playing the role
of a superintendent the
principal the transportation
direct.
Director among other roles this
is actually going to streamline
the administrative burden for
our charter school leaders to do
so many jobs at once running
these programs can be difficult.
Lastly I'll just note that we we
were in lockdown during the
pandemic as I know it's still
going but we're out of the
lockdown phase we were giving
stimulus to every kid were
coming out of a phase where we
need to ask ourselves what we
learned from the pandemic I
think this is a learning a
learning that we're actively
trying to.
Thank you we thank you thank you
Matt yes ma'am.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Kate noble
with growing up New Mexico we
are in the early childhood
organise.
Public schools board of
education I want to say we think
this author for bringing this
forward really.
Good points have been made.
Thank you Kate anyone else on
the side.
Now let's move over to the side
stand.
Good leaders.
Mr chairman we support this bill
provided right direction does
this is I have a little thing to
do.
All talk about justice for just
a minute because we believe the
bill may have some.
Right we have a lot want free
doesn't generally are you
running for thirty dollars
members.
Also the fact.
Those are beautiful this will
increase staffing we have
stepped down many of our
cafeterias and we're
transporting areas that
experience we don't know what
that is belief in Farsi thirty
million dollars and this this is
a good starter number and go
from there Mr chairman of
sections to.
We would advise the Sanchez I
have talked with the with the
for the governor's office
Representative last night we
believe the second side of the
street.
Are not necessary battle I have
is something that we will.
The ship into the wind to the
right job for students and their
several parts in that section I
will go into them I do that and
have local policy the developed
in response to this get to the
how to guide of how we get there
and so no surprises to the
governor's office for we
strongly support the bill this
is the right to go on last four
numbers of callers from Hobbs
here this clearly.
The federal USDA reimbursed
substantially pondered funds the
cost to the.
Fifteen seconds within this
state needs to take
responsibility for this build up
to step up and fund the rest of
that cost for this child over to
Mexico.
Publication process all of the
rules.
Please please that there is a
thirty million dollars
appropriation so that.
Or the superintendents of.
Fission see.
Making some of these decisions
at the local level for their
best mate in order to develop
program.
Thank.
Thank you Joe.
Yes Representative yes.
The executive director.
Four years director.
I think that's it twenty years
then the cost of.
Absolutely.
That is yes does.
Right.
Access
And what would be the.
Article.
The.
Thank you Arsenio.
Members of the committee are
Santo superintendent Las on this
strong institutional support of
this bill.
I try to back up some of the
statistics here today are this
this is true in many the.
Participation is dramatically
maybe some of the same decisions
to.
About fifty percent
participation over ninety
percent right there is a huge US
district but within that though
we've also found we've become
more efficient because we know
what to prepare for setting that
there's less.
Last thing I want to say is that
it this allows us to not run in
the red if they are running in
the red for years when it comes
to.
One become more efficient but
also get back into an area what
we're not important dollars out
of.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
My name is Rick.
Partner with food service in the
state of New Mexico I'd like to
thank senator fifty and senator
part meal for presenting this
bill in total favor of this bill
there are a couple of things
that we need to understand is
that not only are we spending
money but we as a state are
making money with this type of
the bills are it does usually
our farmers and our ranchers
will make money on it this type
of bills for putting money back
into the state the one thing
that I would like to see which
is to get this bill is to have
our superintendents and our
principals also supporting the
entirely for that K. through
five twenty minute meal time
seed time so that those children
can eat the entire meal before
they go into the classroom or
before they go into recess after
they the trial has recessed her
excuse me before they eat if a
child has recess after their
meal they have a tendency to do
what they can throw the rest
away and run out play it's best
to have recess first I think
it's in the field and then have
the meals so that they're ready
to go again and then the so
late we're total support of the
school districts thank you.
They come back down here I keep
seeing your hand and I moved
back to please.
In fact the.
A hundred eighty percent fifteen
seconds please work on.
Not only maybe and thank you.
Thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Mexico.
Thousand low.
For the champions of communities
and provide the supports needed
for low income.
Thank.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Expanding absolute full support
of this we've been.
The Santo ni O. as.
This as well a few additional.
Over a hundred eighty.
Cross the state that sixty seven
school.
we see.
This is an investment not a
dollar this but probably very
low.
Three investment investment in
the local economy.
Just three things please as
mentioned sent action here in
Santa Fe community resource.
Recycles all school.
Pick up in the future and then I
had a really amazing
conversation like miss Marie
Johnson shared with Kim makes
Roswell school do.
She said hi everyone not only.
Only the fresh fruits and
vegetables from the farmers in
my area and across the state but
also use my federal dollars to
provide local fifteen seconds
please.
So thank you very much and.
Thank you ma'am.
Yes ma'am.
Good morning Mr chair members.
Food banks.
Making these meals free to all
children will help and the
costly and frustrating
administration.
Reduced foster's.
And will reduce non
participation by children whose
families lack of money to pay
even the local.
Thank you.
Two more quickly please thank
you Mr chairman John urged
America.
One of the stories we often in
the early days of the pandemic
and the subsequent closure of
our schools with that as we
utilize our school buses to
distribute those lunches to
students and community other
families.
This bill correctly focuses on
students while they're in school
everybody here the other points
of view on the reduction of food
waste this is has a ripple
effect in our.
Reduce waste but also.
Really support the bill all this
reserve I think there's some
of the less obvious reasons why.
Senator Padilla was always
intended that on this.
Thank you and one more here in
the audience that we have three
on zoom yes ma'am.
Thank.
And we also as heroes.
Support of tribal head start
and.
Thank you we have three on zoom
I believe and so the first one
just what a that so.
Emily okay the Emily.
And we go ahead you have two
minutes maximum.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Emily well
Taos New Mexico voices for
children thank you to Senator
Padilla and senator harming all
for your report the spill New
Mexico voices for children
stands in strong support of just
before I'm not only are one in
five children in New Mexico food
insecure but one in four live in
poverty and families are
continuing to face real economic
challenges as a result of the.
And this combined with the end
of waivers for school meals
rising costs of the grocery
store and the line down and
expanded into make your snap
benefits there's a real concern
markets are going to end up
going to school hungry and just
before would help to address
this
The help universal school meals
would come at a critical time
and provide families with some
relief and a little.
Allowing them to afford enough
food at home and giving them a
better ability to cover other
basic needs like housing
including can't.
Strongly urge you to support SB
four so every school age child
to go to class ready to learn
and without worrying about
being.
Thank you and then miss Thomas.
There we go can you hear me yes
thank you.
I have to talk really fast
because I'm talking from my mom
and she's in heaven she ran the
grant middle school cafeteria
for twenty years and she was
never in the red not even once I
watched during the evening
adding up the traditional value
of the meal she had planned and
she never counted catcher.
She what she tried to get this
done a long time ago when she
was running the cafeteria and
even after she retired she.
What other problems is that it
bothered her that the very poor
got a free meal and the very
rich could buy as many as they
want and and the middle class
really struggled.
She said she wanted to see for
heaven's sake she wanted to see
something we're all the kids
eight and nobody cared if you
were rich or poor or middle they
all got to eat and that's a
retired teacher I can tell you I
kept
fruit vegetables in my drawer
for kids that would come in
after lunch and then I could
tell they were hungry I didn't
know why they didn't eat their
lunch but I've.
A lot of them were putting their
bunch in their backpack to take
home at that.
Or my done.
I don't know what else to say
other than I truly support this
bill and I forgot to say Mr
chairman and members of the
board and staff.
No thank you thank you we have
one more yes please.
The Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is C.
court in a fashion I am the
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways we stand in strong
support of SB four healthy
universal school meals is good
for kids and educational
outcomes it's good for families
and it's good for farmers and
our economies our economy please
support just before thank you.
Thank you.
The comments before we go to
questions with me Senator I
thank you very much to for all
the comments I think generally
overwhelming support I do the
knowledge that you know this is
the first time we presented the
bill and we we're gonna hear
some really good stuff today we
heard some terrific stuff in the
superintendents the school
boards and another that's lost
on me I I do want to just
address one one point that I
think is very important here so
the reimbursement rates with the
the the new the funding that
we're requesting here and how
we've designed this program
breakfast go from a dollar fifty
per meal to two dollars and
seventeen cents was which is a
thirty almost a thirty one
percent increase in terms of
reimbursement rate for all
practice within that within the
that the school district there
and then lunches go from two
fifty to three sixteen which is
almost a twenty one percent
increase when you take a look at
it that way a specific example
that I think is important for
the community heroes Moriarty
schools as an example we'll see
a three hundred thirty one
thousand dollar a year increase
in their funding level for this
particular that piece here and
so that is I think ample for
some of the the new equipment
that they're gonna need over the
years also the staffing that
they're going to need as as we
heard some of the FTEs I know
you and I spoke about Mr
chairman for the hearing so I
think you were ready to take
some questions from the
committee could live thank you
questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you majority whip for bringing
this bill forward
and you know I'm going to
support this I know there's been
a few comments on the
legislation how we do this but I
just think it's so important
that we have this you know I
think about right now in our
country we talk about in obesity
epidemic Dr Channell nutrition
as well and it's important that
our kids are you know getting
these healthy males I look at it
from the standpoint of our our
military the talk about they're
having a really hard time
recruiting people to meet the
standards but beyond that I mean
just that the fact of we need
healthy individuals here in New
Mexico all right it's not about
people joining the military it's
about people being healthy so
they can live healthy lives and
if that's not happening it's
also going to cost us on the
backend and health care and
hospitalization everything else
so thank you for doing this I
know you're going to keep
working on this and address some
of the concerns that we address
today but I will be supporting
this legislation thank you thank
you Mr thanks Senator thank you
Mr chair Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the bill as Senator Padilla
I do have a couple of questions
about before I say that as my
questions I want to thank Sonya
more for being here I have
visited hops Haskell had lunch
with all high school students
and and I will tell you if she
is someone who is improve the
quality of meals all across our
district and I want to thank for
that a quick question on the
certification so so we don't
won't be doing certification
that's not something were
required to do by the federal
government in order to
participate in the community
schools and ask my experts to
address them but it's my
understanding that there are
random reviews and folks that
would come in and notify the
school district by the way we're
gonna come in your district and
take a look to processes but
like the witnesses to I'm happy
to answer that so every school
district as to an application
for the federal government what
this legislation is asking is
that we take the the income
application off of families we
would know of limiting that
administrative burden all
students would would eat without
any statement at all so Mr
chairman and senator videos so
we still would qualify the and
for the federal program without
that certification another
question on page three when you
talk about
who has the ability to receive
these dollars you mention
private schools that operate the
national school lunch program Mr
chair and senator can you tell
me how many private schools
participate in the national
school lunch program.
If we have anyone that could be
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan and
looking at our technical experts
are paid in the back I think I'm
getting of make up forty out of
forty.
Private private schools are
operated enough thank you Mr
thank you for including that I
think it's important for all
children to have a quality meal
and I do appreciate that are
within senator current they'll
be able to often even if they're
not in it now they'll be able to
cast to come forward and say
we'd like to participate in this
year excellent thank you Mr
chair and senator still a little
bit confused on the distribution
piece so on page four when you
talk about those food
authorities that mate the male
quality improvement requirements
and then on page I
lines four through nine those
that do not tell me the
difference between those that
that are meeting the
requirements those that are not
meeting the requirements how is
the money distributed is it
still the same or is it
different chair mischievous Mr
chair Senator Kernan members of
the committee so want to try
your attention to use the these
flights in your pocket R. it's
just it's a visual of what that
would look like just for your
reference later so essentially
what's going to happen is we're
gonna replicate a system that's
already used for breakfast after
the bell and other programs but
does so by July August one of
the as as in the bill a school
in a school district will get
will be certified on the number
of bills that need the quality
expectations that we're going to
set with community partners
through the rule making process
this spring schools and school
districts we part of that as
well as families if the school
district opts out does not want
to meet these higher
requirements as we mentioned
more scratch cooking more New
Mexico produce they would get
the lower based reimbursement
this is still additional funding
for every school and school
district for districts that are
moving in the right direction I
want to serve higher quality
meals they're going to get
maximum reimbursement so that's
what that part of the bill is
speaking to this is just a
visualization of it so for
example for this imaginary
District blue sky school
districts serving six thousand
paid meals for this school year
the base reimbursement is about
twelve thousand an additional
reimbursement additional
revenues the maximum is eighteen
thousand for a larger district
that number continues there
continues to be a larger gap so
for the larger just.
They're gonna have a lot of
incentive to serve higher
quality meals hence impacting
more students in New Mexico
thank you Mr chair just a follow
up question on that you
mentioned somebody somewhere is
going to set the requirements
that will meet that higher
quality and I guess could you
explain who those people might
be Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan so and
in the bill it's I don't know
pages on that it says these
rules from him through the rule
making process seven H. five
line twenty two.
So both the mill quality
expectations were not calling
the nutrition standards because
we're not talking about sodium
whole grain in the things that
get wrapped up in the USDA food
expectations requirements we're
also talking about how we
certify those meals and how we
prove that they're higher
quality so that process will be
done in partnership with the New
Mexico school nutrition
association school board school
district's communities families
and any nonprofits for
legislators I want to be
involved I'll be a full
community conversation through
the rule making process their
path and I'm guessing go ahead
I'm sorry Mr Senator Mr Chairman
service so I'm also guessing the
the farm to table type
activities that'll all be
discussed and put together we
don't didn't want to be just
prescriptive here because we
don't know what the challenges
are saying jail versus
Albuquerque there's going to be
a lot of discussions gonna have
to thank you Mr chair and I
think that's a really important
piece because we can have people
on that particular committee I
trust our iteration experts
because they know.
But I will tell you there are
others that want to be on that
committee that really might not
have a realistic view of how
this can be delivered and I want
to be really careful about who
those people are because I don't
want someone from some part of
the state tell me are you and
hops what those requirements
might be that might not.
Be doable I think it's really
important to be careful about
who is on that who's making
those decisions and I would feel
comfortable with just the
nutrition experts within the
schools are making those
decisions
that that's really important to
me because I've seen things
happen in the past where
requirements have been placed on
school districts they're not in
the best interest of the
district so be very careful
about that which leads me to my
final concern
on page.
Eight and I agree
section six eight needs to be
stricken as a former school
teacher that did lunch duty for
many many years I don't want to
be told when to release the
table.
I think that is a teacher have
the ability to know when it's
time to let those kids go play
and I will also tell you Mister
chairman Senator you don't put
kids out on the playground
thirty minutes before lunch and
expecting to play they're hungry
and they want to eat and so any
district that doesn't provide a
recess time for kids within that
time frame the for the lunch
they need to re evaluate their
recess time because all kids
need a fifteen minute break
sometime in that morning but not
thirty minutes before not right
before you go into the lunch
room it's too restrictive for
districts there's so many
factors in trying to figure out
how you plan your lunch time
anyway and then to include this
hi I want to support the bill
but I will tell you that's gonna
be a real problem for me to be
that prescriptive to our school
districts and then it otherwise
I'm I'm very happy with what
we're doing I know that I trust
someone you completely and she
says it's a good bill I've been
to her her nutrition center I
know what they're doing and I'm
going to trust her but I really
would take a second look at that
last piece thank you very much
chairman and senator I just just
briefly so page eight yes down
online and applying twenty
through twenty one I guess to
the extent possible is why we
put that but that language in
there so that there's not a
there's no requirement it's it's
to the extent.
Thank recess.
Thank you senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman
in the Farmington school
district my pick up my
granddaughter every day just
about she's in third grade
McKinley school and
I was looking at the menu from
McKinley today and it's looked
pretty good to sell is very
steak mashed potatoes brown
gravy General Turkey cheese
sandwich is an option macaroni
salad registration bit red bell
pepper potato salad creamy
coleslaw fresh broccoli baby
carrots carrot sticks colorful
are sold anyway you get the
point a lot of stuff and what
I'm concerned about is
Is the is it too much to we are
we
giving kids too many choices I
know it's it's it's very
nutritious you certainly can get
a good nutritious meal there but
little nine year old kid did
necessarily choose the right
things I know she came out the
other day with twelve little
packages of carrots that all of
our bodies are given because
they did like it.
If we're going to give kids
nutritional when I would all of
us were in school you'd walk up
to the window and they tend to
trade that your meal and it was
pretty good most time
we complained I'm sure but
Are are we going overboard
that's my question.
And the answer Mr chair and very
good my compliments I think
that's a very extensive menu
thank you to you've done a great
job at I'm just wonder for not
doing too much trying to get
kids.
The time thing if you're if
you're going to they're going to
run out to recess specially can
anyway would it be better to
give him here's a good to
Tricia's meal it probably is
edible by most little kids
standards is that what what we.
Mr Johnson yes Mr chair members
of the committee Senator Neville
thank you for the compliments on
the menu today
the program is administered
through the USDA and they do
have a a component of it caught
off of versus our so we offer
all of those items and children
get to select what they want
they are required to have three
components on the tray and one
must be a fruit or vegetable so
if they take it is because they
want to they don't have to take
everything of course we
encourage them in our district
if we offer five fruits and
vegetables a day they can take a
serving of each of that's what
they wanted because we want them
to get more calories from fruits
and vegetables however it's
usually a battle to get them to
take a fruit or vegetable Ezzell
I'm very surprised your your
granddaughter gatt twelve
packets of care and know how
that happened Graham of the cook
of.
Rodham.
Yes so we're we're not forcing
it on them they have the option
of taking and I want to
compliment I think that's
terrific which you Mister
chairman Senator what you read
about the menu there I'm
guessing that's going to be an
example for the different parts
of the state would have the
other thing is the things that
you mentioned what we're but we
we believe we've crafted here
some of the items you mentioned
will be local rather than care
it's coming from you know who
knows where so so ideally it's
going to move more healthy
options higher quality us drugs
into the meal that you just
described for the options that
you described.
I guess my concern is that
they've got lots of options and
then when we pick up Elaine a
after school she says can we go
get a hamburger so I I I'm
wondering if maybe there's too
many options in the.
They don't like the fruits
vegetables whatever but.
If we're talking about.
Exerciser or time before is that
what the bill calls for.
Mr Chairman Ms Chavis Mr chair
members of the committee senator
Neville the bill says on section
six it says to the extent
possible recession be conducted
before seat at lunch time in
grades kindergarten through five
the data backs it up that kids
will run around to get out there
energy and sit down I want to
eat but we did want we soften
that a little bit and there is a
clause notice as to the extent
possible.
Okay so when it's lunch time you
say go out by and then you round
them all up fifteen minutes
later and say go we is that the
idea.
That is Mr chair Senator yes
that is the that is the idea
although I would defer to
experts in the room who deal
with recess on the day to day
basis which I do not want to.
That's all my questions thank
you Mr thank you Sir my Estes
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for the experts for
bringing this forward and.
And then national champion on
these issues it's fantastic I
anticipated a bill that had a
the cost of.
Or the.
Mr chairman center for the how
many tears of of meal costs are
there free reduce cost and full
cost central yes you.
So I anticipated a bill that had
the.
You know the those three tiers
and then just a line out of the
the the reduced cost and the
full cost but what you're doing
is not only that you're doing
much much more you're you're
upping the the you're up in the
the quality and and that
nutrition of of the meals and
and putting in specific policy
recommendations could you kind
of expand on that what were you
doing in addition to ensuring of
free lunch for free lunch and
breakfast for every student
thank you Mr chairman and
senator I think you hit the nail
right on the head it's it's not
simply here go do it it's more
along the lines of additional
compensation to the districts
per meal so that you can take
those monies and either improve
your kitchens or how you produce
or who all is involved in the
production of those meals so
ideally you'll get more you know
the involvement that way you
also have dollars to go to the
local farmers and ranchers and
and we will create relationships
with coops and might produce
this that or the other those
will be very much quicker get to
the actual table whether
consumed so I think that's
adding to the quality piece that
we talked about we do at this
twenty second I'm sorry twenty
twenty second twenty twenty
minutes to a twenty minute lunch
period rather than I think today
it's what seven or eight or in
some cases the ten year so so
you're gonna you gonna be able
to have more time built into the
day to sit there and actually
you know interact with each
other while we're eating not
just shoving it in my face and
getting on my next whatever have
to do so ideally that's going to
help from a health standpoint
you know you're you're also
going to give a lot of
flexibility in my opinion
actually to the districts to
make these decisions and that's
why we soften some of the
language so that they can do
what works for them and their
district
I don't know maybe there's
others that want to you know add
to what I just described.
I'm most excited I'm sorry Mr
chair committee members and send
it to my Estes I'm most excited
about the healthy male component
of our of the bill of bills for
it's really going to elevate the
quality of our bills and our
state and I am so excited about
the partnerships that are going
to come forward with working
with our local growers are
ranchers and especially in my
district the flexibility now to
incorporate more native American
foods culturally relevant foods
with that I think
many states who are not doing
healthy school meals for all are
going to be looking to us we're
going to be the standard I truly
believe that of the other five
states that have implemented
healthy school meals for all we
are the first to include that
component of higher quality so
it it's it's next level stuff
we're doing and also want to
remind the committee and
chairman Senator Maestas this is
breakfast and lunch this isn't
just simply the lunch in the
middle today so there's a lot
more going and and more did you
want to add anything to the
comments from.
Helps currently participates
with the New Mexico grown
program this expands that.
When we when we are in a season
that doesn't have a lot of
fruits and vegetables that are
grown locally our kids ask for
them there if they miss them
when they're not when they're
not available so out I am a
witness that kids love fresh
fruit and fresh vegetables and
when they don't get it they ask
for it so.
This is just going to expand on
that and I do we Mr chairman
thank you for those for more
those comments it's going to
develop a lifelong habit of
wanting to consume vegetables
and rest today maybe it's not
always doesn't always take it in
with me by the way that's why
I'm I'm very healthy over here
so all right all right thank you
Mr chairman center for the
experts let me just kind of go
through some of the bill you
have a definitions.
Of which which are only applied
to this to this act the the
entire act is all new language
so we would you know the
compilation commission would put
it.
Somewhere in statute I would
imagine there's currently in
statute.
Rules and or or for a laws
relating to.
To feeding our state children at
that at public schools so this
will be added to that the but
just
When you have a definition for a
value added processed products
so Mister chairman Senator the
on and brought page seven this
is the section five incentives
for New Mexico grown foods.
Set up.
Paragraph B. it says you know
school food authorities shall
use the money received a minimum
of seventy five percent of the
funds shall be used to purchase
minimal minimally processed
products.
Up to twenty five percent of
funds may be used for value
added processed products you
have.
I'll just to me it just seems
like it would be difficult thank
everything is somewhat process
you know and so you have a
definition of value added
processed products in the act we
don't have a definition of
minimally processed products I
guess you don't need both
because there's a dividing line
but how do you how do you
Anticipate that being
implemented don't think that's
up.
Is that going to kind of change.
Nutritional directors at the
schools are going to change
their lives or they're going to
kind of roll right into it
create a Mister chairman Senator
go to page three line twenty.
R. M. on process to million
minimally processed products are
defined there so.
One of why I don't see that
thank you Mr chairman center for
the doctor but is that gonna
change the part but the
percentage now.
Do you think that's.
That's doable you know from one
school year to the next Mister
chairman Senator I miss my
sizzle responded that agency
agency doesn't make it.
Mr chairman members of all the
Senator so to your to your
question so that the just to
give you a little bit of
background so the reason that we
did the seventy five twenty five
that's modeled after other
states Colorado's most recently
the intent there is that a
school district is not buying a
hundred percent using all their
funds for tortillas right we
want them to also buy fresh
produce and all that for all the
reasons that are to mentioned
currently there is a fifty a
forty percent maxim for New
Mexico program schools can spend
up to forty percent on meat on
meat products but that's
currently the only stipulation
we have on the percentage on
that value added verses I'm
process develop quickly passage
to either the food service
directors want to speak to that
is the as a potential issue.
Mr chair committee members and
senator my Estes
To be honest most of us are
currently doing that it's it's a
very achievable where we're
already following that guidance
and it's just going to push
those who are kind of lagging
behind to catch up with with us.
Thank you thank you for that Mr
Chairman etcetera but it and
then up.
I know there was a some concerns
about section six the the food
waste which is which is really
good proposal and very ambitious
as soon assuming this come to
fruition on on the bottom of
page eight top of page nine.
Paragraph B. it says a use is on
line twenty point as you know
chair tables so be provided were
food service staff students and
parents may return appropriate
food.
And then on top of page nine it
says
You know.
Global food placed on the chair
tables that is not taken by the
students during the course of
the regular school mail shall be
donated.
Student to student food banks or
non profits and then the next
paragraph says excess and
rescued allowable food shall be
re street distributed isn't that
the same thing like shin those
programs be merged what what's
there is between be donating
food that's not on the chair
table and and redistributing
food that's.
That's excess and rescued
allowable food so Mr chairman
and senator excellent I have
that actual very same question
so in one instance it's food
that is already or still
packaged and then in another
sense it has to be
put together accumulated and
packaged so there's there's two
pieces there and then another
way another reason that that we
needed to give the districts
some flexibility to get all this
together is they might not have
the equipment to properly re
package again and then
redistribute so they're gonna
need help with that too so that
I get that right there may be a
okay so Mister chairman of the
center the twenty Madam Mr
Chairman
Services
I think for the direction of
this is going is helping kids in
the afternoons so we have a plan
that helps high school.
Where we will take leftovers
from one day we will we package
it can freeze it and have a
paying for this for it is that
we carry a meal homes they can
come and see me years after we
have a pantry this is our plan
we will give is that that is
really purposing donating that
food in Hobbs we also take all
of our leftover food that can't
be research and we donated to
our local soup kitchen we have a
very very low waste in Hobbs
because I don't want to see
anything on the trash can if
they can help someone else.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
know I visited helps high school
with my committee this summer
the commerce committee thank you
the Mr Chairman centers for the
of the up with the rest of
funding you mentioned thirty
million dollars it's on section
seven this of this handout
actually contains stuff is not
in your bill this early but it's
part of the plan and so so on
Let's see towards the.
Towards the end.
The the third rate from the
backs of the budget request to
match the work.
And it's is fifty two point four
million the thirty million and
your bill is is added but then
we need a twenty million dollars
for the school kitchen capital
improvement which is necessary
for some of the schools and then
nutrition national training and
work workforce development for a
thousand dollars and then the
New Mexico grown incentive to
million dollars you mentioned up
that schools get reimbursed this
amount it's going to increase
that that's going to be captured
in house bill two because it's
not here Mr Chairman said for
the do we need to worry about
that or your how are you working
on that provision Mr chairman
and senator good good question
that's in the recommended budget
from the executive and in the in
the already in the works and in
the process and this is a one
time news is a yeah in that that
is a one time so that they can
equip the kitchens the way that
they're gonna need a pretty
commitment not have already
acted so so Mr Chairman seperti
I know I know where you're
pointing but for the folks
listen home the twenty million
dollar capital improvement is a
one time expenditures the thirty
million would be gone going and
then just up with regard to that
on page nine section seven which
is appropriation program which.
Which for the folks listen home
will pry be removed and then
just put in the house bill two
there are appropriations act it
says you know thirty min dollars
in collaboration.
You know from the general fund
to the department of finance and
administration in collaboration
with the public education
department.
That's kind of new to me should
it go just straight to the
Department.
Mr chairman and senator was
Chavis Mr chair members of the
committee senator so the
thinking behind this and I I'd
skimmed over this part of the
packet although you do have an a
reminder on slide two so the the
universal free meals as part of
the governor's broader food
initiative and so in twenty
three we modeled what a
consolidated budget would look
like they're DFA we had nine
agencies all those funds
funneling through one agency and
then out that way we assure
performance measures of a
dashboard real to get the funds
out into the world much faster
because they don't get lost to
the inertia of the agencies so
that's the same thinking for
this for this percent of before
is that the funds would still be
part of that package and then go
out to do up head and has been
fully briefed on this and I
don't have any concerns about it
and then the full package of for
this the food initiative is
actually seventy five million
which is already in the
executive budget.
The proposed budget yes post
thank you Mr chairman thank you
center for the and then and then
also this is kind of funky
I'm not used to doing this but
it's as a.
Three million dollars in fiscal
year twenty twenty four and
subsequent fiscal years so I
don't know if that language
will.
I know we could put that
language in enforce future
appropriators but obviously if
we lost this and in law it's
it's it's a mandate and we're
obligating to fund to the tune
of thirty million or so a year
and then lastly on the on the
twenty minutes
I recall up.
Before like foam and all that
would was added on the
playgrounds we would eat and
then run off and go play and so
the twenty minutes actually is
significantly more advantageous
because you're you process you
know with some of the work out
buff the after the work out you
know
is that current policy is it our
kids eating lunches after up
playground time.
Is that current policy that
would.
Is it fifty fifty or that would
drastically change policy
statewide.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
senator you have a comment on
the.
Mr chair committee members
Senator my Estes
currently what occurs is kids
eat and then they go out and
that is problematic because the
kids are working everything down
and running out to play so if we
could we're trying to help
school districts think about
having them have the recess bars
where they burned off that that
while the Energy and then they
come in and sit down and eat
that's what we're what we're
trying to get to happen but
everybody doesn't want to do so
and so that's where we mated of
the given the flexibility Mr Mr
chair members of the committee
senator I I do want to remind
folks and if my pet experts need
to correctly please do that but
I believe in in New mac there is
a thirty minute lunch period
right now that's required it
does not stipulate how much is
for lunch that thirty minutes
includes getting to lunch
standing in line getting your
lunch sitting down waste and
then leaving the cafeteria we
know that across the state there
are some districts are kids are
sitting down for five minutes we
have teachers and administrators
who can attest to this is not
the standard now we see
everywhere but it is a problem
which is why we put this in the
bill for debate.
So I think Mr chairman I think
it's definitely worth
considering for the educational
leaders to make that move
because when you eat after
exercising it builds muscle and
not fat and so
it's I know it's like a.
It's like a mind blower to me
because I it is different from
my reality but I think it's
worth considering and I'm really
happy that you propose that in
the bill thank you for the time
Mr chairman thank you Mr
seriously you Senator excellent
question thank you thank you and
before I start with a couple of
questions I will remind people
we have a floor session at
eleven I have a commitment to
the committee that we will end
fifteen minutes before that so
for people who are watching we
will probably not get to Senate
bill sixty seventy eight seventy
nine one fifty four I apologize
I know there are some people
who've come specifically for
those but it doesn't look like
we're going to get to those that
the pace we're going today those
will be the first ones when on
Friday when we come back in so I
I apologize for that center
Pinto did you have questions.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
bringing this bill forward
Senator Padilla.
So we have not assess our
students eating habits.
Mr any been assessment that
we're so centric can you explain
a little bit further so we
haven't done a study or anything
prior to this bill assessing our
students eating habits Mr
chairman and senator I that we
have a ton of data in that area
yes Mr chair members the
committee senator Ewing eating
habits like how much is going in
the waste you mean eating habits
like our kids choosing more
fruits and vegetables what you
mean by if you could just
explain that a little bit yes so
like a committee on and then you
have a two to five being at then
one school elementary level that
there's no way we have a
collected any data as far as
even measuring the waste going
out R. on certain days based on
the menu based on even our
students age that kindergartners
probably eat less than the fifth
graders
are we just saying well this
amount of money all the way from
Katie to high school that they
get the same thirty cents
whatever meal and we're
expecting high school students
to still survive off of that
nothing like that has been done
Mr Chairman etcetera excellent
question I'm asked this the
directors of food services to me
to come up the COVID on it but
there's
it it's it's a per meal the
district goes and makes the
decision on how they want to
allocate where and and how much
and what have you can you talk
about how you measure this kind
of stuff.
two at chair committee members
and Senator Pinto
In most of our food service
operations we do monitor ways
very closely and we do that by
grade levels we look at our
elementary schools are middle
schools and high schools in my
district we actually do have a
food waste program that we
implement it to actually monitor
what goes back in a tray what
those into the trash what
portion of the male the kids are
eating and that's why USDA back
in the eighties implemented that
offer versus our component of
the program to allow kids to
choose what they they know
they're going to you know we of
course try to encourage them to
take more fruits and vegetables
but definitely don't force them
we do look at the waist we see
what our cooks prepare we look
at it in the kitchen and we we
document all of this we are
actually working with our
composting partner to see.
The actual total weight of what
we collect and so we can see and
know how much we have saved from
going into the landfill which
affects greenhouse emissions so
it's in my district is an
extensive study that we're doing
we are looking at
what items the kids like to eat
what they don't like to eat of
course we are mandated to offer
fruits and vegetables and for
the most part most of them will
take at least one serving our
food a vegetable you do have
some who go above and taken off
as serving of every offering so
we are monitoring that we do
look at that closely
and yes.
Even within the USDA male
pattern guidance they are
certain amounts of calories and
and service of food that high
school is get compared to middle
school or in high school is get
compared to elementary students
out all of that is monitored and
mandated and how we set self so
Mister chairman and and Senator
excellent question so you heard
about the tracking of what
happens with races that USDA
does give the districts what the
first graders lunch plate needs
to look like and what the senior
high school play needs to look
like analyst and Mr chair
members of the committee so not
every district.
In the state of New Mexico.
Yes yes not every yes not every
district has been evaluated I
would say I I there's no
assessment or any kind of that
to be that helped.
we've we've done a survey PED
did do a survey but I don't know
if they got that specific and
Mister chair members is clarify
some real quick if they get
systems and so so every district
is measure they have to turn in
any number of reporting
mechanisms and so in order for
them to participate in the and
the the lunch program so a ton
of data is available we can get
some of that if you like more
specifics and Mister chair
members of the committee so as
far as even knowing what school
districts actually were affected
back in the day before the
program and they were in school
debt have we considered any of
that in those areas.
I I'm not quite sure I'm
following I'm sorry so before
they had a program for the
federally funded schools there
were schools and we saw this did
the shaming of the students
especially in APS when students
haven't paid their their debt
that they were just given bread
and water basically in some
sense we're not even considering
like in certain dished up areas.
That there's a higher rate.
So basically so Mr chair members
of the committee everybody that
who is the tribal.
Representation here.
In support Mr chairman and
senator I believe we had a
young.
She's right here if you want to
stand please you Representative
think for tribes that writers
for.
For LFC I.
Thank you and the reason I say
that because we're mentioning
them in here.
And we're really you know and
say what we want to do the state
line.
It's easier in some areas so I
feel like there should be a
factor in here and how this is
going to rollout to those
students but yet those bigger
school districts that already
have the advantage we're still
going to create an any quality
in some sense because we're not
really you know what input that
thirty million there yes but
will those districts that really
need it those schools how can we
don't have an STD how can we
don't have it in the
constitution already I mean
we're we're gonna do this one
time thing and it seems like
well the money gets tight we're
going to pull it.
And we don't allow our students
either to have that.
all day.
Because the policies with in our
school districts also don't
allow us to have those with
COVID we are allowed to have our
kids come in and even the
classroom.
But at the high school level
in certain areas there like now
you can't live because well it
brings in the road but yet they
don't try to tackle that program
so their lockers are taken to
even because they have food in
their.
And yet they blame the students
and restrict them say well we
don't want you to have food
anymore well maybe because they
were hungry.
And so we take that from them so
now it's put in the back.
And I've had students
Actually in some sense to be a
little more industrious in which
they would actually make a
couple burritos at home and
bring to to some to other
students.
Yup to supplement.
So.
Thank you I'm in support of the
bill but I don't know if we've
really brought in everybody.
That needs to be considered on
this and how to roll it out and
is this the best way are we just
doing
something because the federal
government is pulling something
from us.
Because I don't know if Navajo
prep's actually being included
in this bill the way it's
written I wish they were here
because I already know there's
an inequity there from the
funding that they get from the
federal government per student.
that we well the federally
funded so we leave them alone
but yet what we spent in public
education per student is a
little over six thousand dollars
so there's already in inequity
death.
Even though that student of New
Mexico.
I
I I wish we would really go for
the gold and put it in the
constitution state yep our
students deserve this much and
that this bar
and our schools should provide
because we're requiring to be at
school and with the extended
learning time that we're trying
to implement.
you know we're keeping kids.
If they don't eat lunch they go
home at three o'clock that's the
first thing they did was
probably.
but if they're at school for
another two hours the
participate in sports which we
encourage after school
participation in the program are
we going to supplement that and
the transport time on the bus
after that another hour to get
home you know we can feed them
to mills but is the flexibility
here to provide a third meals
for those students that are
practically at school longer
than some of the parents are at
work.
Because they get dropped off
first and then the parents go to
work.
And then when the parents get
off guess what they have to
drive back to school and pick up
the student again which is
probably another hour.
I think there's a lot more
considerations that have to be
made
provided support of it yes thank
it's the I'm not sept sitting
well with it thank you Mister
chair Mister chairman Senator
procedure comments and they're
very important to us thank you.
Thank you I have a couple of
questions or comments concerns
about different things some I
kind of alerted you all to it on
the.
See page four section eight and
I appreciate the.
Amendment that exams virtual
public schools are those charter
schools is that we were talking
about the virtual charter
schools are there any virtual
traditional schools in the
state.
I am not aware of any virtual
traditional sentencing yes
they're they're virtual programs
not necessarily virtual schools
okay so so this is referring to
virtual charter schools I think
in in general that are not.
Are there any of our traditional
public schools that do not have
the the federal meal program of
the traditional schools.
To be a perfect example Mr
Chairman we call the the virtual
public the call the other than
virtual public schools that's a
separate if there's a comma
there they're not when I cook
the same at the only charter
schools that are virtual it's
anything that's virtual is the
what the amendment says yes I
understand but that's why I
asked the question that they're
they're only virtual programs
not virtual schools other than
the charter schools for.
How many of our charter schools
do not offer the federal meals
program.
I think we have some Mr
Chairman.
R. L. E. S. C. director might be
able to trust.
So under this legislation would
they be required now to start
offering those and part of it
because of the the amendment
said virtual public schools of
which there are only charter
virtual schools that would
indicate that all the other
charter schools would need to
stand up.
You programs no they actually
they can they can opt in if they
don't offer it the the national
school lunch program.
Senator that's not what this
says in particularly with the
clarification of the amendment.
Where it is designated virtual
public schools which are only
charters.
That would indicate that charter
schools we need to with the
exception of those couple of
charters and I miss reading that
and I would think that we need
to get some clarification if in
fact that's the case.
You understand what I'm saying
our vice I'm actually not
following I the I'm always
willing to tell you but I don't
I'm not following but but so so
the way that the amendment
public school districts and
charter schools come up other
than virtual public schools.
Right which are only charters.
At this time you.
And so that would kind of
indicate that other public
schools that aren't virtual
which includes charter schools
we need to.
Mr chair members of the
committee so the it so prior to
the amendment the way this red
is that charter school any
school who's not operating the
national school lunch program we
are not mandating that they
operate the national schools
from as a whole other argument
we can have another time charter
schools a charter schools and
school districts operate an SLP
national school lunch program
are required to participate in
this program B. I. E. tribally
controlled schools private are
invited to participate if they
would like to
and then the common about the
virtual charter schools the the
new management I cannot speak to
directly I just want to clarify
the charter the the invitation
of schools are already operating
SLP versus those that are not
we're not mandating that they
start operating school school
programs I understand that's why
I think this section I to get re
written to make that clear
because as it currently reads it
essentially saying all public
schools with the exception of
virtual public schools would
have to put stand so the those
other charters would have to
stand up programs with the way
this is currently written.
Yeah and and that's my concern.
So one of the concerns others
have to do with and I think
Senator Maestas wanted to chime
in I'd I'd if that's I don't
know if he is allowed to.
We're running out of time so it
was probably not gonna get to a
vote right now as you know some
of the things that I think we
ought to look at and get and get
through
I'm concerned with the time
lines to do all of this to.
As we do the study on how many
kitchens need to be
it rebuilt and all of that and
my understanding on the time
line that would have happened
before school starts in August
and so even with the
identification to get those
monies out to schools where they
then have to do contracts to do
renovations and actually build
kitchens in a number of places
that's an awfully tight time
frame and I would guess I would
deferred to stand is that
something districts are going to
be able to do on.
On such a short time frame.
One five.
This Mr chair excuse me almost
to the Mr chairman of the
committee I believe the shallots
Dalgleish is chalice devilish
the universal free school meals
program as defined in the
definition section just to
clarify that peace and then with
the school kitchen component so
I think Senator the sponsor
we're kind of on the same page
about we we know this is going
to take one to two years to get
off the ground there is not an
expectation that there's kitchen
three bill and we're doing full
scratch cooking The New Mexico
here there will we understand
there will be a landing pad a
soft landing pad into this which
will be determined through the
rule making process with our
nutrition stakeholders.
And please understand I am
hugely supportive doing this but
we got to make sure we're we're
writing laws that make sense as
it moves forward with it and so
I think that's a real concern
out of the districts I also have
a concern on section six having
vented elementary principal of a
fairly large elementary that
where you have to run multiple
kids through and monitor them
some kids are done eating in ten
minutes and ten minutes of
sitting around while others are
finishing in trying to monitor
gets very difficult sometimes
and so I am always nervous when
we are.
Putting into law things that
should be under the purview of
the local district and the
principal and superintendent
and.
We shouldn't be doing it because
a couple of districts are doing
it we should be educating them
and bringing them up rather than
making everybody else do
something when it says shall
what if they don't yeah what if
someday they don't you know
they're in violation of the law
and that gets problematic I
think when we put things of that
level and so I would look at
striking that section a on there
because that really ought to be
under local control and my
working with superintendents and
principals the vast majority of
them what to do these kinds of
things and do but there has to
be some of that flexibility
built in as they redesign
schedules and calendars and
things of that nature chairman
respect that's why we had the
language that to the extent
possible and we felt like that
again the flexibility but we can
be aware that if we need to see
the and the the last is a large
schools just the time to serve
and if we've got more folks
those are FTEs the districts
have to come up with and I
realize there's maybe some of it
built into this but most of this
as I read through the.
The budgeting portion of it is
not for FTE ease of additional
people who cook it takes a lot
more people to actually cook and
serve meals than just having
them brought in and serve and so
certainly it's great to do that
but it I think there's some
additional costs for districts
and very concerned about
unfunded mandates when districts
are told you must do this but
don't have the extra money to do
so.
Mr chair members of the
committee just one comment so
when we talk to the five other
states have done this I handful
of them did have an additional
car about additional incentive
for staffing and then other
states were able to do with the
same revenues that we're looking
at here they were able to build
the staff exercise opting into
those funds so we may not know
what that looks like until after
your one.
Here in New Mexico I understand
I'm just nervous about when a
district is told you must do
this and they've got to take
from something else when we met
very tight budgets all along
and so I certainly would love to
work with any of these changes
with you my staff as well and
we'll put it on first thing when
when we work out some of of
those those types of issues
you'll be back first in line but
this is a great program we want
to get it right and so I know
that's frustrating to get it
kind of rolled over but want to
work on make sure that we get it
we want problematic your
correctly thank you yes thank
you Sir current thank you and
and sorry to tack on to what you
just said that one thing that
needs to be considered as if we
again raise the minimum wage
that's going to eat up a big
part of what we're doing right
here so I know it happened and
hops and we've got to remember
that so be really careful
because what we're doing here is
good but if we keep bumping that
up your school staff you're
you're not gonna be able to
afford even to the high quality
food thank.
And we sometime next day or so
to be with your staff to go
through absolutely and I I will
make myself available as well as
my staff to work on those we
have reached a deadline we've
got a floor at eleven I
apologize I know people have
come for some of the other bills
they will be at the top of the
list on Friday and as soon as
we're ready with this one we
will put it right back into the
top of the list of stuff we
wanna make sure we get it right
thank you all for being here we
adjourned until Friday at nine
AM.
