Those as we're able to any other
comments on Friday it looks like
we've got a couple of house
bill's now coming over and still
Senator couple of education once
Oregon state at eight thirty.
that make sure we have plenty of
time then for everybody to get
to the floor.
Any comments questions
announcements as we're getting
started I would like to
introduce my a shadow today
the question about US is a
senior in Los crucis who is part
of the CTE program for pilots
it's a pilot it's a pilot pilot
program in Los crucis I think
there are four of them going
through who did the ground
schools portion of it in the
fall Nicolas what passed the the
written test already the others
were very close and should pass
at the spring he is now started
the actual flight training I
think you said you have about
twelve hours have solo next week
is kind of on track for that it
will have his pilot's license
fully covered and paid for
through the CTE programs when he
graduates in may.
Well.
That's
right the man gives me great
hope for the future so if you
get a chance to chat with him I
think you'll find it very
interesting so I'm very honored
to have him as my shadow today
and kind of showing what's going
on he's lying with Bella tore
aviation which is down on the
river Representative panda and I
think the plan next year is to
have about twenty students going
through the program that that
he's going through so that the
pilot program so far as been the
good highlight and looks like
we're gonna move that on such
okay having said that Senator
sure thank you Mr chair so we
have here Senate bill forty one
and what this in a nutshell what
it does is it turns the
opportunity scholarship into an
opportunity forgivable loan and
so what this does is it it it
helps.
Put some guardrails on the fund
we have
while I believe it encourages
completion of anything so what
this would pay for is any trade
certificate the associate degree
or bachelor's degree so as soon
as you got that degree that's
when the loan given so you would
essentially get a loan for one
of those you completed the loans
paid for I believe that
encourages completion of so
that's the first part I know in
the FIR talks about oh we need
this massive bureaucracy I don't
see that I see that the college
or university or the trade
school of certifies that the
student has completed and boom
done you don't need to have a
bunch of bureaucracy figure that
out the school certifies it in
it's over.
in in the loan is forgiven there
doesn't even have to be any
transfer of money the loan is
simply forgiven.
So.
But one of the big part of the
problems that I see is we don't
know what what we get for our
return on investment under this
so somebody goes to to school
we pay for it but did they
complete anything that they get
a job that they do anything at
all with this and so what I
believe is that the taxpayers
deserve to know what the return
on investment is so if the
student is successful.
Then we know that we have
somebody that this is going out
they're going to contribute to
to our economy and in be of you
know a productive member of our
society if they're not let's
okay this mean they're not
productive it just means that we
shouldn't pay for it as
taxpayers so in this case the
return on investment.
We we need to wait we don't pay
for this taxpayers or we get a
student that the completed
something and it would include
the as I say that the any kind
of trade certificate.
An associate's degree or
bachelor's degree and you could
do each of them.
So you could go and say okay I'm
gonna get an associate's degree
and then you just decide you
want to keep on going to go get
a bachelor's degree.
So it's but the but the first
part would be paid when you got
the associate's degree.
So in a nutshell it's brilliant.
The thing else.
You Mr chair that's it okay but
you want me to go on for four
hours a project.
Out of the audience those in
support.
Anyone in opposition.
Yes ma'am if you'd like to the
COVID you come up there's a in
my care please.
There anyone online.
To oppose thank you.
Dress.
Well just grab the might.
Then you have to hold the button
down while talking to the to the
it is just to the settlement.
Thank you good morning my name
is Dr cerita Cargas and I'm the
principal investigator for the
basic needs project at the
university of New Mexico we've
been studying for the last three
years food and housing
insecurity among college
students and I can tell you the
invention of the educational
loan complex has led to
increased hunger on campuses
throughout the United States it
was not always this way after
World War two higher education
was considered a public good the
government invested enormously
and created the GI bill and
later the Pell grant.
Thank you the eighties in the
Reagan administration and
getting a college degree change
to becoming considered a private
good a conscious decision was
made to put the cost of getting
a degree on individuals and
their families the student loan
industrial complex was born it
has been enormously detrimental
for millions of Americans and
the American economy.
mired in debt don't thrive and
that's after school.
During school food insecurity is
a problem for close to forty
percent of U. N. M. students you
know what household under hunger
rates were in New Mexico in
twenty twenty some of the
highest in the country about
twenty percent going to college
increases food insecurity let me
share a few quotes from students
on what it's like it's hard to
focus in class when you're
hungry I've been in class unable
to engage because I have hunger
pains from my stomach is making
noise which is interesting.
Or I have to spend twenty to
thirty hours a week working to
afford food and this leaves
little time for studying.
Or I can barely pay tuition and
insurance and gas for my crappy
but necessary car god forbid I
should be able to pay for
groceries or roof over my head.
We are currently undertaking a
statewide survey at all our
public higher education
institutions on the prevalence
of food and housing insecurity
as of this morning eleven
thousand people have responded
to the survey in higher ed.
I may well have data on just how
many students are food insecure
even this year with the
opportunity scholarship.
But as you know fifteen seconds
please graduation rates are at
about fifty percent of people
drop out we they already have
access to student loans please
do not settle are courageous and
hardworking students with more
debt by converting the
opportunity scholarship into
alone students have already had
access to thank you for decades.
Anyone else in the room in
opposition.
Online the Emily will that.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Emily will
Taos New Mexico voices for
children and we stand in
opposition to this bill.
I think we all know that we have
a lot of students who come from
low income backgrounds and the
opportunity scholarship removes
the burden of tuition allows
them greater access to higher
education.
But because of the low income
nature of many of our students
that the reason they often don't
complete higher education is
actually due to financial
hardship that arises beyond the
cost of tuition this bill would
settle those students who are
probably already facing
financial difficulties with
additional student loan debt and
we know that this affects
students of color at a higher
rate as well who carry more of
the student loan that to begin
with.
We also don't have the data yet
to show if opportunity
scholarship recipients are
completing their programs of
study the opportunities are
ships intended to increase
access and remove the barrier of
tuition for students who are
looking to complete a past of
higher education we are the
committee join us in opposing
this bill today thank you.
Thank you Garrett Moseley.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is care mostly
and I'm with the associated
students of New Mexico State
University and I stand in
opposition to Senate bill four
eighty one.
As mentioned before
accessibility is critical to
higher education and the
opportunity scholarship provides
assessable education to all New
Mexicans who which who wish to
pursue a degree in higher
education.
A college graduate makes on
average a million more dollars
in their lifetime than somebody
that does not have a college
degree I believe the return on
investment in the long run will
outweigh the financial the
financial downfall of students
not completing a college
education in the second quarter
consequence of having students
repay loans which as mentioned
before far too many low income
students drop out not because
they could not academically
complete the work but because of
exterior circumstances seriously
inhibited their and their
ability to complete their degree
in higher education this would
seriously inhibit young people
to buy a house start a family in
advance themselves economically
through other means.
I believe that it is important
to not disincentive eyes
students of low income to go to
higher education and by hanging
over their head that they may
have to repay back up alone
would it seriously make a lot of
students second guess whether it
would be worth it to go to
college or not thank you.
Thank you get.
The comments where we go to
questions from the committee yes
Mr chair first of all this
doesn't change anything.
as far as your ability to go to
school if you go when you
complete it you don't pay
anything are you don't have to
make payments as you go so it's
not a monthly obligation is not
so you get to go to school.
The one thing that it doesn't
Santa fights is completing
school.
Which is not not what we talk
about this has nothing to do
with food or housing because it
is to be paid for.
Assuming you complete the
course.
And so.
I don't see these problems that
have been brought forward they
just don't make any sense to me
all you have to do is finish
school if you can finish school
with an opportunity scholarship
you can finish school with
opportunity loan.
Same same the difference is what
we not did not mention it all
here with the taxpayers who pay
for this.
It is a public good.
The taxpayers will pay for.
So the only difference is this
put some guard rail on the fund
so that we're not depleting the
fund.
For people it.
Aren't gonna complete of some
kind of certificate or an
associate's or bachelor's
degree.
I think that's worthy of the tax
payers knowledge that they're
going to pay for something that
gives them a return on on their
investment.
Thank.
By the way for the committee
Harry Rommel with the higher end
department is online at their
questions of him about this
particular bill so it yeah he's
not in the room he is available
online if there any questions
questions from the committee.
Sir Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator remind me what I know
that there are ready thanks in
place for students that except
the opportunity scholarship in
other words there and rolled
they have to be enrolled in six
hours is that correct and then
of the continuation of that what
if they drop out for semester
what do they have to do to come
back and pick that up again.
So
Mr chairman and senator.
Right now if they drop out for
semester they do get to come
back the next semester this
wouldn't change that at all if
they drop out more than a
semester than they would the the
Scholarship back but the
scholarships are really the the
The scholarship of of the last
dollar I can't remember what the
term was so if you have other
scholarships all those kick in
before any of this happens
already so.
So it's not really a full
tuition coverage whatever's
left.
Okay just you know I.
I worry a little bit about the
need to to take a break I mean I
think that's one of the problems
with the lottery scholarship
what you begin that
in for whatever reason you you
have to drop out this at least
allows you to circle back and
come back and complete you know
the one thing that I worry about
is the funding for the
opportunity scholarship and I
don't know how much you have in
LFC budget for for this going
forward but it's money that I
worry about.
Continuing its recurring expense
and so I think at some point
There is the potential that we
might not be able to fund this
if this everybody has reminded
us time to time that that'll and
gas is not going to be here
forever in that it's very
difficult to diversify and so
what we're gonna do when that
money goes way so I do worry
that down the road and they have
to turn into some sort of loan
program just because the funding
will be there for that course
right now there is money and
just want to make sure that
That students are about to
circle back if they drop out
once Mr they can come back but
that's already in place so
that's all I have was.
Senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman I I have a
daughter that bounced in and out
of college.
That's my concerns are kind of
what senator curtains are.
She went to college for a while
San Juan she was a theater
major.
Then she went to Seattle in the
theater for a while and then she
came back into the outdoor
theater in Farmington we have a
real nice for them but the other
thing.
And then she took a few classes
and how would be that it should
have been on one of these this
program.
And when she laid out would she
then be owing the money could
she's been issue later years how
does it work Mr chair and
senator if if of the she started
at San Juan college in actually
completed.
Either a certificate or
associate degree she did
eventually but not at first and
then if you want if you was gone
for more than a semester know
that she would the money so she
went to Seattle for a year or
semester of more than a semester
in came back no this wouldn't.
Wouldn't cover that.
She did complete she went to
Mexico state complete issue at
University of Cincinnati or
Cincinnati whatever she got her
MFA and she's now a professor K.
state so she did alright we
should have you been hampered
**** Daddy to pay so couldn't
quite as big a problem but the
facts were that she had the.
If she didn't have that of as a
back up should have trouble.
Covering those dollar amounts to
may not have been able to become
successful that's what concerns
me so Mister chairman Senator.
This doesn't change anything
that that the opportunity
scholarship offers today.
Except completion.
So yes she could have come and
gone if she came back and wanted
to go to a get a bachelor's
degree later after coming back
from seeing a Cincinnati it
would this would cover that
assuming she graduated should
owed for some of the earlier
when she dropped enough is that
right well it depends on where
she dropped in and out but again
this is the same same rules as
the opportunity scholarship so
it's not it's not making it more
difficult.
if you can come and go with the
opportunity scholarship you can
come and go with this but it
does make it more difficult also
you've encouraged that as you go
because you can't part of choose
to.
If you go here then you drop it
here then you go here and you
drop it here so then those.
Become debts and it may hamper
your ability to continue because
you can't afford it so Mister
chairman Senator.
Possibly but
Eighty again and I don't think
it makes any difference but the
one thing that I do think this
encourages is completion so
finish we get it in and it's the
loan is forgiven.
Most students if they're not
going to proceed they they drop
out probably before the first
semester now there are people to
get further along there but also
the opportunity scholarship
doesn't have an age on it so
assuming that if one of us did
not have a bachelor's degree we
could go we could go to of New
Mexico state today would go to
UNM.
He's not even listening okay.
But we could even today because
there's no age limit if you
gonna go in there so of what's a
good question I don't know that
we have the rules on this is if
if if you're gone for a year and
you come back.
The start over I think that I
think that's already in place
but I but I can't verify that
right now.
Dr.
On.
Your what the question was.
Yes thank you Mr chair is tied
to a mute myself and apologies
that I can't be in the room at
present currently the
opportunity scholarship if if
you fail to qualify
by GPA or credit hour enrollment
there is a two year lapse before
you can re qualify for the
scholarship.
So if the student and roll then
drops out they cannot they
cannot earn the scholarship
again for two years that is the
in place in the administrative
code.
Thank you.
The ability to well but then.
You after a couple years you can
get back on but should be have
the depth and and maybe you
couldn't afford to go back to
college is my concern because.
Not my daughter because she had
me with some kids aren't
necessarily as fortune the have
to.
Are there ways ago that's that's
what I'm wondering is if we're
settling them with the debt when
they really didn't at all.
I'm concerned about that so Mr
thank you Senator by this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator.
The
Second to see where this is
going in and the policy.
The policy point you're making.
I think you hopefully would
never have to do this because I
think the opportunity
scholarship is.
I mean it's profound nationalist
revolutionary frankly and and I
hope we will set the tone
nationally the
What I like to see is a.
What's great about this this
this laws page for the
department reports you know each
year to the legislature with
regards to number of eligible
students receive the scholarship
you know and so we can get some
really good staff and really
good data on.
the plan for who's getting it
and and how successful their
they are
Because you're right it
If we had scarce resources we we
would then have to limit.
You know do we do we force them
to go do nine credits or six do
we force them to have a three
pointer GPA or for dropped two
point five all that and what's
great Mister chairman Senator
and in this bill poorly I'm kind
of comparing it to the lottery
statute on page three the.
The
the department shall promulgate
rules regarding student
qualifications and continuing
eligibility so it's it's written
up much better in my opinion in
the lottery scholarship I think
we may reach a point.
where we don't need the lottery.
Anymore you know if in fact you
know we can have of robust tax
base and and the money's coming
in of the lottery was created in
this world of scarce resources
we essentially run numbers.
Cell structures to.
To a wonderful people
And the and they don't get a
good return on their gambling
investment you know but so I
think the lottery is.
Frankly apartments tax to do a
good thing we we may reach a
point where we don't need that
we just go scholarship
opportunity scholarship and then
we can modify it accordingly but
I think now we should let this
play out of you know five years
or so see what the status
determine.
Because I think that return on
investment on this on this
probation is going to be
fantastic and I don't think I
think
Picture and tertentu alone at
this juncture.
I not finalized but I.
But we have to make some choices
at some point down the road
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator for bringing this I
think very important bill one of
the
Disappointments
because the the opportunities
because it is very good is that
we're not covering people which
I think you are aiming to do in
this bill and that's people who
need certificates and the state
so desperately needs people who
are able to get certificates and
multiple areas boot camp every
week we caught sometimes we call
it boot camp but we've got this
three credit degree thing
wrapped around it so it doesn't
always qualify so I understand
this is an intermediate step but
we need programmers we need job.
Not not accountants for state
but intermediate accountability
we in our this should apply to
apprenticeships and and all the
trade unions that's what the
state desperately needs I mean
yes it's great that we're gonna
trying get everyone through
college very we gonna pay for it
and and again if we don't have
an economy that can Hiram we're
just paying for other states to
have had gotten the benefit of
higher education and so this to
me moves in the direction where
the opportunity scholarship
desperately needs to grow when
you hear comments as of the
business community they say we
are so misaligned between our
business needs in our education
in this.
That even if we are able to get
entrepreneurs to come into the
state they are going to have to
work force that they need and so
I I I applaud the bill because
it moves in in that direction I
think we really need to can't do
it this session but talk with
the governor and see how we
expand this two certificate
programs not just the the three
credit to course in two of those
courses so I'm hoping that if
this doesn't make it through
here you'll go back and look at
that piece of it because this
this this is what the state
needs and these jobs pay seventy
five eighty ninety thousand a
hundred thousand dollars which
is more than a lot of college
graduates are going to get in if
there's to create is in English
they go into teaching and so we
we need to match the two and
this bill moves in that
direction
there is a concern about the pay
back I would certainly give
allow our longer grace period to
people in terms of a pay back of
the loan I understand it maybe
incentivize and but people out
a fence in their lives where
they can't get their
but the that that direction is
is right on and I hope that you
know we're all catching COVID
around here but I hopefully I'll
catch this understanding of the
necessity of giving
scholarships for certificates
for jobs that pay well CNN has a
ten week course you graduate
from that you only need to do
addition and subtraction and
your writing code and building
it into robots in ten weeks and
you're guaranteed virtually a
jobs seventy five eighty
thousand dollars that's a ten
week certificate course that but
it cost them ten thousand
dollars up front to be able to
get into it so I'm hoping you'll
you'll look at that
As you move forward but I pod
you for bringing this there are
the concerns that that have been
brought up about that but but I
would call the grace period but
thank you Senator for doing it
or Hickey at Dr Rommel I think
would like to to comment because
I think the scholarship does
cover certificate with Dr
almost.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Hickey as a point of
clarification the opportunity
scholarship does off allow
workforce appropriate
certificates we collaborate with
the department of workforce
solutions on all the high demand
certificates that are needed in
New Mexico they do have to be
credit bearing so some of those
seen in programs that are non
credit would not qualify but
there are many credit bearing
certificates that are workforce
appropriate that are allowed by
the scholarship and and if I may
Mister chair I forgot to add
when Senator Kernan was asking
about the the grace period we do
also in it while there is a two
year stop out we do allow
students to petition for
excision circumstances honest
person Mr basically thank you Mr
chair.
That fact back on that point Mr
chair if I may I I agree but the
practicality of what can be done
in the ten week course versus
state semester
is is very different and I you
know all of us we're we're no
well this are a college educated
and we think that's all great
and wonderful but I tell you
there are fantastic careers that
can be done without six credits
in two courses that can be done
through and I understand some of
those the two certificates I
don't know that we need to go
through that quote higher add
process per se and in fact we
are to be directing this to
unions as well where there is a
phenomenal need for pipefitters
plumbers electricians we need
again we need to match the needs
of the state economy with how
we're educating and so that
opportunity scholarship needs to
grow another step so that's my
main point thank you.
Okay other questions
Representative.
Mr chairman
Senator I actually wanna talk to
doctor Hickey thank you those
comments were great I I really I
thank you for you've really got
your eye on the ball in the
right place
and I appreciate all your
support on CTE stuff that we've
been working on
There's a few things that I
think we can do to make the
opportunity scholarship better
and I think doctor if you have a
great start
but you know some of those
things should be that should be
given for for actual degrees
that we need in the state
it shouldn't be just given for
any degree it should be we
should be working with workforce
solutions to say water the
degrees we most need in the
state in New Mexico those are
the ones the state of New Mexico
in the taxpayers should be
willing to help pay for degrees
that are needed in this state
that are needed in California we
shouldn't be paying for us
taxpayers in New Mexico because
all the going to do is get their
degree and go to California I
don't really want to the
taxpayer pay for someone's
degree to go to California so I
I think that there are some
things we could do to align with
workforce solutions and the
opportunity scholarship that
would actually make this work a
lot better one suggestion I
would have for the bill is that
you know if you're looking at
fox Dr Stewart and almost
promoted you to drive as senator
Neville the Senate bills
Line with this is daughter you
know maybe have something built
in there were if the person does
go back and get their degree
then those loans are forgiven.
So if something in that in that
realm would probably really help
with the loan idea I think the
the loan idea isn't meant to be
punitive it's meant to keep
people in school meant to get
people that certificate or that
degree I think we ought to look
at you know it was it was
Senator Pirtle myself that got
the certificates added on the
floor as with the opportunity
scholarship but they made it be
credit bearing and I think we
all the we look at that you know
we're we're the lawmakers so you
know that we can say we can't do
that yeah we can
and we can go back and say that
those boot camps would qualify.
All we have to do is put law so
I look forward to working with
you doctor Hickey at some of the
straightened out we need to have
a workforce that's ready to work
and I will tell you only thirty
five percent of our high school
graduates go to college.
And out of that less than half
graduate.
So they're going into the work
force that's where we really
ought to be focusing that
preparation and so I think
there's just a couple little
tweaks can be made to this that
would make it better to where if
they ended up than going back
and getting that degree those
loans would just be forgiven
because that's the goal of the
US the way I'm seeing what
you're bringing is the goal is
to encourage them to stay in
school not leave school I do
know they have some waiver
issues maybe we want to put
those in law we're if there's X.
exigent circumstances they can
apply for waiver to take a year
off and deal with that you know
young you know the the young
woman gets in and gets married
has a baby they need to take a
year off that you're that baby
know that those kind of things
need to be put in here so anyway
thank you Mr under pope.
Thank you Mr chair and
thank you senator share for
bringing this bill forward just
a couple questions one reading
from the analysis
how would this be administered
as far as the loan and how I
guess.
The.
You know the department how
would they be able to get this
money back or the do they have
the staff to to do what you're
trying to do in this bill so
Mister chairman Senator I
believe they already do because
all you're really doing is
changing.
The name from loan to.
A I mean from scholarship to
loan so we already have systems
in place where you have people
that are doing these things the
one thing I think it's it's
easier us on here you know they
needed Dr here are Chrissy I
believe that that simply having
the university the college for
whoever's given the certificate
to verify that it's been done is
done so I don't think you have
to create a new huge bureaucracy
for so the student owes a
hundred dollars they got their
degree hundred dollars is just
written off the books and in
your dock.
Of.
So in the course the state pays
for that but the.
But but I think that it's
actually simpler you don't have
to do anything except look to
see if they got a.
Achieve that goal.
So I believe bureaucracies
already in place and it should
be easier.
Thank you Mr chair Senator I
know I was brought up a similar
bill as far as trying to
increase the graduates graduate
scholarship act as well and
those are some of the same
concerns and we kind of went a
different direction to not make
it alone and kind of do it.
the way that the opportunity
scholarship is right now because
of those concerns
You know.
I I look at this is just
something huge what we're doing
here the opportunity scholarship
and I understand folks are.
You know concerned about
taxpayer dollars we're going to
do I those concerns of are we
going to be able to fund this
going forward as well right to
make those investments I think
that's something that we have to
do I understand we.
Want to have folks give folks an
opportunity go back to school
especially folks who might have
been in the in the work force
maybe did finish school at some
point in their life a
nontraditional student somebody
that's like I want to go back to
school and re educate myself and
get into a better career also
like you know what can we do to
expand the certificates in those
jobs I think that's definitely
something we can support but I
think.
As a state to prioritize that we
just think education is
important it might not even be a
degree for the work force but I
think that benefits us as a
society the folks go to school
no matter what degree it is and
I think about when I graduated I
went back to school as a
nontraditional person leaving
the military doing you know
Rozzi at UNM I have my GI bill
luckily I was able to did have
to take loans because my dad
worked at UNM so I got a
discount going there
and stayed with him and I don't
take loans but it was still
struggle so I can imagine what
folks are going through now I
know I've went to UNM they have
a food pantry folks are
struggling with other things and
I I'm just concerned about a
burden that might not
automatically happen if they're
successful but I wouldn't want
to make it to where someone has
to make a choice to say do I go
back to school and take a risk
of going into.
And and I just feel like this
could be another barrier to do
that
and I and once again I get.
This is taxpayer money and we
want to you know hold people
accountable and do that but I I
just Mr chair Senator I just
don't know if this is the way to
do it.
Thank you Mr thank you anyone
else.
Just
one follow up Mr Chairman
eserver I was looking in there
you have to get a drafter
somewhere you could put a.
Five year mmhm period to.
If they return in five years and
and you get your money back for
years.
Your loans wait I don't know I'm
just I want to support bill them
for concerned about putting
somebody in New and.
The.
Unbearable situation when they
go to school and have to drop
out for the baby or for that
whatever reason they can't go
back right away then not only do
they have the expense of the
baby they got to come up with
they got a debt to start paying
off school in our.
Not everything is somebody who
from often at trying to screw
the state it's it's sometimes
it's unavoidable and that's the
kind of thing I would hope that
we could if you could find some
way
to put in there you got some
period of time five years maybe
I could probably go a long thank
you Mr thank you.
Just a couple of very kind quick
questions.
This is the opportunity
scholarship cover the whole cost
of attending college.
The so Mr chair right now it's
the last dollars to anything
else any other scholarships or
anything you had like that
those would be applied first and
then it covers whatever's left
so it could if there's not it is
part of the tuition or of the
whole cost of going to New
Mexico state.
Are there other costs that are
associated with going to school
with the on tuition absolutely
there are what portion is
covered by the scholarship of
the total cost of going to
school scholarship is the is the
tuition.
Okay and I guess what I'm
getting at is.
The number one reason people
drop out or leave school is
financial.
The scholarship only covers the
the true education part but
they've got room and board and
books and your multitude of
other things very concerned that
what this does is if somebody
has to leave because of the
financial of the total cost of
going to school.
And the kids continue they now
we're settled with also having
to repay the cost of the tuition
for that semester or however
many semesters they worry until
the other financials caught up.
That that hinders their future
ability of the default on the
loan that hurt hinders their
ability to get other loan terms
the credit rating I mean set
them up for a multitude of other
kinds of problems that's my real
concern with doing this there
also is a lot of data and
evidence that indicates that any
college improve your overall
earnings regardless of whether
you completed a certificate or
not certainly sometimes the
certificate gets in the door for
a job but overall.
Financial health and wealth of
the person there are fluent if
you will goes up with even part
college even if it doesn't
result in a degree I think
that's good for the state of New
Mexico and I don't think we
should be punishing people for
that so you could certainly if
you want to respond to those are
my comments concerns Mr chair I
don't believe this punishes
anybody at all they still have a
chance to go to school in New
Mexico for free.
so certainly not it's not a
punishment but one of that when
I talk about guard rails.
Last year we funded this with
non recurring money because we
had money.
This year in our budget it's non
recurring money because we have
money.
The price of oil and gas doesn't
do this like people talk about
the price of oil and gas does
that.
And when it does that.
All of a sudden we don't have
any money and it leads to twice
in this decade I mean in this
century's so since two thousand.
Twice.
Oil and gas did that twice the
legislature had to come back and
do what we call sweeping where
we went to all of the school
districts and said while school
districts you've got you know
ten million dollars we're taking
that from you.
Every agency you've got money
over here we're taking that from
you it didn't matter if you were
wisely using your money we took
it.
We also dramatically reduced our
our budget.
Because oil and gas does that.
We need much other things
besides oil and gas as you know
I love oil and gas but we need
something else and I agree with
that.
But this stops.
Today oil and gas drops again
because we can't fund it with
reoccurring money if we don't.
Have reoccurring money and we
can't fund it with non
reoccurring money if we don't
have non reoccurring money and
right now we've done it twice
with non reoccurring money.
So we need to figure out a way
to do this in the long term
financial area.
I believe there are three things
that this bill is striving to do
one is help people get a degree
or certificate actually
encourage them and help them and
move them along.
So it's not a punishment thing
at all.
The is well as protecting the
fund but also just the taking
into account the taxpayers
because often we don't okay we
look at this a state money will
state got the money from a
taxpayer that's where the money
comes from and so those three
things are the are the goal.
But it's certainly not
punishment not at all.
I would like to point out that
the lottery scholarship as
senator my Estes pointed out is
really a tax on the poor given
to the rich because it's the
point that play the lottery not
the rich but the rich get that
get send their kids to school.
and they're doing it more often
than the poor.
So that that's a reverse
progressive tax if we do this
right it would go the right
direction for that tax it will
change taxing the the poor to
feed the richest and and go the
other way.
So I I believe that that's in
there.
The credit bearing things right
now those those have bothered
because what we've done is we've
said okay you need to take this
particular car you need to take
an English class to learn how to
become a welder.
And that's how you get that paid
for.
But I gotta tell you Mr Mr
chair.
If you were a plumber.
You are never unemployed because
if you're a plumber you are
willing to go places that most
other people are not willing to
go and it's not stars.
Things under your house.
You would never unemployed if
you're a plumber.
What we promote plumbers.
A of they can work in New Mexico
today there never unemployed
they get paid very well.
and they don't have a bachelor's
degree although I have to tell
you.
Once upon a time when I got out
of the army I started.
Building house framing houses I
was just the I just drove nails
Senator okay state of the
questions that everybody that
was there with everybody I work
with had a bachelor's degree in
it will make more money driving
nails.
We like to.
So finally I think that this it
can can we can we put a time
frame in it absolutely I think
that would be great.
And we make it so that the loan
is not due for of a longer
period of time absolutely but a
lot of the other things I think
are just not there they're just
not true we're not harming
anybody with this.
The the way it's been brought
about we're not keeping anybody
from getting a degree.
Committee the.
The table non debatable if
you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt though.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my estimates yes please
center Lovell knows.
Senator Pentel.
Senator pope yes.
Senator Kernan.
And senator so yes okay I'm
here.
The pandemic.
Was it a motion to table yes.
Yes.
Four four time should Datia.
There is an alternative motion
anyone would like to make.
Representative.
With the no Representative if
you call the roll on a no
recommendations.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator myiasis moved to
explain.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Senator pandemic.
This is a motion for the past no
right.
Yes.
Senator pulp.
No Senator souls no can we do
have of both but it did move
forward though recommendations.
Thank you.
I thought he wanted to I'm sorry
yes thank you Mr Senator just I
think if and when we do target
this opportunity scholarship it
should be done and should be
done based on who receives it
not on not on a loan repayment
Apply thank you.
Senator thank you Mr chair thank
you.
My.
Hi this.
Yes this I know we've got a
couple of your.
With.
Thank you.
So bill for sixty five
educational institution
demographic data.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members this is Senate bill four
hundred sixty five
it's new material it deals with
educational institutions
demographic data collection
parent and guardian educational
attainment I think this is data
that can be easily collected it
will be very valuable to policy
making I'm joined by by doctor
Lopez and I would ask her to
explain the the reasons behind
this and what it will do for New
Mexico.
When is yes.
Just keep it down continues okay
yes what is the S. one million.
I don't think I'm doing it right
you are just okay for the folks
on the my name is Nancy Lopez
and I'm professor of sociology
at the university of New Mexico
with twenty two years of
experience doing research on
education and health and there
are several reasons that I urge
you to support the passage of
Senate bill four sixty five to
collect parent education and all
admissions and registration
forms from pre school to grad
school.
First free lunch collect in K.
twelve is not enough for
identifying students that would
benefit from targeted support
and equity left that connect
them to post secondary
opportunities second although
part education is collected on
this eighteen and AC team this
is a subset of all students
third while fast what collects
this data less than half of
in rural students that you fill
out the fast I Forrest there's
no other proxy for this data
specifically Paul status
qualifying for financial aid
neighborhoods zip code census
track or even type of high
school attended are not proxies
for part education we need a
dedicated measure fifth how else
will we know who we're serving
for example according to data
from the twenty to twenty twenty
one American Community Survey
from the census bureau New
Mexico has major educational
gaps for adults over the age of
twenty five by race and gender
if you look on your hand out on
page three in New Mexico well
over a hundred and twenty seven
thousand white men have a four
year college degree or higher.
Only fifty four thousand
Hispanic men do for white women
it's a hundred and thirty two
thousand compared to seventy one
thousand Hispanic women my own
research published in the race
and ethnicity journal shows
major gaps and a large public
university in New Mexico that
will remain nameless according
to OMB to either be standards
again these are serious issues
that we can create new capacity
to address six the state is
vital for needs assessment and
distribution of resources that
will contribute an impact the
remedies of the martini Martinez
Yazzie plaque Education Act
Hispanic Education Act Indian
Education Act opportunity
scholarship Veterans Services
accessibility services X.
federal seven it's a huge return
on investment it is true that
there's no state appropriation
for this data collection however
data collection part educational
strength and all of our grant
applications so federal
foundations and will bring more
resources and opportunity to New
Mexico and finally this data is
critical for our workforce
development solutions and
training it will enhance the
impact of these development
programs specifically early
career internship experiences
that transform lives and
catalyze mobility mobility
ladders in my case I am the
daughter of immigrants from the
Dominican Republic who was
raised in public housing in New
York my parents have a second
grade education and because they
were programs that targeted
families from all backgrounds I
sit here before you today as a
faculty member at the UNM so
twenty years from now how will
we know that we have been
successful it's my hope that for
the first time in the history of
our state and in our country we
will be the first state to show
with statewide data that we're
providing opportunity and
imparting students from all
family backgrounds for
generations to come I strongly
support us just before sixty
five and welcome in.
Any questions you might have and
I will add that UNM started
collecting this data through our
work at the institute for the
study recent social justice and
huge equities became visible
that would not have been actual
otherwise if we didn't have the
state so thank you.
Thank you Mr.
The.
Both in support.
Anyone in opposition.
The supportive.
Like to make COVID come up to
the microphone please.
This.
Of.
I'm mark Chisholm on the
academic policy director of the
higher education department of.
Chairman souls Center made us
too so we're in support of this
it's important data there's lots
of evidence that first time
students are more risk of have a
more difficult time succeeding
in their college career we've
been talking about collecting
this data and are easier system
for a few years this week maybe
it helps get off the dime and
start collecting that data they
also support the of.
Funding formula and the at risk
measure and give us a better
measure of that.
Thank anyone else in support.
As I Mr chairman members
committee marks a rather easy to
use the microphone please of
marks another with New Mexico
but it's better to work Mr
chairman members committee March
better than Mexico council
members present I just want to
say that we stand and support
this legislation said before
sixty five we are also following
the lead of our secretary of
higher department to be able to
help work with sponsor and the
Legislature to implement this
schools like yours in New Mexico
are doing this for their
undergraduate students and so we
to realize the value of this new
parts of it so we look forward
to to working with us on the in
terms well thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you thank.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee claim Abbey with
New Mexico State University and
we too want to thank the scent
of the sponsors Center Maestas
for bring this forward we do
much of this data collection
already and we're just support
of of the expended
Look that this that this will
pursue and and trying to capture
my date and figure out how we
can better support of students
so with that we stand support
thank you.
Thank you anyone else in support
and opposition Campos.
Mr chairman Stan rounds for the
school superintendents as we
read this bill let me director
tends to the LFC analysis other
two things would like to point
out of this standing opposition
appears that we will be the data
collecting agency for this this
is an unfunded mandate increases
costs we currently have
executive order twenty twenty
two Daschle fifty eight was
directed all of us to reduce our
data collection and are costs to
do administrative work and this
appears to run counter to that
current and secondly in that
analysis to talk about the
family income index and the data
collection currently under way
in that we would suggest that
that be the first our written to
the colloquial term before go to
additional data collection and
the perhaps you need to get
tighter on how that's collected
and what that administrative
impact would be thank you.
You anyone online.
Okay.
The comments we go to questions
from the committee thank you Mr
chairman thank you members the
up.
Yes folks in the there's a
there's a committee so that
corrects just to one line item
is that available to the
committee.
Do that Greece that the
committee receive it okay the
number one thank you it did it
up changes
Have a on the first page of
better definition for public
schools instead of going through
the public school capital outlay
act thank you it goes to the
public school code.
Yeah we get up thank you and
that's something we could that's
fairly simple that we could
probably do here within the hour
of Albert.
Which online twenty one I
believe is what we're looking at
is that correct.
Revisions on page one it's one
Senator also want to.
Okay.
And so on page one where it says
public school capital outlay act
he would be incorrect it should
read public school finance at.
The reason not all schools
receive funding every year from
public school capital outlay.
But they do through finance.
That makes sense for everyone.
The the the the a friendly
amendment.
Comments on with somebody but
want to move that amendment.
Some of Mr chair again and their
second.
The second the second the one
any discussion about that
amendment.
Your call the roll on the
amendment.
Center branch of Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes.
Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Pentel.
Yes.
Senator pope yes.
Back to Senator Hickey yes.
Senator yes so we do have a
small amendment so as amended.
let's see we we got through both
for and against questions from
the committee separate.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I guess I'm a little
confused
your your expert witness just
gave us all the data that we're
supposedly collecting so it
looks like this is completely
unnecessary because it's already
collected so why are we putting
this into in statute.
Mr chairman and others Senator
is the speak a little louder
please sorry I'm not sure if
this is working for you for the
holding the button like that
from it may not be working or
only working for soon but I yeah
so sorry about that so just to
clarify we do not know state in
the country collects this data
we would be the first in the
nation to do its statewide that
data is not collected as I
explained previously for K.
twelve free lunch is not a good
measure we do not collect parent
education it is not being
collected and in higher ed only
fast for filers are us the
question and certainly at the
University of New Mexico less
than half of students file fast
one so we do not have the date I
just want to make sure that
that's clear
Mr chairman and members only to
argue with you but you shared
all that data when you started
you said exactly how many have
have a you don't have what there
is this these were to use shared
the exact data that you say we
don't have so I'll.
Let me clarify what I shared
with census data.
Thank so we have the data that
is not the data that would be
helpful for students because we
don't collect that at the
individual level for students
and also you and then to start
collecting it but that was only
ten years ago.
Thank you Mr is that about it
and correct I think the key
correct me if I'm wrong but the
key is on on top of page two.
The cell but at the data on line
to educational attainment of the
prospective students parents is
that kind of the crux of the
bill correct.
And that is something we do not
currently have thank you Mr
chairman and and senator I will
tell you this as parents I
wouldn't be giving you that
information anyway.
I tell you it's not your damn
business so sorry
Mr chairman Sir but you would
have that total right to do that
this is completely voluntary and
there's protective measures in
the bill that individual
identifiers will be removed and
it would be reported in in a.
It wouldn't matter thank you Mr
chairman and and I I again you
don't want to you know say how
disappointed I am school work so
she ation is not standing up and
opposing a bill that's going to
add an unfunded mandate to
schools there's no funding to
provide to collect this data and
it it's it's becoming very
apparent the school board
association has become very
partisan and I'm very concerned
about that Joe thank you.
That it is to check.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and I apologize I had
to.
Fix that quick air written LCS
before bill went back out to
committee so I missed the
purpose of this bill
could you just briefly what what
why why do we want this and and
I and I I think you answered one
other question I had and that it
will never be individualized so
teachers will never know if a
student has parents with higher
education because I was
concerned that sometimes with
that knowledge and you have
someone who is difficult in
class but their parents so come
from a higher education
background you could be kind of
a subtle discrimination against
that well that that kids lost a
family so so I guess the.
The anonymity helps with that
part but I'm I'm just what what
what what purpose is this gonna
serve to inform us to improve
education thank you for that
question so I just recently
applied for a multi million
dollar grant from the National
Science Foundation to increase
our communities of practice
around serving students from all
family backgrounds that included
not only you and them but also
NMAA you see in them and the
City University of New York the
purpose of this bill is to bring
resources to our students and if
we are funded we will be
expanding the amount of services
that we can provide to students
that are coming from all family
backgrounds and just to confirm
that data would not be available
to anyone other than at the
aggregate level so that a
particular school district and
state this is our population
this is who is or is not
graduating and this is why we
need more money for stem for to
serve our students better
whether it's a middle school or
in graduate school or as an
undergrad so the purpose is to
bring resources to New Mexico to
serve our students and frankly
we should be getting most of
those resources we have high
need Mr chair and senator and
then thank you very much for
that inside I certainly have
being a recovering academic who
used to have to write grants to
get my tenure at cetera I
understand a number of those
issues let me extrapolate one
other conclusion I'm making in
my mind and tell me if I'm way
off base or not
and with this I guess this is
federal grant money that
Educational districts with lower
parental education all they
would be getting more money than
say the district that I
represent are partially
Representative look waiver
so this would move more federal
money
to
neighborhoods where there was
not as much education maybe
lower social economic and am I
correct in that assumption.
Not only would it make the case
for intervention programs are
successfully meeting the needs
of those students who typically
are not being support in the way
that they could be but it would
also allow supplier for funds
not only from department of
education the institute for
education sciences department of
labor the CDC even this this
data point will allow us to
apply for more funding not only
in education I want to make that
clear also in labor and health
in in all of these resources and
not only federal funding but
also foundation funding you know
about the gates foundation you
know about the Lumina so it's
really about a small investment
now for great people act.
And and thank you Mr chairman
thank you Sir to get it would
necessarily move money would
would bring money.
Bring money and then also that
first generation college student
has such a tremendous impact on
the remainder of that of that
family tree if we can identify
and move that needle would be
tremendous for our state thank
you senator Mr Chairman just one
last clarification on that so
this doesn't mess with the
formula this just brings
additional funds and.
Mister chairman Senator Hickey
correct thank you very much
thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Pinto I think you've
been trying to get in.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you for being in
the bill Ford how many data
security officers to the state
of New Mexico have.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr Mrs
Senator Pinto I don't know.
To my understanding we only have
one and I think it's only in the
department of health.
And if we don't have the
public's trust and we don't have
a data security officer in
higher education or public
education I don't think we are
doing this indirect manner
because we should be finding a
data security officer because
that will we need a lot of this
but stressed and really made
direct.
Should be collecting
so do you know higher education
has data officer.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator I
do not I'm not I don't I don't I
don't I do not however the bill
up makes it clear that any data
available excludes personal
identifying information but it
Mr chairman Senator I may defer
to someone in the audience that
could maybe answer that question
if you'd like to or that I don't
know period still on.
Yes once again I Marxism higher
education department but the the
policy division but I have done
data collection for years was a
statistician with respect for
you for many years we take
security and purple very very
seriously we don't have a person
titled the status of security
officers RC you hi all is
constantly looking at our data
making sure were compliant I
know the PED is equally careful
with their data me this very
very secure I mean we have lots
of firewalls lots of procedures
in place everybody uses of the
data has to take training to
understand exactly what they can
of the cat reveal individual
records we're very careful
anything we publish to make sure
we never and reveal any
individual students record.
So Mister chairman Senator
there's not really anyone
dedicated would just saying that
there are people trained in this
area but not specializing in
this specifically.
Thank you Mr chairman separate I
would suggest are not
specialized but budget gentleman
said there's no title assessed
to that but everyone is clear on
the law and.
At the protections are in place.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you.
There are questions from the
committee.
Senator pope.
thank you Mr chair
I think we're hearing concerns
about folks that can do this job
in appropriation but I just want
to commend you for bringing this
bill forward you know we talked
a lot even during this session
about getting the data getting
the information to make these
policy decisions
we're talking about how we're
gonna dress inequities right in
our state and going those
communities on how to address
that so I'm gonna support this
because we need to get the data
to figure out what what are we
gonna actually do and not go off
assumptions are go off a few
stories were actually going to
be able to figure out what's
really going on and so thank you
Mr.
Thank you anyone else.
I have a few questions of.
If.
I'm here I mean it says very
clearly shall not report
demographic data collected
pursuant that would permit
identification of individuals it
sounded like in the the the
presentation that this would be
used to target programs toward
students how would that work if
it's not individually
identifying students how do you
targeted towards the students
that the.
So here I'll just remind you
that Mr Chairman that at UNM we
started collecting this data so
through the work of the
institute that was added at the
parent educational of oil in
twenty fourteen with this new
data we found gaps in graduation
rates that you know from twenty
fifteen to twenty twenty that
would have remained invisible
this is on page two specifically
sixty one percent of white women
who grew up in a household where
one parent had a four year
college degree graduated
compared to only forty one
percent that's what I identify
any individual white woman
that's simply saying there's a
gap there it's a twenty percent
cap the same is true for
Hispanic women it was fifty
three and and thirty eight
percent so last year as I said
we we applied for the and the
stuff that multi million when I
had the we're not targeting an
individual but now we're going
to bring more resources to
address those gaps and and I
understand but I guess this gets
kind of back to Senator Brandt
point is it sounds like a U. N.
M. you're collecting the data
certainly there's nothing keeps
New Mexico state or any of the
other higher institutions from
collecting that data.
I don't understand the need for
the bills so I will also mention
that I co chair the diversity
council about ten years ago we
had a summit with every
institution in the state they
were crying for help they want
to collect this data they do not
have the capacity to do the
analysis and so this is why we
need leadership at the level of
the state and again this would
make the New Mexico the first
state in the country to do so
and it would allow for
harmonization across districts
and understanding what's
happening in Los crucis NMSC was
part of our rapid posing as well
as what's happening in you know
the eastern part of the state
eccentric cetera so what we need
is leadership at the level of
the legislature because there is
interest and I can tell you that
we have a vote at that summit in
twenty fourteen we're all of the
institutions present we're
talking about two year colleges
and four year colleges ex
federal said we want to
collected but we do not have
either state law that requires
us or the capacity to analyze it
if we did.
You're confusing me more forgive
me but it sounds like if they
want to collect it they can
collect the data this bill
doesn't do anything about
analysis this is just about
collecting the data.
I don't think there's any law
that prevents all of them from
us that of every student coming
in collating the data.
Looking at somewhere or using it
I don't understand why we have
to.
Have a law a law that says you
have to collect the data and
that's just at the higher end
level this would also have it
clear down to kindergarten our
kindergarteners gonna be putting
that in when this is the day to
get collected in what manner who
sets up the rules where does the
data go there's just a huge
number of unanswered questions
about the process and again as a
stand indicated we've been
trying to move away from
reporting additional things that
already for the most part
available.
I don't I don't understand why
we need a law to do this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir so the the I I spoke as you
or your see what you're saying
there's nothing prohibits the
school from doing this nothing
prohibits a school district from
doing this but if there's
someone advocating for this
within that school or within
that district it may be
difficult for them to convince
others not that it's a good idea
but that just the rigidity of
that particular bureaucracy if
with that this committee does
suggest it's a good idea I think
every school and university
should do it
because that that it would be
very very valuable to grant
writing and and and bringing
resources much needed resources
to some of the school districts
or particular schools but in
terms of the collection and the
and the sharing how how would
that take place.
So we know that a kindergartner
is not going to fill out a
registration form for their
schooling it would be a parent
I'm sure most of you probably
someone in your family use of
receive the American community
survey that is a survey that
also powers for the for the
students for their children so
the idea is that would be
collected at the point of
registry registry a child at the
point of applying for college X.
that around and again the
harmonization is the issue most
of these districts do want to
collected but again because
there's no existing law why
should they and they say we're
just going to do compliance
because that's all that's
required so the idea that we
would be.
Future thinking thinking about
forty years from now we can show
with precision that we have made
a dent in these gaps that have
been here for many many many
years and this data point will
allow us to do that at the level
of the district and at the level
of our universities and colleges
including two here and tribal.
Now you indicated that no other
states are collecting this but
you pointed to national
of requests that require this
data we're other states getting
it if they're not doing the
collecting how can that be a
requirement program that doesn't
I didn't mean to imply it's a
requirement is strengthens our
application it strengthens the
impact that we can show our
interventions are making for our
students on a day to day basis
the resources that we create the
communities of practice whether
it's pre school to grad school
that are making a difference in
these and during gaps that we
see decade after decade we have
to try something new and this
potentially could bring more
resources to New Mexico but I
want to clarify no grant
agencies requiring this data it
makes a stand out.
Who are we collecting data from
parents on how many children are
homeless.
Mr chair Senator souls I don't
know.
Things like that's the same kind
of data do we collect data on
how many children are food
insecure.
Mr Chairman etcetera so that I
believe that would be.
Alright alright absolutely if we
knew that wouldn't that also
provide more information do we
collect data on how many aces
children are students help.
You know what I mean by aces
adverse childhood experiences
administrator I was our souls I
don't believe how would be that
would be kind of tricky from a
practical standpoint in my
opinion on an application
process this would simply be
another question to ask on that
initial application but yes
you're here it would be great
to.
A to gather all that information
but we this allegedly grabbed
their done an application
process and how we collect data
on how many I mean again going
through the various aces on how
many children parents are in
jail.
Again information that
absolutely is a social determine
of health in the future yeah
we're focused on just one aspect
when there's a whole lot of
other things that we're trying
to strengthen and an
application.
Without a whole lot of
additional power but we're only
focusing on one piece
educational attainment why not
all of the other markers for
social determinants of health.
Thank you Mr Mr so no I mean in
a perfect world we would have
all that data but this is a this
is attainable it's practical and
it the new believe it's relevant
I think the reluctance that
Senator Brandt had answering
this question I think a lot of
folks would would be reluctant
more reluctant to answer the
questions that you pose but you
have the more data the better
absolutely well I guess I worry
that next year we're gonna have
six bills like this that all of
us for another piece of things
that are important markers of of
children future go ahead Act
college attainment and other
types of things that are clear
determinants of their future
help yet this is picking only
one.
I I guess I don't understand why
you know not all of the other
markers if that really is the
intent Mr chairman I did some of
them maybe I'm sorry to
interrupt but maybe more
important even than than
education attainment of the
parents thank you for your
questions and and your points
which I I completely agree at in
a perfect world we would collect
many many status is that
students are experiencing
however the research is clear
even the national center on
education statistics say whether
or not you grew up in a
household with a parent with a
four year degree is going to
shape how you handle situations
such as pieces eccentrics are
the resource of the network that
you're part of this is one of
the most important data points
that absent an again I repeat
this is not a matter of what we
want to just know everything
about you this is about bringing
resources to deal with the
actual determinants of these
intergenerational
trauma so I hope that you
understand that the research is
very clear on why class because
after all we're talking about
class parent educational
attainment most of us have
children that grew up in a
household where we had a four
year college degree or higher
but for those that don't how do
we know that we're serving them
how do we know that our tax
dollars are actually being
invested in programs that are
proven to help the students I'm
I think I mentioned I'm in
upward bound baby meaning that I
benefited tremendously from
these federal programs that
specifically targeted youth that
came from house so with parents
with the second grade education
and here in New Mexico we are a
prime candidate to bring those
resources that actually could
put it that and all of these
ongoing problems homeless that's
you know asus X. cetera so I do
appreciate the concern but this
is a very important
consequential data point for
everything that you mentioned.
Senator stand I don't disagree
there are a whole lot of other
consequential data points that
if we're going to collect data
we ought to collect all the data
rather than piece meal this one
and then next year and some
other researchers comes in and
wants to know about hunger and
food insecurity and another one
about housing all of which have
huge implications for future
attainment of the child.
But we're not collecting all of
that is as it is and so you have
that I guess that's my concern
is this is very narrowly focused
on one data point much of which
is already available through
census data types of things in
in up in aggregate which is what
we're talking about not
individuals that are gonna be
able to be identified most lots
of that is available through the
census data I believe I know
it's one of the questions on the
census.
And why is that not available
are being used thank you Mr
chairman center souls no that's
a great point I think if you but
keep in mind if you did a up.
An aggregate of a particular zip
code that doesn't necessarily
correlate to children in school
it doesn't necessarily correlate
to
To the to the grant writing that
that that that that challenge
talking about I think that I
think that.
There are families that have no
college graduates.
And their families that have
that one college graduate than
that that has a ripple effect on
the remainder of the family my
father was the first college
graduate in our family and now
it we have like maybe twelve or
fourteen on my mom's side of.
That was
You know I think I was the first
graduate but on my mom say
there's literally not.
It's it's that first college
graduate and the struggles that
they go to and endeavors that
they go through and and their
their ability to achieve that
degree is just paramount to the
remainder of the family for
generations I think that's good
good data I don't disagree but
that you're talking about an
individual identified student
rather than an aggregate where
we do have aggregate data for
zip codes which is typically
school very schoolbased.
As to what those are yeah I'm
not sure I understand their pain
and I know you have another
question thank you very much and
at just a comment so Sen Chuck
all the the burden is going to
be on the
PED and and our school districts
for the benefit of the higher ed
and that that's a little bit of
a concern may be higher it just
take school districts out much
higher it take this on and let
them do the collection the other
thing I just have a question you
mentioned what is happening in.
Eastern New Mexico can you
clarify what you meant by that.
I'm sorry miss such as mentioned
something about eastern New
Mexico the site did a did a
committee part of New Mexico no
I did mention that I applied for
a grant share Senator Kernan I
believe she was mentioning just
trying to tie in the other the
university's NMSU and eastern
but she didn't mention the
actual eastern New Mexico and I
think that's where I didn't
remain the university I just
thought the there were some
issues okay well thank you
that's that's what that's what
she was coming okay thanks.
This.
Guess what the committee.
Mr Chairman over the past ocean
for to pass second thank you bye
Senator Hickey.
We'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes yes senator
bill.
Senator Panfilo.
Nope.
Senator pope yes Sanders Sauls
no.
Have a so we do not have a
levels there is an alternative
motion.
There's no record Mr chair.
Second ocean for no
Representative.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my Estes.
It was the motion with no
recommendation on to to vote
yes.
Senator Neville.
Senator Pinto.
Nope.
Senator Paul.
Yes Senator soul no.
And so we we still are stuck
here I'm sorry excuse me some
different.
We we have a test on that four
and three dollars for yes yes
right at Senator Hickey worked.
Check.
It is a no I had Senator Hickey
Senator by us this is a yes
Senator pope is a yes Senator so
that was enough so we have right
now I'm sorry okay excuse me so
we still don't have a
resolution.
Alternative or I'll I'll make
the motion normally chair
doesn't but I'll move for a
table.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
no.
Kernan.
Senator my Estes no Senator
Neville yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope no one.
And senator souls yes.
Table.
So it is stable and and just.
Comment on my part is this does
put a big burden on school
districts the extra reporting
requirements for things I think
there are lots of other things
that we yeah we're going to
collect data we ought to collect
to a broader range that gives us
the full picture not just one
data point and and particularly
I think most of this can be done
through the local institutions
at higher education without the
need for a law that you compels
everyone particularly K. twelve
to have to do it.
Thank you Mr.
This is needed thank you Senator
Lopez.
We're really still don't see
Senator Lopez.
no Senator Shendo was waiting or
was waiting in the wings.
So my S. this initiative can
come in is that okay.
What remind people we have about
forty five minutes we still have
several bills to.
Yeah I was in my office through
the REC and.
So it is that.
Trying to get W. O. process
worked out here and Frank jobs.
They're merging see bills not
only the.
There that.
The do nothing until you've
worked it out on the floor.
We have other ones that.
All okay I so we'll.
For.
So for people watching were on
Senate bill forty two state
tribal education compact schools
act.
Senator Shendo.
Thank you the Mr chairman
members of the committee.
So I'll be here for this
committee I think this is the
first on here the the session
in the front of the Education
Committee so for with me here to
my right is the governor of the
Pueblo **** the governing
document and to my left is or.
Work your.
One of the directors of
education doctor.
Stephanie Meg I'm sorry I was
going to anyway go ahead I have
to go over this if you were to
the committee before we get
started.
Stated.
At the dealership though the
only million on the public you
may
well good morning and that.
Right and I appreciate and thank
you for a and I'm assuming to
present our bill here and the
after that I'll have to Senator
Shendo.
Speaker in our behalf and then
I'll post a few words also.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman as you recall I'm not
sure how many of you were in the
meeting in Amos back in April
when the legislative education
study committee Hector a meeting
at the Pueblo to learn about the
our language immersion programs
or and what we're trying to do
an established in our community
and as part of that conversation
and I think there was a follow
up in Shiprock when we met up
there at the current central as
well and and talked about the
importance of language in our in
our tribal communities
it and so this bill is a result
of a kind a lot of those
conversations and then also
looking at what other states are
doing as well and so what this
bill
in a not show is allowing tribes
to negotiate with PED at the
choosing of the tribe to
establish what what what we call
a language immersion schools or
cultural of a schools we want to
leave that little broad because
it's really up to the tribe's
what do that what they they want
to do and this will allow them
to create
of the schools that are
controlled and overseen by the
tribal government right now we
have public schools and we have
B. R. U. schools that we in some
instances we have charter
schools but the tribe has no
control or any of these
curriculums or any of the
management of of those programs
and so that's where the
difficulty lies when the tribe
chooses to make language their
preference the priority and so
just to give an example and Amos
and back in two thousand eleven
the pueblo accounts so
challenge to head start and and
past a resolute to resolution to
make our language our heinous
language a language of choice
for head start and so with the
federal government finally chose
to do that and so right now.
Now or if you go to our head
start programming amis you can't
speak English or anything other
than our own till language.
It's a what's happening is that
these these students from three
four five years old get immersed
in a language and then they have
to go into a public school
system whether it's a public
school B. I. E. or charter
school and we put the As in
there to allow them but they
lose a language and so last year
to tribal council elected to
make a pilot of the language
immersion from K. two six
because the figure if we can
have these kids in our program
two six great.
Based on research these kids
will never lose that language
again and after that they can go
into seventh grade eighth grade
and and so forth so I just want
to maybe that have the
governorship few words of on
that and then I'll have of
documents because of this.
Once again good morning and a
when I'm not governor and the
language program a manager for
the education department so
definitely etcetera etcetera
stated language is the key to
our people are our children and
not just the children that are.
At our schools now only for the
unborn because of the future.
But for all of us I mean we hear
coming our ancestors everyone
well we're now here so like to
share a few stuff your of my
list here the heinous Department
of Education primary focus
includes a tribal white language
in a educational programming.
And I built priority of the he
was let language through the
through our motion strategies
and program is to retain and
increase fluency and.
Fluency throughout our community
with a focus on a shape and just
where the language shift is
happening.
And the shift happening I mean
there's so much technology out
there so the influences the
phones television all that so I
mean we our goal is to save our
mother tongue.
For who we are this identity.
And
We also we want to keep that
passion desire and motivation
moving forward as New Mexico has
many heritage and languages and
committees that make up the
unique fabric of our land of
entrapment.
I'm not sure.
Once language laws so too are
the unique traditions cultures
ceremonies and lively's of
people built over hundreds and
thousands of generations.
That's what I wanted to share
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you senator Senator.
Greetings of senators thank you
for allowing me to address I've
got a chance to meet most of you
I am doctor Stephanie back my
Indian name is Gail flower pot
or not I have been able to
immerse myself in the heinous
culture for well over a year and
I promise you Benny Shendo knows
me well and also I just want to
a state that I am a certified
teacher administrator and
superintendent in the state of
Texas and New Mexico I've been
here for four years through this
last year of rigorous research
and being immersed myself in
this whole process of creating
this pilot your language
immersion I just wanted to state
heavily that no wavering only I
support Senate bill four eighty
two because this is going to
allow not only the access for
tribes who have the band with
the the staffing and the
collective capacity to be able
to formulate some of these
agreements where the children
are concerned education and
identity and language we know
makes up that foundation for
success so I whole heartedly
embrace this bill I embrace this
trajectory that we're on and if
anyone had any questions by way
of what that would look like
we'll be glad to address those
but I just can't speak enough on
how this is gonna be a positive
thing for that access to take
place between the public
education department and tribes
should they choose.
Thank you thank you senator with
that of we.
There's a couple of things the
that we want to address the.
In the act I was reading it a
couple days ago I know that the
I believe this compact was
modeled after Washington state
and then on page three I noticed
that the
on the.
Section three.
Subsection to see number two
that that does not apply to this
project because that's an area
where.
whoever can initiate by
submitting to PED a resolution
of and it should only be one
which is the governing body of
the try not the governing body
of any of the schools are
currently funded by B. I. E.
your budget and all that so the
we was that in the summer that
an amendment that needs to be
made
yes we would amend that.
And and the other one would be.
I know that we are.
in terms of the PED the
governing of the exemption from
PED
with regard section.
For page are we on on section
five.
I'm not really clear what we
were trying to get at was to be
exempted from state statute as
it applies to curriculum and the
valuation not necessarily the
seller in the pay scale so we
need to fix that as we this
moves out of here we I'm
thinking that we would probably
still a substitute bill if it
goes to to disagree but just
want to make those two point
because the FY are speaks about
all these B. I. E. schools and.
How many of forty some schools
they're all not gonna be
converting this very narrowly
focused to schools that will be
authorized by the try and if I
think about it you're looking at
ninety pueblos two of two Apache
tribes Navajo Nation might have
multiple schools of the shape to
so you're looking at no more
than probably.
The two twenty three schools at
all if it if if the.
Revolved into that Senator yeah
that's that's a fairly large
change on what's here so I'm
hesitant to just push that down
to the four Judiciary because I
think that's one of the big
discussions are things that we
have here
and so the I'm I'm inclined but
I certainly will of my committee
of have a discussion here but
maybe have those changes made to
come back to us on Friday for
instance if if that is amenable
it is typically we don't we're
not Judiciary we don't do
wholesale changes kind of on the
fly while we're here of things
that changed I mean you it
indicated that kinda one words I
was I'm okay with that.
On page three but the other
where it sounds like some major
changes in surgery to it but
again at the center Brandt Mr
chairman and and I've actually
had some conversations with
Senator Shendo on this bill and
and yeah I know we we just a
little over three weeks left but
I would prefer to see it
continue I think the easy fix
would be page three but if he's
going to do as of at some point
probably in Judiciary if we
allowed out here that he can get
all that done right by a drafter
in flux Council then we don't
need to mess with that I think
with the agreement is that we're
gonna get those things fixed to
resolve I don't have a problem
moving forward.
But other observers the
committee that kind of on those
points.
On the point okay.
Okay.
I just know our our tend not to
do large changes or move things
out where within a three minute
that it's gonna be done before
the next committee but.
But I will be chaired I'm not in
charge.
So that's it for now so will
stand for any questions or you
want to go to audience okay
first those in support you raise
your hand.
Anyone in opposition.
It would you like to come and
say a few words on the
microphone.
Okay
and we do have one on do Melissa
Candelaria in support.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa Candelaria on the
internet with the New Mexico
Center online poverty and a
member of the legal team
representing the Aussie
plaintiffs in the US Martinez
lawsuit we stand in support of
Senate bill four eighty two and
eight Senator Shendo for putting
forth this bold and creative
legislation that recognizes the
important connection of tribal
sovereignty to education this
bill would support tribal self
determination in the development
and native language and culture
based curriculum assessments in
valuation and importantly this
is one of many education
proposals introduced this
session that seek to build long
term sustainable systems that
provide equitable culturally
relevant education for native
students and for these reasons
we urge the committee to pass
Senate bill four eighty two
thank you thank you.
This is really from the
committee.
Representative Mr Chairman is
it's more of a question just
because I want to know not not
to determine how I'm gonna folks
already know how voting on this
bill but I just kind of was
interested as you expand from
the Sierra three six grade is
that also done in full immersion
or do you start introducing
English so that when they
transition to seventh grade they
at least have the beginnings of
the English.
Great question and thank you for
asking
so it is a a documented and well
researched a fact as Senator
Shendo indicated that through
sixth grade is the time to
solidify that home language and
that native language however
with the immersion model what we
are doing is following some of
the components of the Montessori
model and teaching and getting
that formal training and
certification and the English as
a part of that will be
introduced in mid between fourth
fifth grade area so that they
are learning the mechanics of
course of English of a writing
of reading comprehension all of
that in both languages and as we
know not all native American
towns are in Britain so
therefore that writing and that
would just six of that will be
introduced prior to leaving the
immersion up experiencing should
they continue through twelve in
one of our schools they will
certainly be getting both but
they will be well prepared not
only from life immersion in
English because it's everywhere
but also through formal
training.
So thank you for asking thank
you Mr chairman Dr yellow flower
I really appreciate that and I
love that the.
Name for you just that that's
awesome I I just got chills on
that one sorry I just think it's
so exciting that you guys going
to have the opportunity to do
this in your communities and and
keep that culture
at the I love the idea of the
bill there's a couple things
that we were working on to get
fixed but I stand in full
support of it and and really
thank you for.
Providing this for your
communities I think it's good
fits thank you thank yes this
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Shendo going to delay the of let
me know if this is if we want to
do this now Mister chairman
Senator Shendo on page three.
I I move to strike.
If I heard you correctly I move
to strike lines six through ten.
That a friendly this.
Gentleman Center I think
probably the best thing to do is
do that all at once when they
get to Judiciary because when
you do that you don't need to
one after C. C. got to fix some
things in there to make a
grammatically correct so those
really need to be done by a
drafter to make sure that's done
correctly.
If there's no to you don't put a
one.
So.
You're compelled to start.
well that's a great catch thank
you Mr Senator Representative I
just want to just leave it up
with the minutes in here and
then having to do I mean.
The proper amendment would be to
strike line six to ten.
Right the semi colon on page
three and strike the.
numeral one on page online for
we want to do that or not.
I think because we're planning
on doing a committee sub
provider to the next one but
very few are taking notes and
right those that that I I would
draw the most thank you Mr
Senator Shendo and then also on
page three and if I might add as
we're doing that if we can kind
of get a copy of that before
goes to Judiciary recommend my
analyst kind of scanned through
it that it does what we were
talking about doing things good
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman of the Senate should
know that if you look on page
five line twelve.
It says governing bodies of
charter schools comma between
the comma and the word except
put a star.
That's where you would want to
draw that distinction between
what up what statutes and rules
are exempt and which ones are.
but I I think this is a.
I can't.
But I can't wrap my arms around
the whole bill because I'm just
reading it but I mean it just
seems like this is a tremendous
this
Need in state statute and and.
I think will definitely up.
I just have a profound effect
on.
Not just a native committees but
New Mexico as a whole moving
forward thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr chair you raised an
issue when you mentioned
Montessori so what do you do and
of like zero to two three or
before they get to pre K..
Is ECECD going to want to permit
the the Montessori model.
Question only come how.
Curriculum that some of the cars
that in some of the teaching
that.
We have is the road we child
care a lot of the public and I
all.
Approaches the the and not
specifically following but just
leading those pieces that are
applicable for their.
Community our stating that we're
trying to create then at age
three transferring into the head
start and that is over at.
Thank you bye the state has head
start as well so meeting their
criteria and also the goals of
the language immersion program
from three to five and then
we're talking about in a pilot
setting thank you very much Mr
chairman on of proponent of
Montessori I think it's a great
way to teach kids and and so I'm
glad that's all worked out
they're not going to prohibit
you from doing what I think
works best anyway thank you
thank you etcetera etcetera pro.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Shendo the governor.
for bringing this just a few
questions and just kind of
looking at the bill and you know
these questions come from just
getting this this right I I'm
really supportive of what you're
trying to do I enjoyed the visit
I enjoyed talking to the
children and just seeing the
pride of them learning their
language and just that
confidence I seen in the
classrooms it was just awesome
so with doing this in the
language immersion
what happens I guess with
looking at the bill with some of
the requirements that we have as
a state as far as map and some
of the other curriculum I I just
wanna make sure is that still
being covered in how would we
track that.
Thank you.
So we have a very strong
partnership with the university
of Hawaii at Hilo which has also
successfully done this within
the whole state what this bill
is doing is opening that door
for access so with not really
changing anything alone as a
stand alone bill but opening
that door for discussion and
collaboration to take place in
regard to some of the settings
that we have explained today
so for right now it would remain
the same
in the long run and what we are
looking toward is the ability to
have our own assessment tools to
assess that that language
progress in also institute some
of our own benchmark data and
some of our own progress
monitoring but that would take
place with in that negotiation
so really nothing is changed
until that a compact is is
entered so for now nothing to
answer your question
Thank you Mr chair also looking
at the bill it's.
I think it makes reference to
Open meetings and and this not
being maybe available to the
public and tribal communities
just wonder how we address that
because I just think that's
something important.
I think chairman and that's part
of the exemption piece that we
need to work on you know we
certainly you know it's not
close but I think once we
exempted you know like the
wholesale exemption than those
salaries the open meetings all
that conflict so so I talked to
the drafted this morning that we
need to work on those particular
things that we need to do to you
know keep in as part of the
statue and exempt those around
the curriculum but the other
thing small talk about salary
and talk about open meetings and
stuff.
We already do that and so forth
so those things will take care
of in the in the substitute.
Right.
thank you Mr chair and then.
just because of of this change
would with staff students with
disabilities be covered under
the federal ID requirements.
Just kind of looking at these
things and and and and another
question would be.
What what happened at the
federal funding at the FBI a
school became a sex schools that
has that a is that something
that we're looking at as well W.
I. schools.
I guess so Mister chairman of
senator of pope can can you
restate the question again sorry
so the first would be what staff
students with disabilities be
covered under the federal ID a
requirements.
The committee I can answer that
first portion most definitely so
what if and as we're having
these discussions and part of my
role um as someone who has the
the the K. twelve experience on
the state level on public school
side and special it is is one of
my high priority so early
identification making sure that
we are providing those ideals
under under the idea and also
fate to ensure that we are and.
Following all guidelines of
confidentiality and addressing
those needs through support
services and related services
having the diagnostic testing
that something that.
It goes without saying and that
we would definitely be following
as a try but I think that that
needs to be an important part on
the Public Education Department
side of negotiating these
compacts because that's that's
critical to the early childhood
development that we just
discussed on distant so most
definitely.
And Mr chair Senator
the other question would be.
What what happened a federal
funding if a B. I. A. school
became a state school.
What typically happens in those
situations is the tribe would
typically initiate of
there's the schools and then
there's grant schools so the BID
screen so Mister chairman of
committees is used to be covered
by the bureau of Indian affairs
education the tribe chooses to
go the grant school route the
tribe has to buy resolution tell
the government there is that
they're taking over the school
and then it's the best the
funding still comes in but the
control of that school now
belongs to the tribe and so the
federal funds still flows just
like our head start when we
chose to go full immersion head
start the money didn't stop
flowing we just changed it
correctly and so forth so
that'll happen to be a schools
and so forth thank you Mr chair
and senator it's great to hear
that that's not a risk and then
my last question with the bill
The talks about state schools
receiving funding for maximum
salary scale but but then a
stipulation that they don't have
to pay out of state minimum
requirements.
Effective track the page the the
the part of the the analysis
analysis of the bill or the
bill.
I think it was pulled out of
bills that are being protected
role for.
Thank you for all.
We.
Seven it helps that okay thank
you.
Section seven and eight you know
eight to seven and be.
So.
That's the piece that we're
gonna fix in the the substitute.
Because we don't want that
exempt.
So yeah I just thank thank you
Mr chair thank you center I just
think it's important if we're
doing that but we're also
looking out for those folks in
those positions yes
thank you center thank you Mr
chair that's all I have thank
you.
couple of questions and
concerns.
We've got a long conversations
you know I fully I love the
program that you all are doing
but this bill is really setting
up a whole framework for all
the communities to do things
like this and so here we are we
need to be careful that we're
not writing a bill that specific
to yours but that others might
have a very different model that
doesn't fit in
And and some of the question
about.
Teaching of math math was one of
the main reasons for the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit.
Would.
With tribes pueblos etcetera be
able to do away would not teach
math not assess math in order to
do this because this indicates
that all those kinds of rules
are thrown out.
Mr chair of not that's not going
to be the case.
Science has always been our
background medicine and look at
them for years but we're lawyers
brought I'm just saying that I
think is Indian people to look
at Chaco canyon and the science
and engineering that took place
to build that.
I think we shifted over how to
reclaim some of those things are
important in terms of chemistry
terms of biology terms a how do
you take you know a river the
quality things that.
From my own experience.
I was a little the farmers
inside all of us grew up we knew
so much about farming but yet
our education we went to our
school was confined inside the
four walls and so I could never
understand you know what
understanding the principles of
no formal sentences and and
learning about in all the
strategies and and sons in
chemistry and and calculus and
all that all that went into
somebody had to figure that out
to bill talking again.
That's in our blood.
But we got away from that how to
restore that and begin to create
these new concepts again for our
children to understand the
science and mathematics and
medicine all this as part of our
history.
All that would be integrated and
it'll be done I think that what
I I'm excited because we gonna
probably end up having to come
up with new words.
For math concept would have to
come up with new vocabulary we
haven't done that if you think
about.
Indigenous languages in the
world how many were there in the
we're losing them no new
language has been created you
think about in this world with
always about loss maybe by this
we can be able to create the new
language of things that we use
today that we don't have a
language for and that's the
beauty of I think languages and
so our hope is that to not limit
This but to create this
structure so that for tribes
want to do this it's open to
them and it's up to them you
know every try.
Nation pueblo is a various
levels of language fluency we're
very lucky to have him as we
still have you know major a lot
of our kids we don't but
countless children that we don't
want this to go down we want
this to flourish and so forth
for others some of the smaller
tribes they might do a little
different you might be cultural
curriculum it might be a little
different maybe English is part
of that as well I don't know but
but I you bring up a good
question Mr chairman and I think
what we're trying to do is
create the framework and other
tribes to develop what the thing
fits best for their respective
communities and I guess it's a
back we're to my specific
question if the tribe's says map
that matter to us are they
required to teach math and
assess it as required in law
that we already have in New
Mexico that's the best part of
the you know the exemption piece
that has to be probably figure
out between pet and and and the
the tribe in the and so yeah
that that's the piece I don't
you know but I think as we're
learning from University Hawaii
and what they've done in terms
of looking at English
mathematics all that and how do
we develop that and if you to
help shape is that and so we
would be at the point where
we're pie the stuff in a missing
we may find a solution two three
years down the road but I'm a
sure about the next forty
comments I was going to add on
to that as well as a non tribal
in the non native American
participate in this process I
just wanted to note that the
rigor and the
the cross curriculum and the
robust lessons exist and yes it
is just an heinous but I what
I've noticed over this past year
I don't know what's going on
specifically but I do know that
those tribes and nations always
there's a lot of collaboration
and a lot of people ask to come
observe and this has not been
done before so it within.
The state I know that there's a
lot of communication going on
and and not to say that we would
be the trend setter trailblazer
however I believe that may occur
organically through this to say
that math will not be eliminated
and science you know all of the
different components and
subjects that are taught are
being taught right now with no
within its pilot so again this
is access and opening the
conversation but there is that
agreement and negotiation piece
that has to happen so that's
where nope math will be
eliminated you know that's with
that discussion would be held
it's not saying we can do
whatever we want we're gonna
start right now you know that's
not I'm not reading that here so
I can I don't that didn't cross
my mind that that would happen.
Thank you again program your do
and certainly and I hope it is a
model for others but we also
have to be careful because this
is setting up a framework for
almost the.
The parallel that charter school
type of a framework for things
and we want to make sure that is
others are doing this that the
the guide rails are in place for
accountability for all of the
other types of things German for
the lead to a make a comment you
know
We talk about math you know of
the constables zero was created
by the money's you can't do
calculus without zero.
Tried to cover with Roman
numerals.
Yes.
Absolutely you know I'm of.
Apperson and.
but no I have absolutely people
were afraid of the of the road
first because it's it's got some
weird properties about.
Out of the mathematics to.
Right it's just again this is
setting up a whole framework
it's not just a program for him
just but set up a whole
framework up if I do that Greg
I'm gonna put you on the spot
from from a public ed
is public ad capable ready to
just sit down and do these
compacts in the time line on
this is very short it says six
months.
To have all of the rules done
compacts agreements and such to
get started on this are you all
ready and capable.
Good evening Senator yes we are.
Mr chair Greg frosted from the
public education department and
I'd like to recognize our system
secretary for Indian Education
Rebecca Reyes to respond Rebecca
welcome.
Thank you chair and committee
six months is probably very
tight.
Do a compact expressly with
thinking about assessments or
even their curriculum to push
out
Or possible possible it's
probably a year
But with more calls have
happened.
Those governments are if we have
to do it we're gonna try to get
it done but it will be hard.
If I'd for produced that
correctly.
And and that was one of the
concerns is a very tight time
line we want to make sure we get
it right and you may not be the
only ones which really puts them
in in some type provide with it
I guess I don't really have any
other questions is your this is
something if I'm reading the
room is probably going to move
forward please you know as
you're working with the drafters
work with Mary Beth of my
analyst because she's gone
through very carefully and has
the concerns about your does
this exempt Matt is this deal
with these kinds of things I
know the data out of Washington
has had some very positive
Outcomes for students but
there's been some real concerns
about accountability and
measures and
hello those have been assessed
and things of that sort and
again we want to learn from them
and get it right to where we
become the model for other
states.
Other.
S. motion for a do pass.
Second by Senator Kernan if
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan
Senator biased yes Senator
Neville.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes.
You have it pass yeah with the
understanding of a committee sub
towards the the next right
committee thank you thank you
for members of the committee
thank thank you.
I was on.
There was and for.
People over very well if you
want to tell you.
And.
Right so right.
One on the spot.
Notice.
For those in the room and those
on the webcast we're now on
Senate bill four hundred
Senators souls you have the
floor.
The bill four hundred is really
a straight appropriation bill
it's about redesigning middle
schools and junior high schools
in the state we had to roll at
one time because all the
analysts not redesigning meant
actually going with architecture
and changing rooms and buildings
and things of that sort and that
there wasn't nearly enough money
to educators redesigning means
how we redesigned the curriculum
and the purpose of the processes
stand you all know very well
stand rounds is handed the
expert on this item is put
together a a fairly powerful
group of people who want to look
at how we manage the very
important age of six through
nine depending on the model
that's being use of Santa thank
you thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman of will make a short
sweet get to the point for you
simple bill two and a half
million dollars two years of
this year twenty four twenty
five Mr chairman this is to
redesign middle school education
our largest problem in American
education in New Mexico is in
this secretary of kids we need
to solve that for couple years
we've been working on this I
want to give you my executive
advisory panel Alan Morgan
former state superintendent
Veronica Garcia former secretary
of education
Kurt Steinhaus former secretary
of education barbecue terrace a
former superintendent in Espanol
and also in Santa Fe and also
the current executive director
for the regional education
cooperative association and you
Mr chairman myself and this is
our attempt to quality and the
discussion in
in a middle education.
This is not going to be a wall
to wall this is in fact a pilot
to work at a redesign during
those times of those three
elements to it first element is
the transformation and sh and
and change of.
The ability to leadership lead
change in organizations this
will require change of practice
and that's hard to do I did it
for twenty seven years as a
superintendent Eddie trained
feed people on how to do that
but not just third ministrations
also including their teacher
leadership because that's how
you make change in schools
redesign of of the learning
itself to be engaging we want to
middle school students study
getting up in the morning saying
with a parent oh my gosh I've
got to go to school today to
rather get up in the morning and
say I can't wait to get to
school because I need to get
started.
And you can do that we've done
that in limited circumstances in
the past we want to get that as
the lexicon of how we handle
little education and this it
cuts across multi
areas of of instruction Ely
mathematics science of course
are always there of the fine
arts are in part of that but
let's not forget the other
teachers in middle school the
cause kids to want to come and
be part of that and then finally
Mr chairman that we believe you
and we deserve the data on this
we brought in a group called off
the charts a group called me
naturex by the way we will
include apple education is
committed to be part of this
driver and we're reaching out
for other national and regional
and state companies that will
want to be part of a redesign
process and figure out how to
get a ride Mr we think it's a
good investment two and a half
million dollars in today's world
to just a couple of years to get
to that number to this point and
we ask for your support on
behalf answer questions thank
you Mr chair it's really
straight appropriation we expect
the no Representative on to
finance.
Thank you Mr chair that's about
to ask I get to do that to your
bill so it'll be fun this go
around we have any support in
the audience are online.
Do we have any opposition.
If we get a couple people let me
get to people to come up and
make a comment.
Any to can come up first to up.
Supporters.
Representative hold the button.
Without.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Alan Byrne
Steen I'm the president of the
Albuquerque teachers federation
and I wholeheartedly support the
idea of focusing on the
expertise of middle school as
something very distinct and
separate from the expertise for
elementary and for high school
there is a lot of great research
about what we need to do to
design schools to address the
needs of early adolescence early
middle schoolers that's when
they say they're kind of more
months with feet is what
everybody says that's when they
start to detach from schools
that's when drop out behavior
starts that's when drug behavior
starts if we could spend a lot
of focus time I'm looking at the
expertise for middle avid kids
the ages from ten to fifteen I
think we would be able to see a
lot of advances both socially
and and learning for all of our
students and I hope that as we
engage in this conversation we
involve some of the middle
school educators because they
have the expertise and the
experience to talk about what
these kids need and I think the
sponsor for the bill thank you
very much.
Right we'll take one more and
support.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee jokey
and with the New Mexico school
board association for all the
reasons mentioned I think we
will we would like this of bill
to move forward for those
resources to become available
for us to study this very
important topic thank you.
Thank you I did see the
opposition the opposition
online.
with that we will go to the
committee center Kernan thank
you very much my estimation Mr
chair and now so I don't.
I don't think this was this is
something that's occurring in
other parts of the country can
you tell me the other states
that are beginning to do this Mr
chairman and I'll be happy to
present to the committee with
any of that information specific
to the off the charts group has
done this in five states and I
honestly just like the five
states are we'll get to that
information where they've moved
educational long and made
significant impact on the
quality of instruction thank you
Mr chairman and one that was
brought to my attention was I
believe in Portland Oregon they
did a middle school redesign and
I pulled up their mission
statement and I think I would
like a little bit more in depth
because mission statement
sounded wonderful but it really
didn't tell me anything so as
mission statements are always do
so so I do want to know what's
occurring elsewhere the other
thing I would like to suggest
and I do know I have great
respect for Radhika brown Morgan
for Kurt Steinhaus that that I
think it's really important to
include maybe a little bit wider
variety of of people with
experience from across the state
it seems to be a little bit
centralized and I want to make
sure someone from my area is
included in that because we are
diverse state and we do think
differently in some areas so if
you could let me know who's not
be participating from maybe the
southeast of the
other parts of the state needs
to be part of this otherwise I
think it's fine to take a look
and see what that says going to
be thank you Mr if I could
respond to that so this is a
high level thirty thousand foot
think tank if you will our
intent is to is to go to the
next level part of that will be
determined through we we
expected target five middle
schools across the state of New
Mexico those little world and
we've looked at the geography as
far as what's there and our
intent is once we begin to.
Understand the the interest them
to develop those as the advisors
that can give us the best advice
and Mr chairman Senator Kernan
those we on I understand the the
need for the geography to be
paid well attention to and first
involve those folks we the
players don't lose department
chairman this also includes
teacher leaders as we move this
for because they're they're
they're part of the secret sauce
and what allows things to happen
thank thank you that's all that
are Maestas the vote would like
to respond just very briefly
also yeah I'm a former middle
school principal of but this
certainly I'm not gonna be
touring L. E. S. C. but I will
encourage the chair that this be
one of the topics we look at
through this summer I have
presentations from but it's also
as you were indicating the
teacher leader is the colleges
of education have more of a
focus on middle school and
people who want to be middle
school teachers infants school
them up if you will to for that
specific role rather than get
elementary teachers one little
older kids are high school
teachers were younger kids which
is typically how we staff middle
schools.
Thermos thank you Mr Mr souls
and we would do pass without
recommendation.
We have staff Justin over at.
It's just that we're always
trying to a do pass without it
just motion without
recommendations.
I'm not convinced but we have.
We have all of those and we have
a motion for a no Representative
second from Senator Kernan if
you could take the role.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator last yes there for the
well yes Senator pets have.
Yes.
Senator Paul yes Senator souls
yes.
Thank you.
You haven't already Mr chair
analytic on back up.
Then we are doomed out of the
four involved ten minutes or so
we
didn't get through we'll move
those on to write a couple
health bills coming over
Centre will we'll get rid of
