Lujan Grisham's term was
tragically was struck by a car
yesterday evening while walking
her the superintendents schools
in Los crucis the community is.
The other states
no we will get through but just
shows how fragile life years of
November always to help people
which care lot of.
if you all could join me in a
minute or so if I happen to the
silence just kind of the
contemplate how fragile life can
be.
Thank you.
A couple of things this course
today's agenda I will have a
carry over bills Senate bill
seventeen family income index
with Senator Stewart of Senate
bill two eighty nine Senator
Lopez is bill one specially
Division of the IT department
will not be heard today that is
rescheduled for Monday under new
business we have Senate bill
three eighty four Senator Brandt
the closure of certain schools
and then we got a number of
house bill will be the dealing
with house bill twenty five L.
E. S. is that the a public post
secondary education the bill
that's been called the crown Act
the number here discrimination
eighteen twenty two grow your
own teachers scholarship and H.
B. fifty two bilingual mark
multi cultural and Advisory
Council I have informed my vice
chair I've got a national
conference I have to be on the
eleventh and so I'll be to point
out that if we are still going
ending on how and sometimes
house built to the at the
betting already and the move a
bit quicker we may be done by
that point any comments or
questions from committing before
we get started.
Mr Chairman I thank you for
Bring up.
Mr hero and and her passing and
I just want to express
my condolences to your district
I know that's she was Los crucis
as superintendent right now I
actually really like to care and
and and really thought the world
for and was just shocked last
night when I heard about it and
so yeah we've lost a great
educator yesterday and and it's.
It's it's hard to understand why
these things happen sometimes
but I know or or community in
your community Mr chairman will
of we'll get through this but I
I do thank you for bringing it
up in the and just want to
extend my condolences to you and
your community thank you.
Thank you and I am working on a
memorial for next Monday or
Tuesday depending on what
they're able to get ready that
will do on the full Senate floor
at that time.
With webcasting.
Okay thank you with that we will
get started on Senate bill
seventeen the family income
index act Senator Stewart greens
leaders through what that does.
A good morning and thank you Mr
chairman
So the family income index act
came about through work over the
last few years
Up partly explained to the LFC
this past November or December.
I don't know who started this
work but Kim Johnson a retired
mathematician with our a
coalition of I I forget the
acronym but it's a group of
scientists and mathematicians
mostly retired to stay active in
our political work they came up
with a family index that showed
graphically the correlation
between a deep poverty and a
lack of achievement in school.
And they proposed this family
income index to the governor and
the public education department
I have been working with them
for months on this bill it
finally felt like it was in a
place where we can offer it so.
Senate bill seventeen enacts
this family income index back it
requires that the publication
Education Department calculate
this income index for each
school site using data from our
taxed Representative department
the Human Services Department
and from census information.
So they have ranked every school
or school according to this
index and are proposing that we
use a ten million for this next
school year and ten million for
the following year to send funds
directly to the schools with the
highest poverty index they have
tried to make sure that this a
kind of distribution of phones
was as fair and equitable as
possible so if you if you're
district has of schools that
fall into this you know
extremely of high poverty or
their second their next one is
stream we low and very low
poverty then your a school year
district is eligible for funding
so the provisions are that no
more than ten percent of your
schools in your district would
be eligible for funding so this
spread set to a seventy three
school districts would have
eligibility for at least one
school by putting the ten
percent cap on it and then you
don't have all the funds of
going to a few districts
so it does by pass the SCG and
the at risk index it would send
these funds directly to the
school that are identified it
could be used as a third for
reading instruction third
evidence based mathematics
instruction and the third for
professional development or
tutoring after school or summer
enrichment programs social
emotional learning community
schools services parent and
family engagement.
So the accountability measures
would be that school districts
must include these intervention
plans in the education plan they
have to submit to the public
education department each school
district has to include a
detailed description of how the
school is going to use the
additional funding and how it's
impacting students.
Certainly there's there's no
silver bullet we all know that
but this is try an attempt to be
designed to get funding directly
to the schools with the most
extreme poverty
The.
There is a minimum of twenty
thousand dollars that would be
sent just so that a school
districts would have at least a
minimum about amount
I'm not quite sure what the
averages but from looking at the
charts it's going anywhere from
a hundred and twenty thousand to
depending upon the size of the
screen a hundred and eighty
thousand
so.
That's you know that's that's
enough to the fire in
intervention specialist hired
counselor it's certainly enough
to do intensive professional
development to ensure that
elementary school teachers have
the most evidence based
strategies for teaching reading
and math
And so that is an overview of
that as I said seventy school
district seventy three school
districts would be eligible for
at least one school thirteen
state charter charters would be
eligible the the funding is
allocated based on school share
student helpful the low a
hundred and thirty percent of
the federal
S. PL
So.
The
federal poverty level hundred
below a hundred thirty percent
federal poverty level.
So Mr Chairman there are a
couple of technical.
And then
that you have just put up on the
screen if you'd like me to talk
about those I can do that.
And you must be muted.
Yes thank you and and etcetera
but in your time I go to then if
you could move the amendment for
discussion now I'm of the
amendment Mr chairman for
purposes of discussion only.
Right.
Senator.
Mr Chairman page three of line
twenty
this is where we're looking at
how we're going to determine
these percentages ally twenty we
take out the work track after
Census
if you leave that in there we
have of problems with
Determining that some of the
census tracts actually cross of
school districts a census tract
ninety five fifty two is all of
more County but then it combines
wagon mound and more independent
school district so the census
information we want to use but
not census tract information
from the other three amendments
all do the same thing page four
line six
You have to put the some of the
percentages not the percentage
because your you're adding a
different percentages so the
some of the percentages those in
three places all on page for
like six ten and fourteen.
Those are technical issues that
are analysts came up with.
And Mr chairman I stand for
questions we.
Because of the untimely passing
of Karen Trujillo we may not
have the.
PED folks on with us today that
was going to be Dr Tim hand I'm
not sure if he's on I have
Joseph Simon and Rachel cultural
from L. E. S. C. for technical
issues and
and with that I stand for
actions on the amendment for the
bill or however you want to
proceed.
And madam chair I do know that I
saw the secretary was on I
didn't specifically look for
others
I we're on questions about the
amendment from the committee any
questions on the amendment.
Fixing that Mr chairman I move
ado para para um the pass on the
amendment.
A second Mr chair.
About a motion S. second word
you pass on the amendment and
again I think it looks like it
is just pretty much technical
fixes it's not substantive and
all is that correct Senator that
is very correct Mr chairman.
Okay million if you will call
the roll wanted to pass on the
amendment the Senate bill
seventy.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Bills I mean excuse me Senator
Kernan.
Yes.
Eveleth not excused Senator
Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
You have a do pass on the
amendment we're now back to the
main bill.
Mr Chairman.
I think the secretary of
education is on so perhaps you
could.
Go to him first and then we'll
be ready for questions or public
and.
Thank you Secretary Stewart good
morning welcome to Senate
education always a pleasure to
have Mister.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the of the committee and but
before I start I just want to I
just want to thank all of you
Senator Brandt center soul
Senator Stewart and others for
your words about the the passive
drive Trujillo this is
definitely been a very tough day
for the public education
department and and many of the
team members including I was I
was equally shocked and saddened
last night when I heard as well
and so we all of our condolences
go out to the Los crucis
community and thank you for your
for your kind words.
what with regard to Senate bill
seventy I just wanna thank of
the sponsor who's done
incredible work working on this
bill with us it's not every day
where we get to look and see how
can we really create an
innovative way to think about
getting resources to the
students who need them the most
and to do so in a way that is
focused on the the actions that
really make a difference and the
Senators through through her
ongoing work and engage dialogue
has really helped craft a piece
of legislation that we're very
excited about at the at the
public education department and
in the administration this is a
bill that provides important
additional vehicle for the
legislature to really make some
targeted decisions on how we get
our our resources for the best
uses to the schools in a way
that will directly attack the
issues of concentrated poverty
in schools and and how that has
negative ramifications for the
educational system.
In addition this bill really
positions New Mexico on the
forefront of thinking deeply
about how do we get better
information and better data when
it comes to family incomes that
helps us make better decisions
it will put New Mexico at the
forefront of doing this work
nationally and we know that this
is been a finding better ways to
calculate these metrics has been
something that was studying the
interim and in the L. E. S. C.
and we think this really moves
the state forward significantly
with this approach in addition
the the the work of the family
income index is is very much in
line with many of the items for
evidence based interventions
that the legislature has
reviewed and has passed
previously and we think the
sponsor for really pushing on
how to make sure that those are
aligned and how to make sure
that we have the accountability
systems in place to see that
this that this additional money
going to the schools is spent in
the best possible ways and an
all of close by thanking our our
partners at Human Services and
tax and revenue this has been an
inter agency partnership truly
and this is what we think is is
required and needed from state
government four agencies to come
together to think how we can
best use the resources and
information we have at hand to
support each other this was a a
significant amount of work that
didn't necessarily have to be
taken on by these other
departments but when they saw
that it may have an impact for
the for the good of our children
they were more than happy to
come together and create this
this innovative model so I want
to specially thank secretary
Schardin Clarke I know we have
here in in the room and her team
for all the work that they've
done on this bill so we are
we're very excited about the
potential for for this action
and.
Look forward to your questions
thank you.
Thank you Secretary out thank
you senator.
You have other people that you
would like to speak.
I I don't believe so Mister
chairman I think people are here
for to help us understand and
answer questions and so I think
you could move on to the public
comment or however you want to
do the committee.
Thank you senator out though
because if you will take it
through public comment these.
Public comment we will now
begin.
With those opposed we do not
have anybody signed up to speak
in opposition but if anybody
would like to speak in
opposition you may now raise
your hand using the hand feature
in zoom or just raise your hand.
And I might point out also
during public comment we limit
comments to two minutes so
please make sure that you keep
your comments up to sites.
Okay it looks like we do not
have anybody who would like to
speak in opposition so for those
who registered to speak in favor
of Senate bill seventeen we will
begin with Robert Beatty.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Robert Beatty with
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
and a leader with Albuquerque
interfaith hi we're strongly
support in support of that
Senate bill seventeen are and
when I think that Senator
Stewart for all the work and
leadership that she's taken I in
moving this forward.
Where the fact that it's
target shooting interventions
for literacy and mathematics is
important
the data being used in this
calculation I'm it is is a new
way of of looking at it and are
we feel that it's a much better
representation of poverty that
is currently being used in the
at risk calculation.
we thank the sponsor R. and and
appreciate this money being
directed down to the school
level are currently in the at
risk calculation all schools use
the district calculation and and
so we don't feel that that's
necessarily and equitable way to
distribute this is a big
improvement and we hope that it
last more than just two years
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have a great view it's.
Thank you chairman honorable
members of this committee and Ms
curry boats and I met in a
student's APS member of the
secretaries teachers by report
and school masterful of the
United States Department
education and I'm speaking
today is an educator in support
of Senate bill seventeen.
This bill addresses systemic
educational inequities prevalent
throughout New Mexico during my
MBA program in educational
leadership partnering with an
MRI designated school I
discovered that by overlaying on
a map the median income
educational level of parents
home ownership and access to
cars these factors had a direct
impact on educational
opportunities that could be seen
reflected reflected on PED's
previous school letter grade
performance indicators what we
we understand that many
educational barrier stem from
generational inequities in
family poverty so this bill six
identify the areas of greatest
inequity determine the level of
need and spend school
communities and provide those
targeted wraparound supports are
using funds that are and set
aside now these funds I'm
pleased to see that will be
taking for many school but they
are separate funding stream that
we use to support schools and
most at risk communities so the
very supports that Senate bill
seventeen addresses includes
school counselors social workers
family information resource
centers culturally and
linguistically diverse classroom
texts innovative professional
learning after school programs
robust community needs
assessments and academic
intervention and mentoring
programs increasing school
spending in these areas of
greatest need is will be
directly tied to increase
student outcomes.
Which include better grades
higher graduation social
emotional supports and better
tenants in closing I urge you to
support Senate bill seventeen
the family income index will
which will support our most at
risk school communities thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Alyssa Cooper date will
repay.
Members of the committee good
morning my name is of the sector
where they would be very I'm the
twenty twenty one New Mexico
teacher of the year and I am a
first grade teacher at New
Mexico international school I am
also here today to voice my
support for Senate bill
seventeen as a teacher who is K.
twelve experience happened in
New Mexico public schools
interact on I can speak to the
surprise I remember feeling when
traveling to other schools and
seeing differences in resources
and staffing among them the
learning opportunities for
students those differences
reflected were evident to me
even as a child and now years
later as an educator and our
public school system I can still
see and hear about these
differences through another lens
and through additional
perspective and I would really
like to see and hear about more
change and through this family
income index we have a chance to
address some of the most market
differences in educational
opportunities throughout the
state by using already existing
and allocated funds to target
these inequity in the schools
that need it most funding for
districts as has been said
already can often overlook the
specific needs of individual
schools and the family income
index can shine a light on
dozens of schools that need it
but have not been able to
receive that additional support
due to their aggregation the
schools has demographics show
less need equity for our New
Mexico students is a goal that
requires that many roads leading
to it and I think the use of the
family income index is one that
we should pave now thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Ambur braid and.
Ambur braid and are you with us.
Moving on we have Jack to
Caskey.
Good morning Mr chairman and
senator spirit thank you for
this opportunity to comment on
this important to.
Legislation this being
suggested.
I'm a principal partner with
innovative technology
partnerships and also co chair
with a mandate on on the New
Mexico chamber of commerce
education workforce development
committee and we are.
Heavily involved all different
types of educational.
R. as Senator Stuart mentioned.
The CSE has been working for
more than a decade to try to
identify those schools that are
most in need of help and those
schools that actually can serve
as role models for other schools
in a similar demographic
environment this particular
piece of legislation is
important because it's a very.
I would say simple but easy and
quick fix to provide funding
directly to the schools that are
most in need and that's our
research has shown economic
situations involving schools and
the communities surrounding the
schools are important indicator
of where the need exists and so
this particular piece of
legislation provides the support
that Senate required.
To help engage that there are
other more complicated
mathematical methods that can be
used but those will take some
time to implement and and put
into place so we are very
strongly in support of this
particular measure thank you
very much.
Thank you very much I see that
Ambur braid and has entered the
room if you wish to speak in
support of Senate bill seventeen
you may do so now.
Amber Braden.
All right moving on we have
Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
support this bill the evidence
based approach proposed in this
legislation targets and provide
supports the most in need
schools and we ask you to also
support SB seventeen thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have hope what are less.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is what
I listen I'm the executive
director of teach plus New
Mexico I would like to start by
offering my sincerest
condolences to the Trujillo
family in the Los crucis
community after Trujillo was a
champion for New Mexico
students.
Mr chairman I work closely with
more than six hundred teachers
across the state in our teach
plus network and twelve current
champion educators in our policy
of ship for the past several
years teach pluses advocated for
policies and systems that
support equity and opportunity
for our students this bill has
the opportunity to create a
system that will allow us to
identify are most in need
students and ensure that funding
follows to the school level
students in New Mexico have the
potential to achieve a great
levels but many of our students
are not starting at the same
point as their peers this bill
will give students access to
additional resources that can
help provide target support
based on their needs well there
are specific expectations
related to the use of funds I
believe local schools should
have the economy to use their
own data to develop a plan that
will target academic social
emotional and other urgent needs
of their students intervention
needs may be vastly different at
elementary and high schools I
ask the sponsor to consider
creating different allowable
uses of the family in
extirpation for primary and
secondary schools as their
solution that supports for their
students may differ based on
standards experiences and
opportunities thank you to the
sponsor and the NMP second on
this bill with the focus on
equity and opportunity for our
students thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Edward Danya.
Good morning madam chair
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Edward Pena
and I'm a counselor and teacher
from corporate consolidated
schools cover high school in bed
New Mexico where I have been for
the past thirty four years
before I begin I want to thank
senator souls for his thoughts
and my deepest condolences to
the family of character he or
she was not only an esteemed
colleague but a good friend.
I'm here today to speak in favor
of Senate bill seventeen.
As we approach each day in our
schools our primary focus is
educating our students our
students walk through the doors
depending on teachers to prepare
them for their own future goals
whether it is workforce ready or
college ready regardless of
their individual economic status
whether advantage or
disadvantage in order to fulfill
the changing world we live in we
must prepare and be ready to
continue learning and our
schools with the entire mind set
of improving the education of
all students which is vital the
purpose of Senate bill seventeen
is to ensure that schools as
well as the families in
economically disadvantaged
communities receive support to
implement evidence based
strategies to improve outcomes
the important aspect of this
bill in is that it recognizes
the challenges that schools
serving disadvantaged students
is faced but also the
recognition of the impact of the
community poverty and the
effects it has on individual
students but also the entire
school we often hear the word
equity but ready see it in
action the use of the family
income index is it equitable
method to determine funding for
schools that will be greatly
that will greatly affect our
students and schools become
fully vested in working with our
students in our situation to
provide the complete learning
environment students that are
economically disadvantaged are
recognized as part of the school
and a provided a complete and
full education along with our.
With focus with with legislative
focus.
When a school.
When a whole screen are in fact
the district adopts thank you
very much next up we have Joe
damn of auto.
Are you Mr members of the
committee my name is Joe down
the block so I first off I want
to start off by sending my
sister the Trujillo family as
well as to those who knew drive
Trujillo on the two thousand and
eighteen New Mexico teacher of
the year finalist in two
thousand nineteen New Mexico
teach plus policy fellow of the
year I come before you today in
full support of passing of SB
seventeen this bill not only
have cancel to change what U. K.
that really has the ability to
improve and save the lives
through provided much needed
targeted resources and
professionals this bill will
ensure students like Dev who
suffers from anxiety depression
and suicidal thoughts daily
trying to learn how to love and
respect themselves school work
is the last thing on his mind
and Asia indoor great trauma by
being believe suffers from
mental illness and depression
who is trying her best to be
motivated enough to earn credits
required to graduate are
receiving and will continue to
receive services and resources
from the right practitioners
educators are not adequately
trained and equipped to help
individuals learn to cope
negative life experiences we
need the right professionals for
the job we need more counselors
and social workers New Mexico
ranks first in child hunger
secondly children living in
poverty we're second with teen
pregnancy and first in teen
suicide and we wonder why
students in New Mexico when
compared to all other states
consistently ranked towards the
bottom in things like academic
achievement and growth I cannot
imagine that these numbers will
improve in a post COVID nineteen
world without the right support
resources our students will need
much more support and target
interventions academically
socially and emotionally as we
continue surviving this pandemic
Senate bill seventy would
provide equitable opportunities
to those supports resources and
professionals directly to those
individuals and most need they
were just of our desperate need
for more counselors and social
workers has never been so
apparent it is now time to take
action New Mexico's children
needs these professionals and
resources more than ever let's
change the narrative New Mexico
New Mexico being first and all
these negative statistics and
make New Mexico the number one
leader for educating and
providing support to the future
of our.
tomorrow our children thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Jason Espinoza.
Mr Espinoza does not appear to
be here at this time.
So next we have Matthew Paul.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
Just a note on Dr trios passing
doctor Trujillo was a was a
pioneer in treating charter
schools and school districts as
equal partners in the public
education of our students and
our state the benefit of our
students was for foundational
beliefs and interests and need a
lot more to give our students
we're saddened by her passing
and send our condolences to our
family and our colleagues I'm a
school based solution for
driving funding to students who
need it most as been important
and needed for some time most
charter schools in New Mexico
serve a highly at risk
population this bill helps to
direct funding to the schools
that are most in need worst
support of of the bill I want to
thank Senator Stewart for
fighting for equity for New
Mexico students and I didn't
introduce myself on Matt Paul
from public charter schools of
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak Stan rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Mr chairman thank
you for the kindness of honoring
Karen and her passing thank you
to the committee for taking a
moment to recognize the.
Mr chairman we want to thank
Senator Stewart for bringing
this bill forward and Mr
secretary I was remiss not to
thank you for the hard work
United last night as we fared
through Karen's law.
Mr Chairman are we as the school
superintendents association and
educational leaders endorse and
support this bill we see it as a
two year pilot to test in a very
important concept and how we
funded meet the needs of our
students in New Mexico schools
we look forward to gathering
data and information from its
effectiveness and looking
forward to corrected long term
fixes for most needy students
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have lily may Ortiz.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of that committee
condolences on the loss of
superintendent Karen Trujillo
she was a kind great woman and
will be missed I'm willing the
artista provided lands on for
the New Mexico school board
association Mr Jovian and
requested to speak but is not
able to join us this morning as
he lost his ninety two year old
father last night he passed away
during the night so I'm here
representing the school board
association and the New Mexico
scored Association support
Senate bill seventy which sends
additional financial support to
school districts for academic
social and emotional no
interventions specifically
targeting students in schools
most acutely impacted by
concentrated part poverty the
school were Association supports
is funding that will facilitate
and concentrated additional
funds in specific schools for
structured leader literacy
interventions for evidence based
instruction and other
interventions we appreciate the
ten million dollars that your
heart in the house
appropriations and finance
committee bill to fund this
initiative over the next two
years we are thankful to the
sponsor for bringing this
forward and we just the
committee respectfully to
consider this bill favorably in
passing it on.
Thank you Mr chairman for
allowing the school were
association to present our
position.
Thank you very much next up we
have Sean Pearson.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Sean
person on the chief information
officer for the Human Services
department and we I think the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward this legislation ties
directly to our mission to
transform lives of New Mexicans
in communities across the state
and we value the partnership we
have with our sister agencies
the public education department
and taxation and revenue
department and look forward to
working with those agencies to
better support students across
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Amanda Aragon.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Amanda own I'm the executive
director of New Mexico kids can
I statewide education advocacy
organization as you've heard in
testimony for me before New
Mexico kids can steadfastly
believes that our resources need
to be targeted toward our most
struggling and vulnerable
students.
Both in normal times and
especially as it relates
recovering from the learning
loss caused by an endemic.
In the absence of a mechanism to
deliver these funds directly to
families to help and are
pandemic recovery we agree that
providing them to the school
directly is the next best option
we do ask that the legislature
continue to find ways to make
that risk index more accurate at
the school level so that
eventually this mechanism will
be incorporated into our main
funding stream and does not
require an additional level of
budget to fix year after year we
think this sponsor for bringing
this work forward in New Mexico
encourage your support thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have John Kurtz.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I first
wanted to say my name is John
John with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and are to locals in the
Los crucis school district
certainly are mourning the loss
of Secretary and superintendent
trio this morning and on their
behalf I wanted to say thank you
of all the kind of knowledge of
ends of her work and dedication
to the education field we are
here in support of Senate bill
seventeen we won't repeat all
the many good comments in
support of this bill but we did
want to know poverty exists
throughout New Mexico's
education system and throughout
our communities but poverty
affects certain communities more
than others and this bill the
smart way to approach that with
targeted funding and measured
responses that fit the needs of
those communities as they all
are unique and different and in
closing we do want to thank the
sponsor of this measure for her
steadfast work in educational
policy but in particular this
bill this morning thank you and
we urge your support.
Thank you very much are there
any elected members of the
public who wish to speak in
support of Senate bill
seventeen.
Stacey I use within the New
Mexico.
Thank you good morning Mr chair
members of the committee any in
New Mexico in the Los crucis
seasick Los crucis sends our
prayers and deepest condolences
to the family of doctor do you
and the last crucis public
school education family I'm
Steve CI is government relations
director for any in New Mexico
on behalf of our members we
support this legislation the
bills aligned with our
legislative goal of ensuring
student equity in opportunity we
believe that our education
system must be rebuilt on the
core values of honoring our
students well being and ending
systems of discrimination
especially poverty that do not
allow all students to learn and
perform to their full potential
the family income index directs
funds to schools and students
that suffer the highest poverty
rates in the state and minerals
the treatment gap of our most
disadvantaged students we thank
the sponsor for bringing forth
this bill we echo the support of
the public an asset the
committee bill in favor of this
important piece of student
centered legislation thank you.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you for taking is to that
so very smoothly I always like
to go back to the sponsor at
this point Senator Stewart any
comments or or things before we
go to committees for questions
from the committee.
No Mr chairman I just want to
thank the supporters for being
on today and I'm open for
questions.
Thank you senator I will now go
to questions from the committee
and I the senator for the.
I thank you Mr chairman and
madam pro Tempest a quick one
all the wonderful support I I
completely I think you know this
is something that's right up my
alley and stuff I worked on the
hunger free student bill of
rights I think it's going to be
complementary to the work you're
doing here and so I'm I love
that are just just quick
question so how is the are the
funds going to be managed on the
on the the school grounds I
guess who's going to be
responsible for that at the
school level.
So Mister chairman of the the
school funds will have to the
plan for their use and the
efficacy of the use will have to
be part of the school budget
that goes to the PED so the PED
is really the accountability a
gate keeper every school will
have to I'm just I said put in
their plans of how they're going
to use it and so
you know every certainly every
school that I'm aware of in the
Albuquerque public school
district the it's the principle
that is the main person the
bigger schools have a or like a
chief financial officer
certainly the districts also
have that so it'll go through
the usual process that we go
through about auditing be part
of the audits about how we
manage the funds at each school.
Are very good Mr chairman and
madam pro ten that's what I was
hoping to hear because these are
going to be funds of all sizes
that sounds like based on what's
going on at the individual
school
and and and one more time so I
think and in your priest in your
opening remarks and a couple the
other remarks some Secretary
Stewart as well it sounds like
there's a wide range of uses for
this it is can can schools.
I heard you say that they can
actually hire hire additional
staff with just this kind of
funding as well is that true Mr
Chairman that's true this is
really up to the school
so
you know it is a pilot I think
Stan rounds for saying that this
is essentially a two year pilot
to see what kind of affect this
will have on our student of
growth the student academic
achievement so
when when the PED came to me I I
really wanted to ensure that
that we use some of these funds
for academic growth
because it's the it's that
they're very low proficiency
levels in math and reading that
are part of the school's of with
very high poverty it's just
those two areas of the of the
academics that up just sort of
shout out at.
so a third of the funds you need
to be used reading literacy that
kind of issue a server for Matt
evidencebased Matt and then the
other third for anything that
will support the schools so you
could hire intervention
specialist at an elementary
level to make sure that teachers
understand the science behind
reading you could adopt a new
math program and do professional
development at the school level
if you're looking at math issues
but but then counselors.
A professional development
social emotional learning before
and after school programs a
tutoring programs
so help to.
Support a community school so we
we wanted to be flexible we want
to essentially when when we
first started this we just put
in all the parameters for at
risk students that was put in
house bill five in the house and
twenty nineteen so it just had
all those at risk students need
all of this so we tried to zero
in on those areas that were
needed the most also have
flexibility so every school is
different and they'll they'll
use their funds differently and
we just want to make sure that
they put it in their plan and
then they measure it and after
two years hopefully we'll be
able to see if this has made a
difference thank you Mr chairman
and madam pro tem um yeah you
know so so in my business you
know a a university might send
me five thousand calls a year
we're as another university
might send me five hundred
thousand calls here to handle
for them but they five thousand
or five hundred thousand they
still have the exact same needs
in the same structure and and
everyone of those calls is just
as important as the five hundred
thousand or whatever is so is
there a minimum grant amount
it'll be made available so that
it's going to be a so that it's
meaningful rather than well you
get fifty dollars because you
happen the qualifying get the
shoot for it versus you know
fifteen thousand.
Yes so Mister chairman as your
Padilla yes the minimum amount
is twenty thousand dollars okay
we have some very small schools.
Around the state no that that
have the students that are in a
high poverty so we wanted to do
at least the minimum because the
amount first goal is dependent
upon the number of students and
their rank on this index so for
example I'm fairly certain that
the school the
receives the most is a
elementary school in Zuni where
they have a large number of
students
so that is the the and that's
three hundred nineteen thousand.
So there are quite a number with
just twenty thousand but twenty
thousand can do professional
development can buy additional
materials can do some before and
after school program so we'll
see after two years whether or
not twenty thousand even makes a
difference.
Hi this is very exciting and
thank you for doing this
actually went to school in June
when I was young and the very
very nice community will great
I'm glad to hear all this we're
going to I'm sure put some rules
together so that the school
districts and what they cannot
use the money for and I hope
that we train that train them on
that ahead of time so we don't
get folks and any issues if you
are not is that called out on
the legislation is going to
depend on the department to do
that Mr Chairman well Mister
chairman Senator the that's the
department's job and.
They've really created this
they've been working on this
with the CSE for for many months
so it's this is a and this is
their Bailey witnesses in there
we'll house and they want this
to work wonderful thank you very
good stuff thank you Mr chairman
thank you president.
Thank you Senator Padilla next I
have Senator Kernan with the
next one with her hand up.
Thank you Mr chair and.
Rubble raising my hand side I
guess I'm I'm next I don't mind
going ahead if that's alright
center Brandt so I'm well I you
know I I am interested in this
and and not not completely
opposed at all that I do have
some questions I worry a little
bit about
Senator we have some school
districts that have grade level
schools and when you spread that
out across the district.
With those districts be able to
at any point maybe qualify for
some of these funds.
so Mister chairman and senator
this is determined on a school
by school basis not a district
so I understand yeah so
For example some districts have
three schools that qualify I'm
just looking for a minute at
Gallup two elementaries and one
high school qualify each of
those schools will get their own
amount of money not the district
the underscore
make me pre statement question
marks question Mister chairman
Senator is in Lovington all the
first graders go to one school
all the second graders go to a
different school and when you
spread that across a district
you're gonna be spreading that
income I'm a level across the
district rather than by
a particular area of the
community that typically has a
high level of low income.
Families so when you take a
district like Weddington and
they're all spread out
disseminated across the district
I can't see how Lemington would
ever generate.
These funds because they're it
it's different how how do we
address that situation.
Mr Chairman.
I'm not sure this is not
designed to be a district wide
the part of money or funds this
is this calls out those schools
it doesn't matter what grade
they are it looks at every
schools income index so whether
it's just the first of school
with first graders they may
qualify if the school with just
fourth and fifth however they're
doing it they may qualify but
each school the schools that
will get funding have to be and
this either this extremely low
income index are very low income
index so it's not designed to
spread funds through the
district to every school it's
really designed to so I don't
think I'm answering your
question well so perhaps.
Representative Secretary Stewart
could weigh in or.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Kernan with with
regard to your question in this
initial foray that this
in this limit approach we get to
study it over the next few years
we did in the crafting of the
legislation focuses on the fifty
percent the the first getting
criteria was being in that fifty
percent of the distribution that
has the highest levels of
concentrated poverty but the way
that the the way that
legislation is crafted that
threshold is up to the
legislature so if in the future
the legislature did want to
expand that threshold or expand
the amount of funding that would
flow through the family income
index of the the legislation
does it is structured in such a
way where where the the
committee and legislation would
have that that level
flexibility.
Well thank you Mr Mr chair and
and senator I still don't I'm
still not sure dollar it I'm not
getting my point across so so
you have a community and suppose
that community when you think
about the the family income
across a community and I
understand you're doing it by
schools I understand there but
but in like in my community we
have certain areas of town
where.
Two or three of our schools are
cited in areas where I'm just
saying that family index is very
low and so they actually
understand they're probably
going to.
Of they're going to receive some
of those funds so but in
Lovington for instance because
all the first graders in that
communicator one school.
The the family index is is not
going to be reflected because
it's been spread out among.
All the members of that
community so you don't have an
area our school in a community
in Lovington that has.
That they're just probably never
going to reach it but we'll
leave it at that and and that's
okay but I do think it's
something that needs to be
looked at because when school
districts put all the kids in
Lovington in one school by first
grade you're you're you're not
separate separating out those
lower family income levels
they're all together which
averages out with the family
incomes that are higher so I
still don't think that that
we've thank you that part at the
other question that I have with
regard to this bill that it it
does concern me and that is in
the FIR and drove tourney did
sit talks about.
It said the legislature could
replace title one eligibility at
the eligibility component at the
at risk with this type of system
so is that the intended some
point to to determine at risk.
I'm in the formula that we're
gonna change how we determine at
risk to this type of the the
formula is at the plant so
Mister chairman and Senator
Kernan it's certainly not my
plan.
I mean after two years we're
going to have some data and more
information
I think are at risk index works
well right now
at not everyone shares that
opinion but
this is a pilot this is a you
know does it work to send more
funds directly to the schools
where they have such high
poverty and I don't know the
answer to that but that's that's
my question in doing this bills
so one the other intentions okay
well thank you and and maybe
this
in the FY are I don't know who
did the analysis that but I do
think we need to keep an eye on
that because I agree with you I
would not have any interest in
changing the formula because
this in some way actually does
address the formula it sort of
just equalizes but I understand
the intent in online that you
have stated exactly how these
funds should be spent in target
I like that piece and and I
certainly don't mind at giving
this a try and maybe we can
begin to finally see an
improvement in math and reading
one other quick question I don't
think districts are going to do
this but I know some districts I
know the way they draw school
boundaries and so I don't think
this is a lot of money it's not
going to create any reason or
situation there to to try and
capture more kids in one school
just to be able to I don't think
that's an issue but but I do
think that some kiddos may miss
out because I know the school
that I taught it was a
neighborhood school with some
fairly wealthy people there but
then we brought in a lot of
kiddos best demand from out side
the area and it became a
different type of school which
was wonderful I love that kind
of diversity but anyway I don't
think that's going to be an
issue.
but I do I do think it's worth a
try Sir sunset in the bill or is
it just to determine that we're
just gonna look at it and then
see what happens.
so Mister chairman Senator
Kernan there's not a sunset but
there's there's funding for two
years so million for one year
and ten million for the next so
I think at the end of those two
years we're going to have to
decide if we continue if it
needs to change if that hasn't
worked if we need to do
something different with with
the formula to if we've learned
something with this pilot so
it's a it's a two year pilot and
and without any other funding
dedicated to what so Mister
chairman Senator Stewart what
about assessment on that because
right now then we've been in a
strange situation we don't have
any way to know where our kids
are today are we going to know
where they are at the beginning
of next year and then at the end
of next year and then the
following year what kind of
assessment tool is the
department thank you doctor you
single forward.
Well Mr chairman I will ask the
secretary to answer that we
certainly didn't put any.
Of different parameters into
this bill so certainly they have
the current assessments that
they need to do
and hopefully we're all going to
be back in school in August and
September and we will even this
year we do have to continue with
their assessments the US
Department of that has said you
can have some flexibility in how
you do it but you must continue
to assess students so even in
this school year we're gonna
have to continue that but if
Secretary Stewart has anything
more to add I'm happy to yield.
Thank you Mr chair Senator and
and etcetera Kernan on the on
the assessment issue of this get
I appreciate the question
because it's going to be a
critically important one the
kind of the core of your
question is we'll continue to
assess all of those core factors
that we look at and look at what
the difference will affect is
yeah I know it's a very short
period of time but will still
give us a chance to look at the
differential impact on things
like academic proficiencies and
graduation rates and chronic
truancy and and some of those
other core measures that we that
we look at across the board.
And then I think you have a a
deeper question about our
assessment system and and the
pandemic and the way in which
that has that has interacted and
what we've what we've done and
and Senator Stewart just
pointing to it is
we're we're really looking at
still continuing to collect that
data and using all of the
options that we have available
both the the summative exams
that we put into place the
interim exams that that schools
across the state have been given
and many of the other data
sources that that we've been
collecting even if even if it
looks a little bit different
than the way in which we would
we would typically do our
statewide summative assessment
so we're we're still moving
forward on those areas.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for that but I did get the
department at.
Senator did they ask for did you
ask for waiver for this year for
testing.
Mr I'm sorry Sir we that system.
That was go ahead you can answer
it Mr secretary.
Mr Chairman on the on the waiver
we we ask for flexible us
options from the US department
of education and so that means
we're still gonna run our our
somebody assessment system but
there's typically a ninety five
percent threshold we have to
test ninety five percent of
students and we know that given
the pandemic and the fact that
many students are still staying
remote and that there are
administrative and validity
concerns with those getting to
ninety five percent will be a
challenge so what we've asked
for our waiver from the
department is flexibility and
the various assessments that we
use both our own summative
assessments as well as
the interim assessment systems
that that districts have had
and given the option for every
family to take the summative
assessment if if if they would
like so so we do still have an
assessment program that we are
that we are administrative.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and Senator Stewart I think it
is critical beginning of next
year if we don't have good
assessments at to track this
program I think it's gonna be
very difficult to to confirm
that it's working so I really
want to urge the secretary first
but we have to get everybody
back and not you know they're
just a lot of roadblocks in
doing that they are currently in
place that if that's not
addressed before the end of this
year and beginning of next year
we're still not going to be in a
place where we're going to get
accurate data on where our
children are so really want to
urge you secretary to do that
and work with Dr Scrase and see
what we can't do.
About making sure once they're
back thanks stay back and not
that's just real concern but I I
I support this on I think it's
worth giving it a try I really
like the letter C. P. Senate and
Matt and and I trust our school
districts are going to really
take advantage and do the best I
can for these kind of so thank
you very much.
Thank you Senator Kernan Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and I have
a few questions Senator and
restricted Terry project you
being here with us I I'm I'm
still trying to wrap my mind
around this completely but I'm
I'm kind of with the server
Kernan where yeah I think this
might be a good idea but I'm I'm
just not a hundred percent sold
yet so
My understanding is the money
will go directly to the school
this comes through the district
office but it'll be it won't be
one of those deals where the
school district can take part of
that money and use it themselves
it goes directly to the school
to be used at that school
facility is that correct Mr
chairman that is correct.
Was.
Bill on this committee since the
beginning of my time here.
in on the interim L. E. S. C.
and I was under the
understanding that these kind of
issues were taken care of
through the at risk index there
are funding formula so can you
explain to me why that's not
working.
So Mr chairman and senator I
would not say that it's not
working.
Well am I I think we've
increased our at risk index over
the years because it goes to the
district not to the school.
they're you know they're
they're.
That has always been an issue
for some people it's it's never
really been an issue for me
because I've looked into the
differences and my own district
you compare love quase um what
the west mesa west mesa receives
thousands of dollars more
then log quite that they have
more counselors they have more
intervention specialist they
have more
sort of tutoring programs they
have more credit recovery they
just each student that is and
generates a significantly more
money than look quite a so I
think the at risk index has
worked
This is this is kind of a a
different idea that answers
these questions that always come
up of we want to see what's
going to each school we want to
determine you know if if each of
these high poverty schools are
getting more help and
And so this is this is a pilot
to see all right well let's
let's look at these really high
poverty schools let's give them
a little bit more it's only ten
million you know it doesn't go
very far it's being spread among
essentially a hundred and
fifteen schools in seventy one
districts so of the the
department started with forty
million and I just couldn't
accept that if they wanted forty
million I wanted it to go into
the at risk index.
So they've they've they've
they've struck this so that it
is acting like a true pilot
rather than eight a full blown
blown plans so it took me a
month before I agree to carry
the best.
Stop so you know I I have some
of your concerns I share some of
Senator Kernan concerns I do
believe that pilots do help us
figure out if we need to do some
changes and I'm hoping that
that's what this pilot that.
Mister chairman Senator it
sounds like you're saying let's
let's let's try the pilot for
two years will take that data
look at.
We're we're we're didn't and
then kind of decide where we can
go from there.
Cellectis is supposed to be a
targeted.
Targeted intervention I guess is
right you know one of the right
terms to try to target some
funding
I'm trying to.
Remember things and didn't think
Yazzie Martinez judgment rule
that that path wasn't doing a
good job reviewing the budgets
especially when it came to the
at risk index funding getting to
the individual schools and isn't
that one of the reasons that we
have some problems with in that
area.
Mister chairman Senator bread I
would say that's that's accurate
that's an accurate statement
that the judge actually did
really called out the of PED's
ability to look at these budgets
to determine you know how old
they were focusing the at risk
so
I wish I was judge singleton had
not passed because she really
was the person who started this
by agreeing with the plaintiffs
so
but yeah the PED really
Was called out in that lawsuit
for not being on top of these
budget side I think they're
taking that seriously
there are a they're higher of of
the Delgado's superintendent
Cuba I think has really improved
their ability to look at those
budgets because he was a
superintendent knew exactly how
that works so I I think they've
improved and certainly they're
going to have to be on their
game for this pilot because they
will have to determine how these
funds are being used and whether
or not they're being used in the
best way.
Mister chairman Senator think
that's where one of my concerns
come.
Is that we all the the
department was called out very
specifically for not really
doing their role in the budget
approval process.
And now we're going to give
another program to administer at
the school level and so that's
one of the areas I have concern
for we have three hundred
million dollars going into the
at risk index now.
and we're gonna at ten million
but as far as I can see and and
no one has told me otherwise
the three hundred million may or
may not be being monitored
properly and so that's where my
one of my concerns and
drawbacks.
It's keeping me from saying yes
It's coming from the other
concern I have is that this.
Thank you even admitted that it
get the equalizes the funding
formula.
You're going to have we have
this funding formula that the hi
for everyone rave about for last
nine years except my own
district they'll rave about it
so much because they're one of
the lowest funded districts in
the state.
Senator Kernan will tell you
that we we I think I about who's
the worst funded.
and this just further declines
is that so how do we deal with
that.
Well so first of all Mr chairman
of course I was concerned about
at this does not this equalize
our funding formula.
What it does equalizes is the
extra funding that schools get
from other sources no we all all
ready.
Don't count our federal funding
as part of our formula so you
know we already have schools I I
mentioned
west may said they get
considerable amount of federal
funding and they need to every
penny of the so I don't I I
don't I don't say this to
stabilizes the funding formula
but it does add to the overall
Decebalus station of money going
to school districts I admit that
and if you want more about the
so you know one thing my
expectations on PED for this is
I want them to give us detailed
information on how each school
is budgeting their money just so
we can evaluate those
expenditures this really is up
to them to collect this data I
want to see that L. E. S. C. so
so that we can really has a
better understanding of of what
what this pilot is still so
that's a huge expectation that I
have is the sponsor of the bill.
Mr chair if if I could just
address one of the Senator
Brandt concerns in this area as
well
that you're absolutely right PED
was called out on not having the
right systems in place to
monitor some of those budgets so
a big part of the work that
we've been working on and we we
implemented the the first round
of it last year in the budget
cycle work in implementing even
improved version this this cycle
is actually getting down to the
school levels in each in each
area at with the at risk formula
so that we could have a much
clearer and definitive picture
of what at risk funding was and
how it was being used and how
was aligned to the items that
were that were put forward
legislation in the in the
previous session so what so
we've done that in in year one
of of improving on that
particular practice we're going
to do that specifically again
for at risk this year and for
this program as well we take
that responsibility very
seriously and because of SB
ninety six for last year we're
also in development of a
financial transparency website
where you're gonna be able to go
on to that website and look all
the way down to the school level
all these funds and be able to
see very precisely where all
that information goes so there
there's been a lot that's been
put in place to address that
particular issue and I'd be more
than happy with any member of
the committee to to to talk you
through exactly what that's been
looking like and how we're doing
that work.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
should call out the those
findings in your house you
Martinez were before their
current secretary K. and so I
really appreciate an update on
where we're at what we're doing
on that that so that's really
helpful for me to understand how
we're dealing with the at risk
index funding and and how your.
Really holding
districts accountable for how
that money is being spent in
this way I look at that
So the the other area that I I
am concerned about would like
you to maybe talk a little bit
more about is the tax
information.
so normally PED doesn't have
this type of.
Information to make the kind of
decisions were asking them to
make so as a taxpayer in New
Mexico and own files every year
is PED going to now have access
to my tax return.
And Mr chairman I would like the
secretary to answer these
questions.
Mr chair.
The other Mr chair Senator great
question and I know we have
secretary Schardin Clarke on
here as well we work really
closely on this so here in in
this rounds we've been
developing the program what
we've done is department is
basically sent over roster
information through them you
with tax and Representative and
they sent us back a profile for
each school so we are looking at
any individuals tax information
and we weren't looking at the
other specifics on it just
basically said here's the number
of students who fall into this
particular category what the the
proposal in in this legislation
does couple of things one in
shrines that partnership in law
so as we go forward and there's
new administrations it's very
clear that the department will
continue to work together on
this program and the second
thing it does is it allows us to
do some more auditing of the
formula and targeting in
partnership with taxed wrote so
that we can make sure that we're
getting a really precise and
increasingly precise algorithm
to increase more more matches
and that we're able to work
collaboratively on that effort
and if the committee would to
permit I've I would love the
secretary Schardin Clarke if
you're able to weigh in on the
the tax and Representative site.
Thank you.
So madam secretary you're frozen
up for us.
You.
Let me turn off my video madam
Mr chair and and senators that
might help.
is this better yes thank you I'm
I echo the the comments of
Secretary Stewart a moment ago
but I also will just add that
any time taxed Representative
enters an MO you we're we're
allowed to share specific tax
payer data for a specific
purpose that happens under
section seven dash one dash
eight point eight and we have a
lot of checks and balances and
security measures in place the
MO you will spell out exactly
which data goes how it will be
securely stored and transferred
when it will be destroyed what
training must be in place for
anyone who handles that data so
we require any agency that
receives our data to be just as
careful and secure with that as
we are ourselves to to prevent
that being misused and they're
also significant penalties in
statute for anyone who were to
misuse or divulge that data
inappropriately.
Thank you
Mr chairman and secretary and I
think that's covered in in rural
literally on the last page of
the bill right we're has the
section allowing the.
Return information
So says return information not
data from the to the written the
returns and so I I still have a
little bit of concern in this
area I don't think as a taxpayer
that I want
To have my individual tax
information and so I understand
what you're actually doing but
that's not what the bill sets
and so I'm.
A little bit concerned about
that I think that may be
something we need to clarify.
and I understand that.
Some of that information is
shared with other departments
I'm not sure all that happy
about that either
but it has been in the currently
we haven't had too many bridges
for the more places that that
information is stored the more
likely especially in today's day
and time of that there can be a
breach.
And then if you want to address
that secretary.
And then Senator Brandt sure the
way that the language that's
being added to seven dash one
dash eight point eight as it's
drafted it's very standard
language for that section and
you'll note that basically we're
allowed to share just to that
return information that is
required to administer this
family income index act and we
wouldn't share anything that
wasn't necessary so basically we
we would just be sharing what's
necessary for PED's to be able
to
calculate where a student
poverty friend of threshold
level falls in in a given school
so we'll just be matching
enrollees and specific schools
and then figuring out what
they're for where they fall in
the federal poverty levels and
it would be any other
information shared.
Mr chairman secretary all the
information is really kept with
you you're aggregating the
information based on a school by
school enrollment and then
giving the aggregate.
Data to the districts that might
is that correct is that the
right way of putting that.
Chairman and senator Brandt
that's that's pretty much
correct I would just say that
this this language would allow
us to share some disaggregated
data so that T. are so that PED
would have the opportunity to
verify what we've done and and
actually see the calculations
themselves without this law we
can do the calculations to the
best of our ability without
sharing any disaggregated tax
return data but this will allow
us to have a more fulsome
conversation with PED
to be able for them to be able
to verify that we've done the
calculations as was their intent
right right now they wouldn't
have that opportunity to verify
anything that we've calculated.
Mr Chairman
Senator secretary that that
really causes me concern is
going to be honest with you
if you were just putting the
data together on the individual
school ensuring that with the
the the
The department I would feel a
lot better about that I do not
like.
The individual tax information
being shared with a bunch of
different locations again I
think that it just opens up the
opportunity for.
Hackers to get in and still
individuals data I think when
the taxpayers of New Mexico pay
their taxes they believe that
the tax department is the one
who has that data no one else
and so that that concerns me
there's got to be a better way
of doing that.
then sharing that information I
understand that the.
You know you're you're saying
we're proud to verify your
information someone's got to
trust someone in this little.
You're the tax experts.
So I would think that that we
can trust your department to
give that in the information on
a school by school basis to Pat
and they can just run with that
information.
so so that's a real draw that
for me.
And that was a that was a
concern honestly the moment I
heard about this bill that was
my first concern I think the
rest of bills actually pretty
good
and I support the intention for
sure of the bill but I'm really
concerned about the tax
information in today's climate.
Secretary thank you Mr chairman
and senator I I just want to add
that
I share your concerns about
protection of taxpayer data and
and from data breach but I do
want to note that the concern
about it a tax payer could have
about their data being breached
and then them being you know
subject to identity theft or
some sort of financial lost
we for example have taxpayer
bank account information for
example if they give it to us to
direct us to direct deposit
their return or something like
that we wouldn't be sharing that
with PED we would basically just
be saying this is the tax the
students household household
size income and therefore the
poverty threshold is this so
there wouldn't be any
confidential information going
back about social security
numbers or bank account
information or or anything like
that that I agree is very
sensitive to a data breach.
Mr chairman Secretary appreciate
that I will say that that a lot
of us taxpayers don't think it's
anyone else's business for
taxable income level as
and so.
I don't want that shared with
anyone but you
through your apartment that's
just because I legally have to
share with you so I pay the
proper taxes
that's why I really believe the
right approach to this is for
you to activate the data or
disaggregate can't remember
which one short term and given
that data on a school by school
basis to the path so that's
that's where I'm at on that and
that's where my concern lies but
I do appreciate that you're not
sure social security numbers
that's helpful.
But I don't think pad or school
district has any business
knowing
one of families income is
individually.
That could cause problems I
think it's school level thank
you.
Thank you Senator Brandt.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you senator for bringing this
bill forward.
And I think is it is there is a
bit of concern to what Senator
Kernan mention about line page
two lines twenty two to twenty
three when we talk about for
each public school the family
income index
Shaped by passing the district.
But to
Being that school in that manner
even using the tax information
it with if we have out of state
employees what area you live in
and some of the tax information
that is used
you don't calculate some of
these deductions are not
calculated when you do your
taxes when a family is I'm.
Commuting to work you know
they're not they're unable to
deducted doctor of
transportation is to go thirty
or forty miles a day back and
forth five days a week on one is
one income or even if the
without a state if the fathers
working out of state in just a
mother is there
I don't know for.
When we talk about the.
The gross income to and the.
Exemptions that if you're living
and working on the tribal
nations I don't know if that the
secretary can speak to that.
Senator Pinto you're correct
that not every dependent will
appear on a tax return so not
every student will be someone's
dependent on a tax return and so
the that and the for example
there are certain non filers who
don't file a return because of
income sometimes because they're
tribal members there there can
be different right maybe there
military service members there
are a few different reasons why
someone might not file a return
and so with the intent here is
to be as precise as possible and
more precise on this income
matching than the status quo
allows but we understand that
every single student won't be
matched and so to the extent
that that I have given students
who is on PED's list isn't
matched to a tax return or isn't
matched through HSD is process
than the fall back will be that
the status quo of just using the
census tract in other data
that's necessary so I think this
bill is a wonderful in that it
adds precision where wherever
possible to that income matching
but it certainly doesn't take
anything away from what's
happening currently if there
isn't a match.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee and thank you
secretary because on page three
line three when they're talking
about are three and four.
You know I just a gross income
and then modify gross income.
Why do we need like you know
these Senator income sources
instead of just going with one.
Mr chair and senator Pinto
basically that will just allow
us to use whatever data is
available every every state tax
return is going to have the
adjusted gross income the AGI
and that's what follows over to
start the New Mexico returned
from the federal return and only
some taxpayers have modified
gross income so the language
just allows us to to look at
whatever data is available and
make the most precise match
possible.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you Secretary members of the
committee.
So is it modified adjusted gross
income or modify gross income.
At its Mister chairman Senator
Pinto it's both every tax return
will have an adjusted gross
income some will also have the
money gross income R. N. M. GI.
But in here we're just gonna go
with a modified gross income.
I I'm I'm not sure Center
painter Mr chair which pager on
I I have the zoom in front of me
and the girls but I I believe
the language allows for both.
They don't see modified adjusted
gross income but that's just
it's up to you guys if you want
to look into that so on page
three thank you secretary of Mr
chairman and members of the
committee also
When we talk about using the
census tract especially in for
this every I represent the
census may not have being that
much of.
Reliable as far as the data that
was collected most recently is
there going to be another source
that can be
used.
Mr Chairman if I can answer
Senator Pinto first on page
three lines for three and four
it's include three ported
adjusted gross incomes modified
gross income cetera so both of
them are mentioned and if you'll
recall we took out the word
track after the census in our
amendment we we we may use some
census information but we're not
going to focus on census tracts
because those tracks across
different school boundaries so
that was an amendment that we
did originally.
Yes.
But
Mr chairman members of the
committee senator of modified
just gross income cells it's a
different those are two
different numbers if I'm not
mistaken
secretary.
Mister chairman Senator Pinto
yes they are different and and
I'm if you look at page three
line reinforce you'll see that
they're both as I was as I was
suggesting and has done the
Sanchez suggesting that both
contemplated in this bill both
separately.
Yeah modify gross income but
there's also modified adjusted
gross income.
So I'm I'm not sure you can get
the same.
The sentence reads that the tax
from taxation and revenue
department return information
that includes the reported
adjusted gross income comma
modified gross income comma
etcetera so they're they're both
called out in the bill.
I do just need gross income only
applies to that Mr Chairman
visit Committee Lamar I just
adjusted gross income just Is to
New Mexico it's not a federal
number right.
There's there's just not there's
adjusted gross income and
modified gross income there
there's the those two there's
not a combination of the both
modified adjusted.
Okay.
So when the census tract we're
not good there might be Mr chair
members of the committee there
might be an alternative source
used for the area in which I
represent if that information
was not reliable.
Mr chair Senator it is so in in
this case the as secretary
Schardin Clarke mention the the
methodologies to go from the the
most precise information that we
have down the down the line to
other information and data
sources that we have so in this
case if if a taxpayer was birth
us student was not able to be
matched on the tax record with
their adjusted gross income or
their modified gross income the
next most precise information
that we have might be from HSD
and some of their programs in
the next most precise
information that we might have
might come from data collected
from the census so in all cases
we do getting more much more
precise than we currently are in
and all of those cases and we
the reason why you see each of
the different pieces of
information here is so that we
can use the best available most
up to date data that we have
four for every student.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I don't on page
seven when we were.
Eight seven line twenty two to
twenty funding case management
the use of the money.
And the distributions.
This is probably more of a
comment than a question.
The after school programs that
took place in the area which I
was working on the area and
Was teaching.
There became a hindrance of.
Participation based on
would you say providing dinner
in in that sense that if you
provided food that would be a
higher turnout but the there
would be a struggle within the
budget to cover that and even
with the area I represent and
you couldn't just call and have
someone deliver thirty miles
from restaurant out to that area
when the cafeterias off limits
and we we talked about this
family income index and the low
in the very very low students I
think one of the things we
probably need to try and look
into is how can we make the
cafeteria available especially
when we know that food in
security is probably a real big
issue when we talk about parent
participation and student
participation after school hours
and transportation
those cafeterias
the facilities exist in some
cases sometimes even the staff
is still there up to certain
point and then some some
instances there are weight ways
to provide
cold food in which the staff
would probably not be
necessarily need to be present
to find that so I hope we can
kind of look into that and find
a way where
maybe some of this money can be
used to try to adjusts Justin we
where the school can is that
part of the facility I'm thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Senator Pinto.
Senator Kernan again you have a
short question for a second time
before I ask my questions yes it
could Mr chair thank you very
much and I'm just sort of got in
on a little bit of the
discussion between Senator
Brandt and the sponsor and and
just to clarify.
So are is it true that the PED
will have the names of families
that qualify according to the
different level in their May and
matching those two different
schools they actually have the
family names.
Etcetera etcetera Mister
chairman Senator on on the
question the the the process
that we used is
one of which we sent over school
information and taxed
Representative sent us back
aggregated information where we
didn't have any family games the
only have the numbers of people
at each school in the of the
bill in the legislation the
weights drafted and again this
is fairly fairly standard
language
when taxed revenues into to data
sharing agreements it would for
the purposes of making sure that
we could verify an audit the
formula and continue to improve
the the formula over time that
would allow for limited a very
limited amount of information to
be shared nothing
to the level of a social
security number of bank account
or other identifying information
of that nature
and again this is mainly for the
purposes of of making sure that
we're able to verify the formula
improve over time the PED has no
interest or desire in getting
access to detailed records from
from taxed Ralph that's not
information that we that we once
or would or would access from
this it would really be up for a
very specific and limited set of
purposes for the for the
implementation of this act.
So Mister chair I understand the
process you're you're utilizing
that but I I guess someone a
circle then just yesterday
answer are you gonna have names
of families in your possession
to proceed with this process.
Yes or no.
Mr chairman if I if I can
suggest something he now has
school rosters they have the
names of students in each school
they're sending that to tax and
Representative they will
aggregate any information they
have on that group of names and
send back only that abrogated
data about family income nothing
attached to names not individual
names or any of that other
information so and if you if you
look at that section the name of
that section that starts on line
is information that maybe he
revealed to other state agencies
this is the standard language
I've been leafing through it a
taxed Representative of since
information to other departments
they work with other programs
and this is the statute that
tells them what they and send to
other agencies so that's why
they continue to say this is
fairly standard language because
it's the language that they use
when they're working with
You know the I mean it it's for
five pages of what what they do
so I hope that helps and perhaps
I will ask the secretary to
answer so so I guess Mr chair
and it's Senator I'm looking at
page three line to surviving you
all of our discusses apple late
but but it it includes personal
identifying information and you
know I I guess I'm I'm just not
convinced that.
I believe Senator Brandt.
Kind of pull that out in and I'm
not comfortable with that I left
everything else about the bill
but I think that needs some work
and I'm really concerned about
the process because I don't
think I don't think I'm
satisfied that they're not going
to have by school I mean how
else would you do it they've got
the names I guess it taxed Rabb
of the names of the families
that fall into these categories
and then do they just send back
the name of the school are they
attach that information are
these are the kiddos at that
school I mean that that's just
not clear to me at all and you
may just want to go ahead but I
can't support the bill until
that's clear I so it's probably
gonna pass on and then we have a
deeper discussion but this is
this is not.
to me thank you.
Mr chair if I couldn't Senator
Senator I think the the the the
the answer to ninety nine
percent for question I'm sorry
that I'm gonna get you give a
little cabbie ought to that is
we we generally would not have
any family information for for
this for the most part we would
get aggregated information the I
think they're the exception and
I think this is what Center
Brandt was talking about maybe a
concern you're talking about
might be a case in which we look
at a at a school and we say that
this number doesn't appear to be
accurate can we look look at
how this how this calculation
came about at this particular
school and that would be the
work that this
The legislation enables us to do
with taxed Rav to collectively
examine and make sure that the
formula is working in the way in
which we intend and that's the
main purpose of of this and not
for us at the public education
department to get individual
family names for for the schools
it's a it's really a very
limited verification piece that
is part of the process thank you
Mr chair and and and I will tell
you LFC spend trying to get that
kind of information from this is
about businesses and
corporations for years to
determine if tax credits are are
working and that's not been able
to do that so this is still
concerning to me I'm not
convinced and so I'd love the
intent of the bill all of that
is just great with me we've got
to figure out a better way to
identify which schools are
eligible without I'm identifying
people and and that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you Senator Kernan
I would normally have a number
of different questions but it
really isn't going to change my
you as to whether I hope for
against all get with the sponsor
and the secretary I think
there's quite a number and just
kind of lay out a couple of the
things but I don't need
responses because we can discuss
that later and I think a lot of
it may be covered in rural to me
this bill seems very much kind
of when I was the the elementary
principal my district was a
title one school we got a lot of
I the one funds and funds were
supposed to come straight to the
district or to the school of the
district of the title one funds
got aggregated across all the
schools in the district yet I
have high poverty school I
didn't get the share of those
what I'm question would be how
do we prevent the district
problem just supplanting funds
to a particular district I did a
principal in three different
schools and never once did I
actually have a budget as to how
to spend those those all work
control at the district level I
could certainly get
recommendations and things of
that sort but I didn't actually
have the money
the minimum of twenty thousand
this also requires a third a
third a third a third of twenty
thousand is a little under seven
thousand dollars to do math a
little over seven thousand to do
reading it a little more seven
thousand to do other type of
things that doesn't I very much
and a small district of maybe
two hundred students.
That we're talking about a
hundred dollars per student over
the course of the year of
additional money spent I wonder
whether we're going to be able
to see any significant
difference as a result of that
or whether that's just going to
be in the noise also my
understanding is that that with
tax records and other thing
there's about a seventy five
percent match the twenty five
percent that don't match are
their demographic differences
about those of the one third
likely did not match of concern
that those are immigrant
families nonresident families of
families that are below the
threshold even for filing tax
returns
The just the things of that sort
I think the intention is very
good I'm going certainly
supporting it at this point but
I think there's quite a number
of things that need to be quest
out in rural and I'm hoping
possibly one of the early.
Which Reese.
The editor on madam you Sir.
I apologize no problem just on
what you say something that you
may not want the whole world is
here.
and so one of the early Ellie
S. C. meeting is what are the
rules some of the questions how
are we going to manage and
handle a bunch of those
different things and I'm
concerned about you know how are
we going to determine the
efficacy of this over just a
short two year period things
like graduation rates tend to be
a much longer longitudinal study
to determine and then we're
dealing with correlations in the
B. really be able to parse out
how much this actually affected
it as opposed to the changes is
in the at risk index that we
really even haven't had a chance
to see how the the increases in
the at risk index have have
already maybe working on fixing
some of these things again we
really sort all that out from
the north so what there are
other things that doesn't
necessarily read require an
answer but just some things that
I think about and yeah I have
questions and want to be figured
out in rural
if you like to respond quickly
but otherwise we're ready to go
to a vote I think.
Mr chairman I'll just say that I
heard your concerns I've heard
Senator Kernan chair Brandt's
concern I'm gonna ask PED to
look at the paragraph on page
three lines two through sex to
see if that needs to be adjusted
I think that's the paragraph
that's the problem not the last
paragraph in the bill and
if you move this forward I'll
continue to work on that.
Thank you senator I would have
pleasure of the committee the Mr
chairman I moved to pass over
there with the depositor Pinto
the second and I and if you'll
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt noticed on.
Senator Hickey.
I have a trouble with his new
gate yeah and I do see him thank
you Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan.
No but hopefully get this fixed
thank you Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes that are
you have a due process
This bill is still a work in
progress it appears but that
it's got the right things headed
in the right direction but I
think so thank you thank you for
being instead of that we miss
you I'm miss you guys too.
Are we about let's for the
public we just had a do pass on
Senate bill seventeen the family
income index act next we have
Senate bill three eighty four
closure of certain schools with
Senator Brandt Mr Chairman.
Yes Representative thank you Mr
chairman for we we to start the
next presentation centered
around I just want to report to
the committee I will have to
step off at eleven o'clock and
will return as quickly as
possible but I have to be off
the line for short moment thank
you.
Thank you.
Three eighty four.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity to present the bill
I am not feeling well today and
would ask Miss role to Monday I
will stay on the committee as
long as I can but I just not up
to presenting a bill today if
that's okay with you.
Senator that's just fine that'll
allow us to get the some of the
others before
the center for the I have to
leave and I also have a have to
be at a different you met at
eleven so we may be able to to
the others Representative Romero
are you with us for house bill
twenty five.
Senator he may be Cherry health
education.
If we can get noticed again that
is bill years up to work with
him on next whenever you get
here House Bill will move down
to house bill twenty nine as
amended.
Mr Chairman.
Representative would please yes.
Well you house bill twenty nine.
I'm.
The.
Twenty nine.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
Leave this is saying bill we
passed with Senator pro thank
you.
Sponsor.
I would.
We have a motion for to pass is
there a second.
Second thank you bye senator
Clemente
if you call the roll Marianne
and representative that we may
not be do the five year over.
Of we just had a do pass motion
and seconded we may not need you
to under over.
Well we're gonna take a vote if
that's alright with you thank
you Mr chairman is the same bill
that passed out of your
committee before and Mr chairman
I'm in education and the house
side and education in the Senate
side so I apologize.
Yes ma'am we're ready to take a
vote lets you want to thank you
other things that might change
the vote not.
Thank you Representative you
call the roll please.
Yeah and has stepped away from
her desk she will be here
shortly.
I think that I call the roll I
think again and report to her
what the the vote was I do not
get in the right order here but
I think senator Senator.
I'm sorry.
Okay back so I'm
sure I would about number
paperwork that really.
I'm very and we're ready for a
vote okay I am so sorry about
that I was trying to get hold of
a Representative Romero Senator
Brandt.
Yes ma'am.
Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes.
About.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes.
Have a due pass revenue fell out
of education and Representative
that's how we roll over here in
education on the Senate side.
I see that Mr chairman thank you
very much Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you help us out when we get over
to your side you thank.
Okay.
Do we have any word about
Representative Romero
yes.
Education I just spoke to his I
just spoke to his secretary and
you said he's on his way
Mr chairman with your permission
some I am I don't know why it's
not printed there but I'm to the
Senate sponsor for the twenty
two.
Now it is I don't I don't see
representative here at the
moment but if you want I can.
Bill anyone hearing thank you
for your Representative Romero
are you now.
This will.
Maybe not is Representative
Garrett with us for house bill
twenty two as amended.
And if not center but it would
you like to present house bill
twenty two as amended I will Mr
chairman and members of the
committee this is a follow on to
the grow your own teachers grow
our own grow your own teachers
act that we passed about two
years ago that is been one of
the most widely successful
programs that
Scholarship programs that we've
had in state government history
since nineteen twelve.
And
the reason that it's been
successful is really it it
identifies individuals that are
already in the school setting
and just you know insurers like
a bit educational assistance and
folks that already work in the
classrooms and insurers that
they have this opportunity and
and these monies have been
gobbled up in the been very very
successful utilized
that there was an amendment and
and there was further
clarification that was needed
with the program work with the
let the language and that's what
you're seeing here today which
ensures that it's just a student
I'm sorry a play potential
participant in the program that
has had direct experience with
the classroom and so that's
that's kind of where we're at
right now.
Can't hear you Sir.
Thank you that was a polite way
of saying you're good Sir
Thank you do you have any expert
witnesses you know I I I don't
know that there are a few are I
hope you'll raise your hand
because Representative Garrett
is really caring was carrying
this through the house and I was
with her once or twice and I
don't know that there were any
that the.
It had to be called out in the
presentation but I think there
might be a few people that want
to say a few things if you want
to go to public comment Mr
chairman.
Thank you and tell because
you'll take is there public
comment it looks like we've got
three or four that are on the
list and then maybe a few others
and remind the public we limit
you to two minutes of the
judicial.
All of that
Chelsea Canada raise your hand
as an expert with witness is
that correct.
Mr chairman members of the
committee for yeah I'm here for
technical assistant so I don't
have anything to add at this
moment but could help clarify
thank thank you miss Canada I
appreciate that.
That we will now go to public
comment we do not have anybody
register to speak against the
bill are there any members of
the public who wish to speak.
An opposition to Senate house
bill twenty two and demanded he
may raise your hand.
Okay and are you do you wish to
speak in opposition.
No I wish to speak in support
and it's made chin.
Thank you very much.
All right in that case.
Deal.
Hi good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa Dion of an attorney with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty.
And a member of the legal team
for the Yazzie pointed something
out to Martinez lawsuit and on
behalf of an MCL pediatrics for
medication Mexico we stand in
full support of that the spell
thank you.
Thank you very much now moving
on to those who wish to speak in
support of the bill.
We have lily may Ortiz.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I am billing
more T. so I represent the New
Mexico school board association
as their legislative liaison and
educator recruitment retention
appropriation that is one of our
top priorities for twenty twenty
one as you all know research
indicates grow your own programs
have shown success in recruiting
and retaining candidates this
bill expands the scholarship
program school from only
included educational systems to
include all school employees who
have worked directly with
students for two years.
So this we believe expands the
pool of teachers animal SB a
sports legislation that will
assist in recruiting or
preparing teachers for
classrooms we thank the sponsor
for reading this fourth we asked
the committee to favourably
consider this legislation and
the school board association
thanks the committee for
allowing us to voice our
opinions thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much next we have
mark that.
All right next step we have
missed the career.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
testify my name is Missy Currier
and I'm a registered lobbyist
for strategies three sixty on
behalf of our client western
governors university we
testified in support of HB
twenty two WG is a point And
appreciates this legislation and
legislation like it that
continues to provide our
opportunities to grow expand and
better prepare our teachers and
students thank you for
continuing to find ways to train
and retain all school employees
ultimately bettering better
preparing our students for their
futures we appreciate your
support and thank you for the
opportunity to speak today.
Thank you very much next.
We have.
Robbers.
We have this.
Thank you and good morning
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Joel Davis
I'm on the policy chair for
elevated spectrum and all
volunteer nonprofit organization
advocating for the autism
community and we fully support
this bill to.
Better our our teachers and and
support staff in the schools
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have heather Bassett.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is heather
Bassett I'm here from
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in strong support of house
bill twenty two and we
appreciate the Sanchez
I'm I know that's what does a
lot for educational employees
but I also think it's a really
good movie too.
To give a shout out to Dr Karen
Trujillo on on branding aside
yet program she met two of my
best friends I know eight years
ago and brought a high school
educators rising program to
Albuquerque schools now we have
programs in six high schools
with over two hundred students
who are getting career
experience in in education and
so I think down the road it
would be really nice to see kids
students in high schools we're
kind of educators rising be
included in the scholarship
eligibility grant to thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next.
We have John durch.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John Turchin with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico first I want to
acknowledge the Senate sponsor
Senator Padilla it is not an
overstatement to say that this
is a wildly popular program in
fact after it was adopted about
two years ago within one
academic semester our first
graduate from the grow your own
teachers Act scholarship was
teaching in the Alamogordo
public schools and so we have
seen an immediate
responsiveness to grow your tier
scholarship back and one of the
things that I wanted to build a
pond
My colleague the millionaire
teases comment is that not only
does this promote filling
vacancies in our in our
classrooms that point is very
well made by the school board
association also is
promotion of recruitment of
diverse
teaching candidates and that's
really important when we think
about our students and the
quality of education they get
growing our own from within our
communities from educators are
already serving in those schools
and it's really important that
students see educators in their
classrooms that look like that
might come from their
communities so we could not
offer a more strongly worded
support we we certainly urge
members of this committee to
vote yes on house bill twenty
two as amended thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Stephanie Rodriguez.
Thank you thank you chairman I
am Stephanie other guests and I
am the acting cabinet secretary
of the New Mexico higher
education department I would
like to express support on
behalf of both our agency and
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
for each P. twenty two the grow
your own teachers act as you
already know career on teachers
help address teacher vacancies
and grows our state's educator
pipeline which improves outcomes
for New Mexicans you all have
made the important decision to
support the scholarship program
in the past and now
Representative Garrett Senator
by the at education leaders and
advocates have collaborated to
expand eligibility so more New
Mexicans can qualify we can
continue to increase the number
of educational assistance
instructional aides receiving
passed the teacher licensure to
date your investment has already
supported nearly one hundred
fifty scholarship recipient
great teachers create great
students and expanding the
scholarship program is a vote of
support and confidence of both
our educators and our children
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have Erica Roberts.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members my name is Erica Rovers
and I'm here on behalf of New
Mexico first and I'm speaking in
support of house bill twenty
two.
Answered by Representative
Garrett and Padilla New Mexico
first continues to convene town
hall discussions on a biannual
basis or on critical issues like
education health and the
economy.
We continue to hear all of our
town meetings that include
stakeholders from various
sectors around New Mexico and
across the political spectrum is
that we need to capitalize on
the town of hardworking New
Mexicans within our state and
invest in our local workforce
this grow your own teachers
program is uniquely placed to do
just that.
Barriers to funding for higher
education keep individuals from
our lower income communities
from pursuing a teaching degree
and targeting these individuals
from underserved communities
allows us to grow teachers who
are grounded in the culture and
history of the community in
which they will teach this
program addresses many of the
issues brought to let me as a
versus Martinez lawsuit ensuring
that those who know their
community best can service
committed educators within that
community and assets many New
Mexicans are calling for
programs to grow attract and
retain a workforce that's
culturally and linguistically
competent that can create
culturally responsive practices.
As such with the backing of over
four hundred individuals from
throughout the state we have New
Mexico first fully some support
HB twenty two thank you so much
Representative Garrett
pedestrians very Lara and forget
offer bringing this critical
legislation forward and for
allowing me to speak today.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill twenty two as
amended.
Back in may two yes Mr commit
you Mr chairman members of the
committee Meredith mage and
Education chair of the legal
women voters of New Mexico and
all of the other speakers in
support of this bill have
mentioned the topics that we
also believe in very strongly in
order for New Mexico to have
high quality equitable education
system we must grow our own
teachers and we are my only
request is to add more money
every year to this and to extend
the eligible participants say it
is so important and we thank the
sponsors for green four.
Thank you very much next up we
have stand rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee Stan rounds for
the New Mexico superintendents
Senator Kernan you might
remember Mr chairman that back
about twenty four years ago we
did this on the Hobbs and
municipal schools in fact I
think we scope it's that we did
include beyond instructional
assistants who was very
productive for us locally what
we found was we help those
individuals over time they you
know want to grow them inside
they don't go away so Mr
chairman we appreciate the
expansion of the scope this
legislation and we fully support
thank you.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you took are up I'm not.
The car
yes.
When you get back over to my
other screen here of.
Is there any questions from the
committee.
Mr Chairman typically allow the
Sanchez to just do a little
summary not all all I would add
Mr chairman everybody was in
favor yeah I don't know that we
needed after if you'd like all I
was going to say is that the
that the bill did through our
work in and through the work of
the Representative and myself
and others and all the folks you
heard from it did glide through
the house unanimously through
both committees in the for
that's I want to say thank you
okay thank you are there any
comments from the committee.
I'm not seeing any heads is the
what is the question the
committee please.
I'm moving to pass seven.
And second I think that was
Senator Kernan yes you'll call
the roll please.
I'm sorry I forgot to turn off
my police return on my point
okay Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes and senator
souls.
Yes I have a due pass.
They do pass on house bill
twenty two as amended to grow
your own teachers acts dollars
shipped is Representative Romero
with us yet.
I am Mr Chairman good morning.
Good morning we are ready for
you on house bill twenty five
the only a few study of public
and postsecondary education
thank you for making progress I
know you're Cherry over on the
house side.
Only thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee it's good to see
you all on it's nice to see new
faces of this legislative
session I want to say that
outside of the house so this is
house bill twenty five and those
of you that have been around the
past so it's been a while that
this bill has making has been
making its way around
it's to expand the scope of our
legislative education study
committee to include higher
education currently on the L. E.
S. C.
Is is tasked with the K. twelve
system as well as the only
aspect of higher education is
the are the colleges of
education so this would be
expanded to include all of
higher education it's passed the
Senate before I believe it was
three or four years ago that it
passed the Senate it's passed
the house before but never full
some hoping to complete the
trifecta this year and get the
house and Senate and the
governor to sign it and really
unite our systems together and
in expanding the scope of our
legislative education study
committee and understand more
fully our students education
throughout the K. through
sixteen system that we have so
with that Mr Chairman members of
the committee all stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative get any
technical experts or those of
just stand by in case there are.
I I believe I director dentals
here and if I may I would defer
to her if there are any
questions but but I'll be fine
as thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman
so current you'll take a few of
public input these.
For house bill twenty five did
not have any members of the
public who registered in advance
to speak in opposition either.
Are there any members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition at this time please
raise your hand.
Okay moving on to those members
of the public who wish to speak
in favor first off we have Max
Baca.
Good morning on all members of
the the Senate education and
Senator souls and all your
family I know my condolences to
you and
our hearts and prayers are going
out to you and all your
community so thank you very much
I had a ability to work with
care when she had PED for the
short while she such a such a
talented person and she's gonna
be a great loss to us so you're
in our prayers so Mr Mr chairman
we think the the honorable and
service later of Mr
Representative Romero bringing
this bill forward we don't
really have a.
We just want to bring a couple
of concerns from highlands
university and some of the
concerns are.
The workload on Ellie S. C. can
they really take on this this
type of work and if you look
over the last prior to COVID
nineteen ninety percent of the
bills are ninety percent of the
items on your interim you
average about maybe
eighty to sixty items per
interim from that basically June
and to December and ninety
percent of on average have to do
with public education higher ed
was probably maybe ten percent
and that was typically it fell
within the realm of
on the annual report in going
over the annual report so I'm
just concerned with the the
number of items that are on the
plate a valley just see that
that higher education will get
the attention that it needs
certain order to help align and
coordinate across the line I
think that's the intention of of
this legislation yes take to
realign higher education the
only other concern we have is a
and possibly complication if L.
E. S. C. takes a position on
policy as and it's supposed to
LFC and as opposed to this
coordinating council which is
different from it hiring for the
higher education department if
we get into those situations.
Thank you very much next up we
had marks of it who does not
appear to be on this call so we
will move on to Meredith
Meredith Meijin.
You are muted okay Mister
chairman members of the
committee I'm more information
education chair for the league
of women voters of New Mexico
and I have been listening in
observing L. AST meetings both
as an educator of thirty eight
years thirty six of which were
higher and levels and to it
secondary and I wanted to say as
a former liaison between Santa
Fe public schools in Santa Fe
community college that was
absolutely urgent for secondary
and postsecondary institutions
to work together and frankly to
work without the throughout the
whole spectrum from early
childhood all the way to through
a post secondary there is such a
huge gap even though we have
made progress in the state over
the years in aligning the some
of the graduation requirements
but still approximately eighty
percent of the students to take
algebra two for instance in high
school are prepared for college
level math we need to work
together as a high quality
equitable education system and
only by having B. L. E. S. C.
have purview of all for at least
three alignment with secondary
and postsecondary we will make
progress thank you.
Thank you very much do we have
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
house bill twenty five.
Please raise your hand stand
rounds thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents but at the
moment let me act as a
historian.
I worked in the LFC in nineteen
eighty three is the financial
analyst guess what the
originating issue was for the L.
E. S. C. it was higher education
there was a poll that came out
from a UNM professor called the
love lost poem in in the in the
legislature's desire to look
into practices at higher
education they actually created
the leduc case study committee
it then became up absolutely
appropriate that they in fact
study the entire gamut of
education in the articulation
between those parts in fact in
nineteen eighty three with the
staff of four we were able to
handle the workload of bills in
both arenas and run the
appropriate and analytics so Mr
chairman we stand in support of
the.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you to our will now head
to questions from the committee
on the other Brett.
Two passed.
That motion produce passive
Center bread is their second
second again by Senator Padilla
again I wanna make sure any
questions from the committee.
If not very and if you'll call
the roll please.
Your Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yes.
Kernan.
Yes Senator bell.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes
Representative you have a new
path on house bill twenty nine
twenty five by LFC study a
public post secondary education.
Thank you.
Thanks for gracing our Canadian
course thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee.
Thank you and I think the last
bill that we've got on our
agenda is house bill fifty two
is amended by liberal
multicultural and Advisory
Council Representative Figueroa
are you with the.
I have Mister chair.
So if you'll please present
welcome to Senate education.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee house bill fifty two
as amended establishes the
bilingual multicultural
Education Advisory Council in
statute is currently an ad hoc
committee
service to ensure that the
stakeholder voices of our
linguistic diversity.
Are included and guiding and the
implementation of the bilingual
multicultural Education Act I do
have an expert witness but he is
content given your time
constraints to just be available
for questions and that is the
dance on the lot of.
He is here and with that we will
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative that's
nice that you have an expert if
that's necessary
The card you'll take us out to
public input.
To repeat what others say we
limit you to two minutes yeah
please because I.
Public comment for house bill
fifty two as amended we do not
have any members of the public
register to speak against the
bill at the members who wish to
speak in opposition to house
bill fifty few as amended please
raise your hand.
Megan.
Speaking in support of the bill
it's very very important I'll
just continue with quickly that
Mr chairman members of the
committee league of women voters
stands in strong support of this
bill and thank the sponsor for
bringing it forward.
Thank you any other members of
the public who wish to speak in
opposition of this bill.
Loretta.
Salazar.
Yes.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
All my name is Dr Loretta
selesai I'm emeritus professor
from New Mexico highlands
university and also a member of
the coalition I respectfully ask
that you support house bill
fifty two.
Which will because currently
it's an ad hoc committee and its
role is to uphold and safeguard
the by the oil multicultural
Education Act it's critical that
this be official by
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you very much.
We will call for support
comments of support
which we will now do.
And it.
The deal.
You can.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name as a leasing
deal and I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico state online
poverty as I've mentioned and
also a member of the legal team
for the Yazzie plaintiffs in the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit I am C.
O. P. and transform education
New Mexico stand in full support
of this bill this legislation is
consistent with the Yazzie
Martinez case which calls for
the full implementation of laws
already on our books including
the bilingual multicultural
Education Act we believe HB
fifty to help further the
state's efforts in providing
access to culturally and
linguistically relevant
education to the for student
groups identified in the case
thank you.
Thank you very much we also had
a public comment from Patricia
Jimenez lay them who cannot be
here today but are there any
other members of the public who
wish to speak in support of
house bill fifty two as amended.
That includes public comment at
this time thank you very much.
Thank you Kara of.
Looking for wholesaler but yeah
I thank you Mr chairman and I.
Don't see we do have other hands
I I announced much earlier
Representative that I do have to
step off this me out of this
meeting at eleven o'clock so
respectfully I want to let you
know that I did say that much
earlier it I don't know if
you're allowing this Mr chairman
but I would move to pass even
though I I don't know that we'll
get to the vote at that point.
Of that that motion Senator will
stay on the table as we get to
other comments Senator in.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Representative for being this
bill Ford and I.
Up.
We have we already have other
councils or other houses can be
different.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for an excellent
question we do have an Indian
Education Act Advisory Council
we do have Hispanic Education
Act Advisory Council and then
both of those acts there is
some.
Reference to language but the
bilingual multicultural Act
encompasses all of New Mexico's
indigenous languages as well as
Spanish.
Focuses and specializes in
language acquisition these are
experts in the field of teacher
development of supporting
heritage language of language
acquisition itself of measuring
proficiency of supporting the
cultural
aspect of language development
because these things are
intertwined so while the Indian
Education Act focuses more on
Broad programs and families and
supporters this one focuses on
that language acquisition peace.
Thank you Representative.
Mr chair members of the
committee and how are you going
to have this kind of meshed with
the I mean because the tribal
sovereignty and the tribe's
right to
you know that incorporate
language I teach language
however they see fit.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
another potentially could
question that committee has been
expanded
so that in working collaboration
and feedback from tribal
entities is expanded to have
five members appointed by a
indigenous cultures in the state
indigenous government entities
to make sure that that aspect is
considered and supported even
the last year of proficiency
needs to be looked at from more
than the western perspective and
language acquisition needs to be
supported in a variety of ways
and this council is focused on
doing that across the board
however the language is being
taught and if I may Mister
chair.
The expert Mr Santa may have
something to contribute here.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator I just like to
respond to that as well a keep
in mind that that we have or the
PM you see multiple
multicultural education by the
council has been around for
fifty years and many of those
instances has partnered with our
tribal communities to find
support around these areas
including of the Pueblo
I language about legal
enforcement that was created in
a number of other efforts that
have been put forth over the
years specifically in response
to what was being shared by
Representative Figueroa.
this year or with as part of
this.
This.
House Bill.
The intent is to make sure that
we are including five different
members of tribes and so these
individuals will be identified
through basically tribal input
so that way we are taking in
account the variety of different
Roaches and the community and
decisions specific to how
language and culture more may
not be use within our bilingual
education programs within the
state and so at yes definitely
have a desire willingness to be
inclusive as far as those those
focus areas in those a.
Questions that you may have a
specific for indigenous
communities here in New Mexico
and bilingual education.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee so when we talk
about bilingual education and
I'm glad you said that this
council are has been around for
fifty years and I think that's
by eight one of my next
initiatives is that all these
programs councils committees
task force.
It you know we we pile it on
trial at all pilot on and some
of them have been in existence
for quite awhile but are they
still effective and if they had
been you know whatever do it
dean Danny she aided that
council or that task force in
the first place those
initiatives that should have
been put forward.
You know if there any effective
anymore and I'm not saying that
but over time.
You know those adjustments have
to be made and I come from an
area that I represent Inc which.
We have committee on top the
committee on top committee
study studies waiting for this
report and that report and
nothing gets done it is just a
lot of meetings a lot of
Things to you know for people to
meet but there's no end result
that by now you know being in
the state knowing that these
languages the Spanish and the
Spanish language and all the
native languages we're not going
to go away.
Yes there on that window they
have gone down but they were not
going to be eliminated.
So that you know.
Trying to move forward in that
sense.
There there's part of me that
does not want to add any other
purpose to what exists right now
because of measuring those
affected them measures and being
efficient especially now with
COVID and how much of
the news about budget crunch and
money being an issue and putting
money in the right place.
I don't know if you can speak to
that as far as even with some of
the tribes in the buy in from
the tribe's fully but I know
also to that there are some
things I would not put forward
We don't talk about you know put
it toward in that.
Amended we top out on that thank
you Mr chair.
Mr chair and besides that I
would say.
I am grateful that.
The Spanish language about the
multilingualism that exists in
the state of New Mexico the
Spanish language and all of our
native languages is here and as
the senator pointed out is
dwindling but it is here and
it's going to stay here in part
because this bilingual
multicultural Education Act and
counsel are fighting for it and
are supporting it over fifty
thousand students in the state
are currently enrolled in
bilingual and multicultural
education programs and their
work I would say recently it has
been effective and one of the
most recent things that has been
done as the bilingual
multicultural state seal that
has encouraged students to
recognize that multilingualism
is an asset that with you bring
to the table is a strength and
is strikes to the state as well
Mr Santa if you would like to
add.
It.
Mr chair and members of the
committee Senator Pinto I I just
want to I guess.
Remove your your your hesitancy
perhaps on on how you how you
might perceive H. B. fifty two
H. B. fifty two is is definitely
not adding program it's it's not
adding an extra layer of
bureaucracy I have you know a
list of a variety of things that
specifically the bilingual to
culture Education Advisory
Council as accomplished over the
years
most recently making
recommendations to the New
Mexico Public Education
Department around teacher
pipelines on specific to
accurate authentic assessments
in two languages and recognizing
the importance of verbal
competency went with regard to
our indigenous languages so that
way we're taking into account
and the respect and honoring the
expectations of our indigenous
communities and of course on
building capacity as far as the
administrators and having and
making sure that administrators
no matter where they are in in
the state of New Mexico have a
greater awareness in depth and
appreciation for the value of a
language other than English
supporting development as a way
to strengthen the academic
achievement and the the capacity
of our of our students and our
communities those being some of
just the most recent advisement
the MEAC is as participated in
decides that the again over the
years whether it be a re framing
the home language survey or
taking into account the New
Mexico teach crosswalk and
ensuring that that New Mexico
cheese to each system or process
included a cultural and
linguistic a responsive.
Lands to it without that there
was a basically a lands that
that did not exist that was a
focusing on all the children in
New Mexico including our
indigenous communities and our
language other than other than
English speaking communities are
marginalized communities to to a
large degree and so again we
we've had fifty years of of
working collaboratively of
really pushing forward and and
making sure that New Mexico
remains at the forefront of
bilingual education in the
nation and all throughout these
years I'm trying to make really
strong connections and
relationships with our
indigenous communities and again
this this is an adding another
layer of bureaucracy is not
adding another a program it's
simply codifying in statute a
the council that has been around
internet hot fashion for fifty
years and it's it's much needed
otherwise potentially that boys
a very strong voice that has
been here for a number of years
could potentially disappear and
we don't want that.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
The last time the act has been
changed.
Relied on the expert witness for
that.
So Mr chair members the
committee Senator Pinto three
act was looked at.
We like in two thousand one when
basically was the regulation
that was updated the regulation
was updated so that way it would
to take can accounts no child
left behind expectations as some
of the language has been shifted
as well and so really the act
hasn't been looked at for for a
number of years and other than
our efforts to again codify this
this existing council in a
similar fashion the way the
Indian Education Advisory
Council was created as part of
that act and the Hispanic
Education Advisory Council was
created as part of of the act
that was that was on that that
was part of that unfortunately
when the bilingual to co chair
Education Advisory or excuse me
a program was created
the council was not created
along with it and so we're
simply simply trying to rectify
that that to.
Over sex.
Mr chair and senator since the
council was not created in
statute and then looked at in
statute.
Until now various rules and
regulations have changed over
the years.
Thank you and members of the
committee and I think one of the
things that we're seeing as far
as the trend is that a lot of
these programs that after trying
to lean on the Martinez Yazzie
lawsuit in order as a reason for
implementation in which these
programs and some of them
existed before this lawsuit and
that's what is really troubling
me is that they were in
existence before and which the
expectations
we should have been to if the X.
if they were fulfilling what
they needed to put fulfill prior
to this litigation then we
wouldn't have a lawsuit right
they would have that relevancy
in in personally you know I'm
not a lawyer I'm not a judge in
that sense so we have these.
That what some some of the
things that were already in
place prior even legislation
it's does that we're overseeing
it the accountability you know
yes we had this collaboration
going on but was it be effective
enough to keep us from falling
into this litigation and that's
where I really find this
troubling
because you know our children
are not just by legal anymore we
have multi legal children
so this kind of leads them out a
bit and that sense of addressing
it so that's why I'm like well
where are we moving forward how
are we moving this forward and
it seems like the act probably
needs to be more addressed I'm
not sure why it hasn't been I
think a lot of our legislation
when we talk about the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit has to be updated
to meet the needs especially
when we are talking about
In in technology into our
schools and meeting our
children's needs in those
resources so I I I find it hard
to support
this bill thank you.
I don't see anyone else in the
committee with any other
committee questions
unfortunately we've lost our
quorum so we will not build a
vote on this bill today and will
have to vote on this on Monday
and we'll put this at the front
of the schedule so be the first
a bill that we vote on.
and this will end the meeting
today we did not hear Senate
bill two eighty nine and Senate
bill three eighty four so those
might be rolled over to Monday
will get the email out in the
schedule and that's all I have
do we have any comments from the
committee.
All right well thanks a lot
we'll see everyone Monday will
get the email out with the
agenda and have a good Friday
and a great weekend.
About.
