heard lots of this bill. We have
lots of discussion on this bill.
The sponsors have gone and taken
that into account and come back
to us.
And so if you'll kind of let us
know what's changed in the bill
and if we can kind of keep
questions and focused on where
those changes might have been.
Please go ahead.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, we did submit
an amendment that I believe may
be getting distributed right
now.
Um, and that amendment number is
uh 231-684.1.
Mr. Chair I'll move it for
discussion. Thank you. We have a
motion to move the amendment for
discussion purposes. Please
explain what the amendment does.
Um, so taking into, to the
feedback, uh, we taking the
feedback in, apologize, uh, we
did go meet with um public
public a PED, um, he did meet
with the drafter, essentially we
came to a consensus within um
PED that they would agree to
remove the sunset clauses on the
6 listed pathways. So
essentially what this amendment
does is it
Reverted back, it took out all
of the previous house education
Committee amendments, um, and on
page 3 of the bill, line 16
after the period to the
basically it took out listings 1
through 6, as those are already
listed in statute, so they were
no longer needed in the bill,
the 6 pathways to obtain a
computer science endorsement. So
that's what the amendment did.
OK. Thank you. And I think those
were the changes that we as a
committee were looking at and
and concerned about. So, um,
And quickly out in the audience,
anybody familiar with?
You know, understand that when I
comment on the, the amendment.
Thank y'all are good.
OK.
Thank you and
All's good there, so questions
from the committee, uh, on, we
are on the amendment.
Mr. Chair, I move the amendment.
231684.
Have a motion for do pass on the
amendment. Is there a second?
They can buyer Figueroa. Is
there opposition to the
amendment.
See no opposition. We have an
amended bill.
Back onto the main bill as
amended, again, we had fairly
extensive discussion last time,
but a discussion on the bill.
Mr. Chair, and we would do pass
on House Bill 297 amended.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh.
Representatives of the now all
this is is just an appropriation
bill, is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, um,
it includes the appropriation,
but it it also.
Allows for additional licensure
types to obtain this
certification. So the one thing
that remained in the legislation
was on.
Uh 3 section F, um it does open
it up beyond only secondary
licenses, so this does open up
the endorsement for all license
types as well as the amendment.
I suppose the, the, the
preparation, apologize.
OK, I'm trying to
fit your amendments in on what
our FIR says and so I'm not real
sure if this is even
In line with what your amendment
does, I'm concerned about, uh,
under other substantive issues
on the FIR stating.
Excuse me, in 2021 PED adopted a
five-year plan to provide
computer science education to
all students.
Then a targets create teacher
pathways.
Is that still the intent of what
you're trying to get done here.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, that
is, um, and this was first
introduced, um, the initial
allotment did allow multiple
school districts to open up and.
And have computer science
programs and pathways within
their school districts. So yes,
that is our con continued.
Um, after this course.
OK, and Mr. Chairman and
representative.
stating also that there's 4
pathways.
And those are, let's see, well,
actually, that's 5 right.
That's
And it does, it does point out
what the beginning teacher is
and the existing teacher has to.
Performed York before they get
this.
Uh, requirement in place to be
able to be.
Endorsed, is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, senator, um,
they're actually 6 pathways, but
what the amendment did is it
removed the listing of the
pathways from our current bill,
um, and that those are already
listed in statue. OK. Out of the
6 that exist currently, 2 had
expiration dates, so, um, PED
has agreed to remove those
expiration dates, not having to
be put into built into
legislation. So those same
existing pathways that have been
in existence.
will continue to to exist
without any expiration dates. So
that's why they were removed
from the current piece of
legislation, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, that's
interesting to know what were
the existing expiration dates.
They were January 1st of 2025.
OK.
And everybody is good with this
PED is good with this. Is that
correct, Mister Chairman and
Representative.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, yes,
they have, they are in agreement
and we would love to proceed,
um.
has the will of this committee,
OK, and Mr. Chairman, one last
question you are appropriating
$250,000.
Uh
For professional development for
teachers who want a computer
science endorsement or maintain
that endorsement.
Why are you only having it for 2
years.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, uh, Senator,
um, we would love to have it in
recurring, but we are just
having it right now again,
hoping to encourage those
pathways, um, as best as we can
right now. Um, you know, we
will, we will continue to
evaluate the computer science
pathway, um, and shared
additional funds to be
available. We will continue to
seek funds for right now we
thought this was a prudent
request, um, to continue on in
this pathway. OK. Thank you very
much for that, Mr. Chairman.
I guess my concern is.
is we keep spending money.
I know that today there is going
to be a meeting.
At 10:30, I believe it is that
is going to be.
In regard to, excuse me, in
regard to our
defending this gun be coming in
from the feds, so I'm kind of
curious just to see what that's
going to entail.
And I'm sure it's gonna be.
Eye opening
I'm trying to be polite. Eye
opening.
Um
That Mr. Chairman right now, you
know where I'm going with this
at $250,000 is coming from an
industry that does provide all
the money, that is the oil and
gas.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Thank you, Representative.
Thank you. We do have a Du pass
motion. Is there a second that
can buyen Figueroa if you'll
call the roll, please.
Cinder boom. Yes.
Sender yourself.
Cinder Figueroa. Yes.
Tender Hickey
Nova.
Ramos, yes, Senator Thornton.
Yes.
Senator Pope.
Yes, yes,
yes.
So you have
You have a do pass motion of on
an 8 with one excused.
Um I'm looking to see if Romero
Baca, I know he's stuck over in
his other committees, so I
your
take over chairing, I'll go down
and and put on.
The next house bill.
Think I know it fairly well.
Yes.
193.
So for those in the committee
room and online, we're now going
to House Bill 193.
Study public education system
and Thunder Souls is going to be
presented.
And Senator so you have the
floor when you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, this
bill is an LESC endorsed bill,
uh, and so it's had extensive
discussion in the LESC and um
for a couple of years. Uh, I
believe that I actually has
gotten all the way up to the
governor's desk before and, and
was vetoed the bill for the most
part is talking about
The role and duties of the
legislative education Study
Committee and moving then.
Make, make sure that I am on the
right one, that we are looking
at also then having jurisdiction
over higher education and early
childhood.
Education.
And that's most of what it does.
Currently the LESC, the only
part of higher education is the
teacher preparation programs,
but if we're going to have good
quality education, we need to
make sure that the entire
sequence of education that we're
able to study it, be able to
bring those in, talk about
those. I know there's been
concern from higher education
about whether this is another
committee they've got to go and
defend and pre present to uh I
see it very differently. This is
a committee when there are
higher education issues.
that they are able to come to
for help and assistance in how
to get that through. There is
technical support for all of
that and working through and
working with the legislature.
And so that's what it does, Mr.
Chair.
All right. Thank you, Senator,
uh, with that, do we have anyone
in support of House Bill 19 in
the committee room. If you could
start lining up for public
comment.
Do we have any opposition?
House Bill 193.
report online opposition.
You can go ahead and start with
the public comment once again
you have 2 minutes.
Uh, good morning, everybody.
Carrie Robin Bruunder with
Public Charter Schools of New
Mexico. We support this
legislation, very simple. Our
education system does not start
at kindergarten and end at 12th
grade at this point. We think
it's an ongoing system and we
think this will be really
helpful to study. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Good morning,
chairman and members of the
committee, Whitney Holland,
president of AFT New Mexico. New
Mexico's education system
doesn't stop at high school
graduation, yet higher ed is
left out of the legislative
Education Study committee's
oversight. Despite its
critical role in workforce
development, economic mobility,
and the success of our K-12
graduates, bringing higher ed
into LESC's jurisdiction and
shares continuity in
policymaking, strengthens
accountability and prioritizes
the needs of students, faculty
and staff. Our public colleges
and universities face many
challenges from funding
inequities to faculty retention.
LEC has the expertise to provide
informed, proactive solutions,
and I urge you to support this.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshuts
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We are actually here
just to stand in solidarity with
all of our wonderful educators
in the state, and also on behalf
of all the working people in the
state who have children that are
in all types of schools, uh, all
the way from early ed to uh well
beyond higher education. So
thank you for your support.
As Chairman, committee members,
thank you. Good morning. Uh, my
name's Edward Webster. I'm the
government relations director
with NEA in Mexico. Uh, we stand
in support of HB 193. We thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forward as many very smart
people bought in front of me and
said, uh, school begins in
kindergarten, goes through
higher ed, uh, expanding the
scope of study and analysis to
the LESC and the great work that
they do, uh, would be a benefit
to students, uh, education and
instruction in the state of New
Mexico. We urge you to vote yes.
Thank you.
Thank you. That's the end of
public comments. We don't have
any online and, and no
opposition.
An opportunity if there's
anything else.
Present Senator. Mr. Chair, I
don't have anything else to add.
All right. With that, we'll now
go to the committee for any
questions or comments.
Senator Thornton
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Senator
So it says that this bill, if it
goes through, um, it's not
containing the appropriation,
that's require additional work.
Uh, do you have any idea?
How they're going to handle that
without an appropriation or is
that something that's gonna be
falling falling separate field.
Mr. Chair and senator, we have
the director of LESC here, uh,
in long discussions with them.
They have capacity to begin this
area, uh, as I don't imagine
that it's gonna be full blown
everything in higher ed the
first year as capacity will
grow, and there may be a need
for additional FTEs into the
future, but to begin the work
this year with some of the, the
issues that we know already are
coming, I believe they have the
capacity, but I'll, I'll let
that he's nodding that.
let the director answer if you
have a specific question. Would
you like to, you could come up
and respond to them.
Thank you, Mister Chair, uh,
Senator Thornton.
Pretty much what the senator
said, yeah, I mean, obviously
we've got um just.
Briefly, uh, when we're fully
staffed and we will be as soon
as session is over, uh, 1212
staff members including
Director, Deputy Director,
Office administrator.
and analysts and researchers.
And so we feel pretty
comfortable that we could take
on this role if we needed to add
additional capacity, we would
come back to you in future years
to ask you that.
Thank you for that. Um,
chair.
Senator
It's my understanding that this
bill was taken forward.
In the last year or a couple
years ago about speed by the
governor. Do you know why, why
she vetoed it at the time?
Mr. Chair and, and senator, if I
knew why the governor vetoed
everything, I probably wouldn't
be sitting in this seat. I'd be
doing something else. Uh, the
guesses are that um there were
concerns from higher education
about additional oversight, um,
uh, reports that would need to
be made, um, as well as whether
the legislature was removing
some of the power that the
governor might have over some of
those areas and trying to pull
it in, but I don't know
specifically.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for, for bringing this bell
one more time. Um, it
It's not about authority and
it's not about oversight or
legislative education Study
Committee is for research
purposes.
And they are our staff to answer
questions and gather data for
us, and I can't tell you how
many times I have had a question
that can you get, give me some
data on how such and such a
program is working, and the
answer is no.
That's in higher ed, and we're
not authorized for that.
Or can you find out about such
and such a thing.
At the university level or even
in the early childhood level,
and the answer is no, that's not
in our authority. We need data
and evidence to see how things
work all along this spectrum
because we have to make
decisions about how to fund them
and how to change them.
And this will allow us to send
our staff to do that research
and gather that evidence for us.
It's
A long overdue bill.
Thank you, Senator.
Any other questions about
Senator Ezel?
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
I, I do have a couple of
questions here, so we're going
to have
Elias's budget request was 1.9
million, an increase of 10,000.
And it, it is stating in the FIR
that the agency will request at
least one full.
I employee.
But then we also have LSC which
provides the budget analysis and
program evaluation or public it
and for higher ed, so if there
are two different agencies right
now that are making these.
Checking to see what everybody's
supposed to be doing, OK? I'll
put it that way.
What if they come up with
different results. What is, how
is that going to be resolved?
Mr. Chair and Senator, are you
talking about LFC reports
compared to LESC reports. Yes
sir, I am.
OK, uh, thank you. I just wanted
to make sure I was gonna be
answering the question that you
have. Uh, we run into that
currently, uh, LSC regularly is
doing evaluations and reports on
all kinds of education. They
call in the superintendent of
different districts, uh, looking
mostly or supposed to be looking
mostly at the financial side of
things. This really won't change
things more than that, um, and I
think similar to what uh Senator
Figueroa was
asking about we hear lots of
bills on in committees here in
the legislature that deal with
early childhood and with higher
ed that we've never had an
opportunity to discuss or see
earlier, uh, and the ideas that
we'll have some analysis prior
to this and have some
discussions.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, it's a
good question. We actually work
pretty closely with LFC
partners, so the way LFC usually
works is they have one analyst
assigned to a topic area, so
you're, most of you are probably
familiar with Sonny Lou, he's
their K-12 analysts, we work
pretty closely with Sonny now.
They do, um, their evaluation,
the evaluation side of LFC as
Senator Soulles mentioned, does
do evaluations. We feel like we
have a
sort of a longer term view of
education, at least in K-12
currently.
In a way that is not, we choose
a program and evaluate them and
then sort of move on to the next
thing, sort of think about this
program evaluations and and all
the work and study that we do.
Um, on a more long term and
continuing basis because we are
able to focus on K-12 and in
this case, we would be able to
be to do the same thing for
higher education.
OK. Well, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate your response here.
And going through all of the
analysis, the one that really
stuck in my mind was the one.
From HED.
Mr. Chairman, do you have y'all
seen that analysis there?
And it's, it's bringing up some
significant
issues that I would like to pass
on to get y'all's thoughts on
these. One of them is, uh,
This bill might have the
potential to indirectly create
duplicative reporting
requirements.
It also has the potential that
the LAESC and LFC would make
conflicting recommendations and
I've already asked about that.
Um
It's stating here in HED has
been responsive to all requests,
so I'm kind of concerned about.
Senator Figueroa's request for
data and not getting exactly.
What she is needing there, but
uh higher ed topics outside the
scope of teaching, training, and
certification.
So
How is all this gonna mess
together.
or is there gonna be enough
manpower to be able to get this
done without having to hire
additional full-time employees
to get this done.
Mr. Chair and, and Senator,
certainly it's going to start
slow. We're going to see where
it is, which areas that, that
are appropriate, uh, the goal
and, and I, I've talked with the
secretary of Higher Ed and
assured her that this is not.
Where she is going to need to
come in and defend higher
education to the LESC and to the
LFC on a monthly basis. Yeah,
that is by no means the intent
of this. It's much more the
intent is so that the members in
the education committees get to
discuss, understand the higher
education needs before we get it
in a committee where we're all
kind of flying blind. Um, we
are, it's gonna take a while to
ramp up depending on
How much of
Higher education issues are
impacting the education in a
whole.
I'm not sure if that answers
directly what you're asking,
but, but it's gonna, we're gonna
ramp up slowly, certainly over
the next couple of years and see
where the needs are.
said Mister Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, what I'm hearing is
there might be, I don't know,
communication between these
departments where we will get
the full picture.
What a concept.
What concept, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Do we have
any other questions or comments
from the committee?
Do we have a motion?
Over Du pass.
All right, we have a do pass on
House Bill 193 from Senator
Figaro and from Senator Navi.
the vote.
Sinder Booneinry cell.
Figueroa.
Yes.
Sender Hickey
Yes.
Nova, yes, Cintaramos. Senator
Thornton.
Yes. Sinder Pope. Yes, Tiner
souls.
Yes.
And congratulations, Senator,
you have a
Unanimous boatman, and we'll
move on to the next bill if
that's OK.
It was
The other house. Senator Brand
is gonna cover it or they or
they won't.
under
We have a due pass unanimous on
House Bill 193. We're now moving
on to House Bill 238.
Middle and high school
professional work hours.
going to be by Representative
Poland and house, I mean, uh,
Senator Brant.
You have before. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, committee members, um,
here to present House Bill 238.
This is relating to public
schools, allowing up to 60
instructional hours per school
year to be used for professional
work hours for middle and high
school grades, we want to align
the middle and high school
professional work hours with
elementary.
I also brought uh that our
expert is Doctor VC Cleveland,
the superintendent of Rio Rachel
Public Schools.
Thank you.
I really appreciate.
The opportunity to speak, um,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, to all of you today,
uh, your ongoing commitment and
your many efforts to improve
education in our state, uh, is
very much recognized and
appreciated.
School districts do many thanks
to support a student
achievement, but I would have to
tell you there's nothing, and I
would really underscore that
word nothing.
That is more impactful than
providing our students with a
highly prepared and qualified
teacher. Thank you for improving
the last several years, educator
compensation. I want you to know
that it's increased the quality
and the quantity of our
applicant pool.
For a while we were just hiring
just about anybody who walked in
the door, and so we have seen a
dramatic improvement in both of
those, those areas. We are
seeing gains in recruitment and
retention, although there's a
lot of work to be done,
especially in the area of
special education.
We are keeping more teachers
from leaving the state of New
Mexico, and some of those who
left have now returned to their
communities and to their
families.
I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to you for
your support and education and
recent years, particularly the
passing of House Bill 130.
This legislation, which allows
districts to count professional
work hours as part of the
required instructional hours
underscores your understanding
of how vital professional work
time is for the educators in our
space.
Today we ask you for to consider
a small but very important
adjustment.
In House Bill 238, this would
create equity among our
elementary and secondary
educators.
Specifically, we are requesting
that secondary educators be
granted the same number of
professional hours that are
currently available to our
elementary educators. This
adjustment will help ensure that
all educators, regardless of the
grade level they teach have
equal opportunities to grow
professionally.
I can attest that.
Uh, while there are major
differences among elementary,
middle, and high school
programs. I can tell you their
work is equally challenging, and
I can say that because I have
worked at every level in public
education. I've worked
elementary, middle school and
high school, although most of my
background was high school.
All levels must have time to
train the plan, and most
importantly to collaborate with
one another.
At the secondary level, we are
facing many of the same literacy
demands that have been placed on
elementary staff.
I would have you know most of
our secondary teachers in our
district have caseloads of 150
to 180 students every single
day.
And so they need that
professional work time just like
our elementary uh folks do as
well.
It is crucial that all teachers
have time for professional
development.
As well as other professional
work time during contracted
hours. Our district is seeing
significant increases in student
in student attendance during the
last two years. We have really
good data that we can share with
you on that.
This was achieved in part by our
teachers taking time to
personally contact and work with
parents.
And they need the time to be
able to do that. The disparity
in professional development
hours may create complications
when building school calendars.
Many families have children at
both the elementary and
secondary levels and the
differing numbers of
professional workday can result
in separate calendars, so as a
result, attendance can be
impacted with secondary students
missing school to take care of
their younger siblings on those
days when elementary students
are out for in service.
We strongly believe that
ensuring professional work hours
for all educators is not only
fair, but it will ultimately
benefit our students, it
supports our teachers who work
very hard, and it will
strengthen uh our educational
system. So thank you again for
your continued dedication to
education and especially for
your consideration of this
request today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'm
mine is gonna be really short.
We know and we've looked at for
several years in LESC.
that quality of, of the teacher
is the most important thing in
education.
This allows all the districts to
go up to 60 hours.
as part of the instructional
time to make sure that they can
reach that quality. We want to
be able to make sure we get
teachers, the right professional
development.
Changes from every district and
every teacher. Uh, this was
originally this way in the bill
that we passed. It was amended
at the last minute to drop it
to.
30 hours
In the upper grades, um, we need
that to be 60 hours. All our
teachers need the opportunity to
become better teachers doesn't
matter how long you've been
teaching or how long you've been
up here in Santa Fe. We all
learn every day.
Mr. Chair and committee members.
Thank you
Thank you.
Do we have anyone in the
committee room in support of
House Bill 238.
Coming up and lining up for
public comment. Do we have any
opposition?
How about, uh, we can begin
public comment. You have 2
minutes. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee carry Robin Bruunder
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. We think it makes
sense to align these
professional hours. There's also
an idiosyncrasy that's happening
for our K8 schools where half of
the school can have 60 hours of
professional development, but
the other half can't, so we
think that this is going to do a
lot to have better professional
development, a lot of work time
for our teachers, but also help
solve that idiosyncrasy that
we're facing.
in some of our schools as well.
Thanks so much.
Thank you. Good morning,
chairman and members of the
committee, Whitney Holland, AFT
New Mexico, AFC New Mexico
strongly supports HB 238 because
counting professional work hours
in this way ensures educators
have the time they need for
meaningful collaboration,
mentorship and professional
development. Quality teaching
doesn't happen in isolation when
educators can learn from each
other, engage in training, and
connect with family, student
outcomes improve. HB 238
recognizes that investing in
teacher growth is an investment
in our students' success. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Lily
May Ortiz, the legislative
liaison for the New Mexico
Schoolboard Association and Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, our association of
450 school board members
throughout the state have two
top priorities that relate to
this particular piece of
legislation, educated
recruitment, retention,
preparation, and academic
achievement, uh, NMSBA ranks
student achievement and quality
learning as their number one top
priority, the LESE analysis
notes that the most effective
forms of professional.
development and work hours for
teachers are embedded in the
course of the normal school day.
It is important that our
students receive the best
possible education and
professional development work
time gives our teachers those
critical preparation hours. We
thank the sponsors uh for
bringing this legislation
forward. We highly support this
and we ask that you support it
as well. Thank you so much.
And thank you.
Chairman, committee members,
Edward Webster, NEA New Mexico.
Uh, we support HB 238. We thank
the sponsors for bringing it
forth, um, as the expert
witnesses testified, um, better
professional development, more
professional development leads
to better instruction and better
outcomes for our students
academically. So please vote yes
on HB 238. Thank you.
Thank you. That's the end of
public comment. We have no
opposition, no public comment
online, but I want to give the
sponsor an opportunity.
anything else.
OK, before we go to the
Thank you, chair, and um in
committee and no, there's
nothing you know temper
questions. All right, with that,
questions or comments from the
committee, Senator Ramos first.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much,
and I, I really do like this
bill, but I do have a few
questions on the LESC committee
analysis of the state's HB 238
may decrease the number of
instructional hours for
secondary students statewide
through the next.
Uh, through the exact impact
would heavily depend on local
calendar decisions, how are we
going to make sure that the
instructional hours are
continued.
As is uh and continue to or and
increase the actual
powers of
Professional development.
Thank you.
We are committed to the um
We are committed to meeting the
the statutory requirements for
the 11:40 hours. Of course,
this, this acknowledges that
teacher professional
development, and teacher work
time, um, is, is a, um.
It can be used for that purpose.
I would what I would really
emphasize is the, the number of
hours are very important, but
also what is equally important
is the quality of that
instructional time and so if our
teachers don't have time to
train and to plan and
collaborate and work together,
then more hours alone will not
accomplish what we're hoping to
do. And so, uh, it feels very
important to continue that
professional development,
particularly as we move forward
in some of the, the new
curricular initial.
ative s from the state, and our
teachers have time, um, have
time to, to train and to plan
and collaborate. Also would like
to kind of put a, a plus in for
our, our teachers that there
needs to be that time, uh,
during the contracted day, as
much as possible because our
teachers have families too. They
have family responsibilities
that they also have to meet and
so asking them to do a lot of
this on their own time. I, I
think it's just not, not uh a
fair request for our
professional education.
But we are very committed to
using our instructional time
wisely at the meeting of state
requirements.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, um, this
bill doesn't contain an
appropriation.
How are we going to cover this
for 30.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, it,
it doesn't need one, it doesn't
have a physical impact. We're
not increasing contract lengths.
We are allowing the districts at
their discretion so back to
local control. We've talked
about that a lot, uh, low
control allowing the districts
to modify their calendar.
Up to an additional 30 hours for
8th grade through 12th grade
teachers. That was the way the
bill was run originally, um, and
that's actually the way that
LESC had put the bill in, so
we're just trying to get this
back to the original format, um.
Yeah what we know is the quality
is the number one indicator of
student success, quality of the
teacher and Mr. Chair, Senator,
how we, how do we monitor the
success of
30.
Thank you, Mr. President, um, I
think.
Like everything, um, you know,
we, we get an NAEP scores and
and other scores to see if the
kids are improving, um, and we
can, we can see the the growth
in our teachers and as they they
get better, uh, at their jobs,
um.
that we should see better
results from the kids.
We've looked at models from all
over the country and all over
the world.
And
The number one thing is that
quality of the teacher.
So that will bring our
children's academic level up.
No more questions.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
on the committee?
Uh.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, senators.
Um, and representatives.
During the first fast counting I
should say, on the number of
4 day week schools and it's all
this chart right here of not
there's no page number on it,
it's right behind the FIR.
I'm counting 58 4 day week
schools. How is this going to
affect those schools that are
only
Have attendance on 4 days.
and senator, um, they still have
to meet the same number of
hours. So what generally occurs
in those dis.
So a longer school day, uh, in
order to get those hours in, but
they still have to meet the same
number of instructional hours.
That's very difficult in larger
districts because we cannot
lengthen our school day. We have
so many tears in terms of our
buses that we can't start any
earlier. Our buses leave before
6 and come in after 6, but
particularly in the smaller
districts, they do have more
flexibility to have a longer
school day in order to get in
that 11:40 hours.
horses.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the response you just
gave me, but yes, it, but it
could also be a little bit of a
hardship on these schools that
are only going 4 days a week
because they do have set bus
schedules.
They are already lengthening the
day, the day.
That a student is there in
school learning.
One thing I did find kind of
And funny on page 3 of the bill
under number 5.
I'm gonna kind of skip down a
little bit about the 3rd line.
Oh.
Provided that instruction occurs
simultaneously time when
breakfast is served or consumed
pursuant to his statement
federal program shall be deemed
to be the time in a
school-directed program and is
part of the instructional day.
Can you?
Give me some insight on what
this actually means. uh, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, um, it
basically means that if you're
actually doing instruction as
the student is reading, I mean,
is eating, then that can count
as instructional time. However,
that's part of current law, and
we're not touching that. That's.
There it's been there forever.
Um, so all we're doing is
literally on, on page 2, line
16, we're just striking grades
and 30 instructional hours for
that allows them the same
standard to be across the board
K through 12.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator, I do
understand that that's the only
change that's in the bill, but I
had never seen that before. They
can teach whilst breakfast is
being served.
Kind of
but but.
Anyway, um,
Also in the FIR in the second
page of it under significant
issues.
Whenever it's talking about the
blending of instructional time
of professional work time.
Are you reading that area that
I'm
going to get right now.
I'd like to know your all's
thoughts on that about might be
pitting proponents of more
learning time.
Against the advocates for more
professional learning and
collaboration time.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, uh, I
think it's, it's always been in
my long career, uh, a push and
pull between the time for
instruction and the time for
planning and professional
development and and other
professional work time, uh, as I
mentioned previously, we have
seen our student achievement in
increased significantly in our
district because our teachers
took the time to call and speak
with every single parent of
children they had in that class,
trying to develop.
relationship so we could work
better with those parents and
with those families. They need
the time to be able to do that.
The other, um, is that I believe
our teachers work very hard and
I think they do the very best
they know how to do.
I think though that there is a
lot of areas where they need
professional development and
professional growth. We know a
lot more now about reading, for
example, than we knew 1015 years
ago. And so our teachers need to
be brought up to speed and we're
also very excited about the
conversations to get many of
this, this training in our
police service programs and then
provide the professional
development to continue to
support it, but I think, you
know, our teachers need
additional training.
And growth to stay up with
what's the best breakfast that
we know in teaching and whatever
and area, there has to be some
time to spend with our teachers
to make sure that they are, we
are giving them the knowledge
and the skills and the tools
that they need to be successful
as opposed to just saying get
better, uh, we're saying here's
ways that you can, you can use
these techniques, this
knowledge, the skills in your
classroom to help your students
learn better and so that's,
that's why.
I think that's important. It's
not just time alone. It's a
quality events structural time,
and we want to give the teachers
in our state the very best tools
they they can have to to teach
in our classrooms.
And Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the comment you just
made. If they are.
Being able to use what they have
been learning and directing it
towards the students they are
teaching, it's a win-win
situation.
Um
But it's
I guess my question to the two
presenters here.
It will still give local
control, though, is that
correct? Can you go into more
detail on that, yes, so, so.
Even under the current law.
You know, we get up to 60 hours
for elementary up to 30 hours
for middle school and high
school. Under this, we just make
it 60 hours across the board
K-12, but the school district.
So, so what would happen, let's
say in rear Rancho Public
schools is Doctor Cleveland and,
and her staff would work
together and they would put
together the policy.
And so they, they meet with
their attorney, they make the
policy up and then they bring it
to a school board meeting and
say we want to do the 60 hours
of instructional time for all of
our teachers because we
have the most effect in the
classroom.
getting that higher quality
teacher.
And then the school board would
vote on whether they want to
adopt that policy or not. And so
that's where your local control
comes in because just like us,
the local school boards are
elected by the local community.
And so if the local community
doesn't like a decision that
they've made, then the local
community can come and remove
them from the board at the next
election just like they can do
for us, so this really makes
sure that this issue, which
there may be other schools,
maybe some of your 4 day work.
Schools are like, well, we
actually do quite well with the
40, with 40 hours.
That's all we're gonna use.
Maybe another school's gonna
say, you know, we don't even
need 30, we're gonna do 20. That
allows this section because it
says May on line 17, not shell.
It says May 7 leaves it
completely up to the local,
which we love.
And Mr. Chairman, the reason I
brought that up is I did want
you to stress that because it
does say May. It's a very
important word.
Very important.
I am also looking at one more
thing I'd like your thoughts on.
This is a, uh, legislative
education Study Committee.
Bill analysis.
And down at the very, do you
happen to have that one?
friend of you.
OK.
the legislative education Study
Committee Villanalysis.
The very last page under other
significant issues, and I'm
gonna read it so the crowd will
know where I'm going with.
Since the enactment law of 2023
chapter 19.
L E S C and LFC staff have not
evaluated the relative value of
instructional hours versus
professional work hours.
As schools become adjusted to
the law, the state is likely due
for an evaluation of the return
on investment for different
types of school calendars. Does
this give you any concern? The
first sentence that I read. Does
this give you concern?
Miss Chairman Senator, no, and I
understand what they're saying
because we just put the law in
place, uh, in 2023, but no, it
doesn't, um, I, I think that we
have.
have learned in EESC at least
every presentation I've had for
the past 13 years, and I've been
on LESC has stressed, and we've
looked at all kinds of other
states and all kinds of other
countries.
has stressed that quality is the
most important thing.
And so, you know, sometimes you
end up, you know, we've had a
lot of technology changes in the
last 20 or 30 years. We've got
some teachers that I'm in the
classroom for 2030 years. Some
of them, some of them are almost
as old as me.
Maybe they're not as great at.
those technology things that can
be professional development
that's designed just for those
teachers to strengthen them in
how to use technology in the
classroom for teaching.
And maybe even how to use
technology to manage their their
time better, um, so there's a
lot of ways that this can be
used. I am not concerned with
that. I think it's something
that we absolutely should go
back and evaluate if we've seen
a change.
Yeah, you know, the outcomes for
our students, um, that's
something we should do, but I
don't think it's.
You know, that we shouldn't
change this because we're
waiting for that information. I
think we've seen it from
everywhere else.
And Mr. Chairman.
The representative and senator
is one of the other things that
was stayed or dried up above
that under administrative
implications, it does a
uh requiring PED staff to
determine whether schools are
actually providing the
instructional.
they claim.
So I guess that goes back to the
accountability for it.
What type of steps are is PED
going to have to take to make,
to ensure that they are actually
getting the.
Right.
Is there going to be some sort
of monthly reporting from a
school year-end reporting, how's
that gonna work?
We, we have uh found over the
last several years. I'm sorry,
Mr. Chair, Senator, we, we have
found over the last several
years, the public head
department has greatly increased
its supervision of school
calendars.
And we have had a lot of
conversations with them about
what they count and what they
don't for what kinds of
activities and so in years in
the past, it was pretty much an
auto automatic kind of thing.
You submitted your calendars,
but I can guarantee you we've
had very hard conversations, uh,
with the public department to
ensure that all those hours are
being met. I would also, and we
disagree on some, for example,
um, we think that jump starts
are very important.
Uh, for students in very large
high schools, uh, to help them
acclimate to um to, to high
school and to 6th grade, but
that being said, um, there's
very close supervision now of
your calendars to ensure that
you're uh instructional days are
being met. I would also add that
uh when uh the state first asked
districts to step forward and
increase the number of of days
and structural hours, a
rearrangement was one of the
first to step forward, uh.
And, and agreed to extend uh to
to gain more instructional time,
uh, in reference to your, your
earlier question.
OK. Well, well, thank you very
much. I, I.
Learn something from you, just.
Mr. Chairman, I guess my neck's
concerned then after hearing.
The doctor stating what she did.
So it's got to be a minimum of
1140 instructional hours per
year, that a school has to
instruct the students, but then,
Does the local board.
This is getting a little off
subject, but I do need to ask
it. Does the local board have
the right to determine.
The days that they do attend
school. You can't address that
because you've been on our
board. Yes, so it is, uh, you
know, I, I just
Let's make sure we're staying on
the bill, but if you can answer
that.
going to be kind of short. We,
we want to get on some other
bills.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, are you
asking like the school calendar
and if the school board makes
the decision on the school
calendar? Yes, ma'am. Yes, we
do. So we are uh Mr. Chairman,
and um senator. So there is a
community that uh works with the
school district to pres um to
come up with their their
calendar and then it is
presented uh to the school
board, and then the school board
uh members will make the
ultimate decision on it. We are
usually presented with, well,
I'm no longer on it, but
We used to be presented that
maybe several options and we go
through that and analyze it and
then we make our decision, Madam
Chair or Mister Chair, I'm so
sorry. The reason I'm asking
this question is because we do
need our money to go.
Where it's more, most beneficial
to those students.
So if the local schools are able
to come up with their own
calendars, that means that if
they decided they wanted to
start after Labor Day and it
before.
Memorial Day they could have the
ability to be able to do that
without having the students come
in in the month of August
whenever temperatures in some
areas of our state are over 110
degrees. Uh, Mr. Chair, so yes,
so as long as you're meeting
the same of our requirements and
uh how they decided, but there's
a lot of things that are, are
analyzed on, you know, school
bus systems and all that, and
there's a lot to go to play to
make sure that we meet those
hours.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Um, any
other questions, Senator Soltz.
Just very quickly, does this
bill require any district to do
anything?
Mr. Chairman, no, there's no
requirement, uh, in this bill.
It's, it's a may very important
word. So Mr. Chair and Senator,
it's just enabling districts if
they choose to increase the
number of hours. Is that
correct? if a school district
hours of professional embedded
professional development if a
school thinks that they need
more time, maybe they've got it
really young teacher corp.
That hasn't done a lot of
teaching yet and and, you know,
they want to have more time for
training those teachers, this
allows them to have that freedom
and flexibility to do that.
Thank you, and I, I apologize, I
keep asking the senator because
we're used to that here. I
should be asking rep because
it's your bill, not his bill, so
I apologize.
about uh Mr. Jared
representative, um, are you
aware of other countries that
are often considered in the top
of the education rankings, do
they do more professional
embedded um
Preparation hours than the
United States, Mr. Chair and I
will allow Doctor Cleveland to
answer that because they did a
few studies. Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, they
do considerably more than we do,
um, I, I had the privilege many
years ago of going to Japan and
uh they they're they're
professional development hours
were 3 times what ours were.
And uh
Mr. Chair and representative,
the top performing countries in
the world, do they spend more
time concerned about the quality
of instruction in less time
about the time on task or the
The actual hours in front of a
teacher in the US?
Uh, share, um,
Yes, they are more concerned
about the quality.
And Mr. Jar, yeah, and I, they
typically get much better
results because the teachers are
highly trained, highly prepared,
rather than just how much seat
time in front of the teacher
that there is, um, I very much
appreciate this bill. I remember
I was teaching math, like was it
09 or 10 when we had to
drastically slash education
budgets and at my school, what
that meant was all of the
teachers lost one of their prep
periods. They lost 50%.
least of their prep time, and I
related it's like running a
marathon for a little while, you
can speed up, but you gotta pay
it back later, uh, and I know
personally my preparation for my
classes, my ability to provide
feedback to get homework graded
on time, all of those things
suffered when my my ability to
prepare wet down and the
students were still getting the
same amount of.
I'm on task, so to speak, but it
was a lower level quality as a
result, and I think this allows
districts to move back to
putting more preparation and
quality teaching in front of
students rather than just more
time in front of students, so I
very much support it. Thank you.
you senators Senator Ros.
What
movie do pass if I do pass with
Senator Ramos to the 2nd, 2nd
from Senator Figueroa.
Uh, Cabo.
Ciner boom.
result.
Figueroa, yes.
Hickey. Yes. And your Nova, yes,
Ramos. Sarah Thornton. Yes,
tender, yes, tender souls. Yes.
And
Representative, you represent a
senator, you have a due pass on
House Bill 238. Congratulations.
Next up we have House Bill 260
amended.
Allowable responses.
astute behavior.
Representative Garullo and
Representative Chavez, I think I
a representative of his op.
Oh, here she is.
Welcome to Senate Education
Representative Chavez.
It looks like we're gonna have
Senator Figueroa join you on
this bill. House Bill 260.
Amended
You have the floor.
Thank you, um.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and committee members.
Um, this is, um, House Bill 260.
And um I am presenting it for uh
Representative Coola, who is the
main lead on this bill and
basically this bill and I'm
gonna, we have um a couple of
expert witnesses, um, from LESC.
I'll let them introduce
themselves, um, and this bill
rela relates to what's allowable
in terms of using restraints and
in response to student um
student behavior. Um, it also
speaks to, um, seclusion.
And, um, and it requires
training of um school, um.
Uh, staff
In terms of proper methods, um,
and, and what's allowable. So
with that I will um
Allow, I will ask um Senator
Figueroa if she wants to make
any comments and then ask our
expert witness um to introduce
herself and speak a little bit
more in depth about why this
bill is so necessary. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Committee. I would only add that
this bill comes out of a working
group that was this.
Suggested in Senate Memorial
'68, which ran out of time and
actually did not pass, but our
ESC convened the working group
anyway to deal with this issue,
investigate the concerns and the
folks involved in that working
group were school board members
and superintendents, teachers,
also parents and advocates or
Elias Ctaff and PED staff, and
they worked on this for a year
and a half. This bill comes out.
of their work
And I will let merit speak.
In more detail to their
conclusions.
Mr
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Mary Andrews, and I
have a senior policy analyst for
the legislative Education Study
Committee, as Senator Figueroa
said, this bill comes out of
almost 2 years of work of a
diverse group of stakeholders,
and this bill is responsive to a
report that the group authored
that was presented to LESC in
July 2024. It we specifically
are incorporating the need for
improved definition.
missions to keep all staff and
students safe.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
just going to say that my
colleague is, is dealing with a
heavy boat in another committee,
and so she may have to get up
and leave if she's called to do
so, but that's why I'm here.
Understood. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. With that, we stand for
questions.
Thank you.
In the committee room. Do we
have anyone in support of House
Bill 260 amended. You could
start lining up for public
comment.
Uh, just for the sake of time,
if we could just have 5 to 6
folks.
Might be a little more up there.
But let's do that. Do we have
any opposition?
How about opposition or support
online?
So we can go ahead and begin
with the support on the uh.
Public comments. You have 2
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alice
Lou McCoy. I'm the executive
director of the Developmental
Disabilities Council. We also
house the uh office of the
Special Education Abed our state
Obed, Michelle Trigembo is here.
Uh, she actually sat on this
working group, the DDC convened
it um because uh so many of our
members really care about this
issue. And by state and federal
law, the majority of our council
members are New Mexicans with
developmental disabilities and
family members.
Uh, you know, a lot.
Of data and research out there
unequivocally shows that
students with disabilities
experience restraints, seclusion
in schools at far higher rates
than other students. Our own
council members have children
who have experienced restraint
and seclusion. So this is a very
personal issue for them.
Restraint seclusion not only
traumatizes the students who
experience it, but it
traumatizes this educators who
have to perform it and the
students who have to witness it.
The spill not only clarifies the
use of restraint seclusion in
schools, it emphasizes training
and use of positive behavioral
supports and interventions,
which is the single most
effective way to avoid
situations where educators must
make that tough call about
whether or not they need to
restrain a student. The council
strongly supports this bill to
protect the safety.
of our educators and students
and urges the committee's
members to vote a due pass.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino, and I
represent the Pueblos of Taos
and Aquama and also the center
on law poverty our strong
support of this bill as amended.
Um,
We believe that students with
disabilities deserve to attend
school that affords them.
Uh, the necessary supports, the
safety.
And the dignity.
Without fear of
Intimidation
Or unnecessary harm.
Or seclusion.
And I think, I believe their
parents also want the same.
Want to remind the committee
that the US Department of
Education ordered PED to amend
its state plan and help Title I
students uh learn and that they
should be able to learn without
being subjected to any sort of
bullying and also exclusionary
discipline and harmful
intervention. Uh, this bill
urges, uh, PED to provide
training.
That's a culturally and
linguistically relevant,
especially in those school
districts with large, diverse
student populations, and so for
those reasons was the chairman
with stands in full support and
ask that the committee also
support this piece of
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. I am
here to emphasize why passing
this restraint and seclusion
bill into statute is not just
important, it is definitely
necessary.
As the leader of the office of
Special Education at the New
Mexico Public Education
Department. I have seen
firsthand the impact of
restraint and seclusion on our
students. Also as a former
school principal district leader
and teacher, I have also seen
this impact.
These practices are meant to be
last resorts, yet too often they
are used in ways that cause harm
rather than ensure safety.
National data and real stories
from our own communities show
that restraint and seclusion can
lead to trauma, injury, and
sometimes unfortunately, even
the loss of life.
New Mexico must take a stand to
protect our students by ensuring
that schools use evidence base
de-escalation techniques,
positive behavior supports and
clear guidelines for wind and
how restraint and seclusion can
be used.
The bill provides a level of
accountability and transparency
needed to safeguard our children
while also supporting our
educators, which is equally
important with the training and
resources that they need by
passing this legislation, we can
ensure the well-being, dignity
and safety of every child and
educator in our school. I urge
you to support this bill and
help build a safer, more
support.
inclusive learning environment
for our students. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Ellen Pine's
representing the Disability
coalition, and this is a
particularly important issue for
us because as has been
previously noted, students with
disabilities are
disproportionately likely to be
subject to these measures, uh,
which can be extremely traumatic
and as Dr. Cage pointed out, can
even be fatal. Um, several years
ago, you all took the important
step of enacting law to
Regulate the use of restraint
seclusion in our schools, and as
often happens with law that you
pass.
time shows that there's a need
to go back and refine that
statute, um, at the LESC hearing
held last summer and I know some
of you were there. It became
very clear that both school
personnel and families felt a
need to go back and refine these
issues and further limit the use
of restraints and seclusion, um,
as was also previously noted
this, um, this proposals came
out of a work group that's been
a long time.
I'm looking at these issues and
the bill embodies their
recommendations, um, before
closing, I would like to just
say a brief word on the issue of
prone restraint, which has
become kind of a flashpoint in
this bill. We object to the use
of prone restraint because it
can be fatal, um, prone
restraint refers to putting
somebody in a face-down position
and restraining their movement
and because that restricts
breathing, people have died in
prone restraint positions, not
because anybody was trying to.
him, but because uh it can be
dangerous and that is
particularly the case for many
students with disabilities whose
breathing may already be
compromised, so we feel very
strongly that um barring the use
of that, um is an appropriate
step, and we urge you to approve
the bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee, Whitney
Holland, AFT New Mexico. I stand
in strong support of this bill
because of 3 core reasons. The
clear guidelines for educator
training and positive behavior
supports and de-escalation
strategies. The language around
supports and rights for parents
or guardians whose students are
involved in situations where
restraint is used and our core
belief that our schools should
be places where all of our
students feel safe and
supported. Thank you.
Thank you. And online we have
Laurel Nesbit support. You have
2 minutes.
Yes, yes, good morning, Mr.
Chair, committee members. My
name is Laurel Nesbitt and I'm
an attorney with disability
rights New Mexico. I was also a
participant in the important
work of the of the working
group.
I want to say that DRNM supports
house built 260 as amended and
commends the enormous effort.
The bill sponsors, the LESC and
the Senate Memorial 68 Working
Group.
On restraint seclusion. DRNM
appreciates that the bill
identifies and defines
prohibited activities including
seclusion without continuous
line of sight supervision,
chemical restraint, mechanical
restraint, and as Miss Pines was
mentioning, um, earlier, prone
restraint, which uh we certainly
agree is inherently dangerous
and um and is is not accepted
under the uh the, the current
training standards.
The bill highlights the critical
importance of learning different
and better responses to student
behavior. Students with
disabilities need educators who
can
Who can understand and
anticipate their behavioral
differences. Likewise, educators
need strategies and resources,
including additional staff
support to teach, support, and
calm such students, getting up
ahead of the behavior before it
even happens. The bill also
points up the need to build
capacity and behavioral
expertise, both at the
department and at the district
level so that schools have
access to effective behavior
supports for students who need
them most.
Beyond this bill, we urge the
PED to build that capacity and
expertise as well as to ensure
accurate restraint and
confinement data collection by
districts to monitor, etc.
Chair members of the committee,
DRNM asks you to vote due pass
on House Bill 260. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Next up we have Jen,
if you could, um.
Give us your complete name in
your intro.
Hi, this is Jennifer Sanchez,
um, I wear many hats instead on
many committees, but my proudest
title is Mom. I'm the parent of
two autistic students, and I
support Bill I'm sorry, House
Bill 260 because it prioritizes
safe, fair, and positive
practices and transparency in
schools.
Too often our children with
special needs face harsh
punishments instead of receiving
the support that they require to
succeed.
This is a fear that we as
parents live with every time we
drop our students off.
And we wait
Throughout the day hoping we
don't get those calls.
This bill promotes positive
interventions and practices
helping students and ensuring
that they are treated with
dignity and understanding. I
implore you, on behalf of my
children to please support this
bill, House Bill 260. Thank you.
Thank you and last we're gonna
have Gabriella Dietrich.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich. I am
the executive director of NAI
New Mexico.AI is an organization
that believes strongly that we
rely on evidence-based practice
to determine what we do with
both with individuals with
mental health conditions and
with the community at large, we,
when we know better, we do
better. And the evidence is
clear that restraint and
seclusion are dangerous for all
individuals, but particularly
for individuals with mental
health conditions.
and other health conditions that
That sometimes create behavioral
differences that need
intervention and care and
support. Um, I wanna also say
that in order to enable students
to succeed, we need enough
people in the room, enough
enough kinds of support from
enough experts to support their
behavior in a way that does not
require the student, the
individual to suffer so that the
classroom can continue on as
intended. We have people in the
room to execute the
kinds of behavioral strategies
that enable success rather than
just getting a behavior that's
perceived as a problem out of
the way. We stand in support of
HB 260, and we, or did you pass.
Thank you.
Thank you. That's the end of
public comment. Just want to
give the sponsors an
opportunity. I know everything,
everyone support, but just in
case you left something out for
the bill.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right? With that, uh, we're
gonna go to the committee first,
Senator Souls.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair.
We, we get these things rolling
out of our mouth and forget to
think before we start, um.
I very much appreciate this bill
coming forward as an elementary
middle school teacher as the
discussion, I have flashbacks of
children, you know, that, uh.
For various reasons, you know,
and, and I was often one of the
ones that had to restrain them
to protect them from themselves
from others, from damage
property damage and other kinds
of things, and very much
appreciate all of this, you
know, I went through
I don't remember a couple of
days of, of training on how you
do that effectively and, and uh.
Appropriately, uh, uh, in the
definitions just kind of a funny
little story, elopement. Uh, I
was about 2 weeks into the job
of uh being a middle or an
elementary principal when one of
my special ed teachers comes
running by the office going,
we've got a runner. I'm like,
what the hell's a runner?
it was a 2nd grader decided he
was headed home and took off
running busy streets. This was
an urban school. He had right
across the busy traffic and I'm
looking both ways. So, that's
one where there may be an
opportunity that the child needs
to be restrained temporarily so
they don't run out into the
middle of traffic. Um, remember
that situation very clearly,
very much in support of this.
There's been many, many hours of
work by the working group by the
LESC over a couple of years.
try and get all of these pieces
right to protect children, but
these also protect the school
employees.
By having the, the right
training and, and the proper
understanding as to what we're
really trying to do with this,
that it's not about controlling
children. It's about making sure
that we're working towards
positive behaviors. Um, I've had
discussions with the
superintendents around the state
of New Mexico, who for the most
part are on board with all of
this. They still have some
concerns about potential for
litigation. It's not in this
particular bill. I think it's in
the special ed bill, but
I would prefer that the
ombudsman were in a neutral site
such as the Attorney General
rather than either with the PED
or with the disabilities groups
or other, other things of that
sort so that if there is a
concern or appeal that it truly
is a neutral ombudsman that's
not part of this bill, but
that's one of their concerns
that's related to this bill. Um,
and so again, I, I hope the
committee fully supports this
and understands as we move
forward, got great updates and
In um the definitions and
things, so I'm not sure I've got
any questions that I'm asking.
Appreciate all of the very hard
work so that we are doing best
for all of our kids. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Any other?
members of the committee.
Questions, comments?
Senator wrongs.
Mr. Chair center uh
representative, I'm sorry,
senator, thanks for bringing
this bill. You know, dignity and
understanding is always very.
Um, I do have, uh,
Special
Aid that helps out.
Oh
And uh
He has, he has to restraint.
Children pretty much on a date.
Um
And uh
What is, what provisions in this
bill are there to protect them?
From
Any type of lawsuits or or just
protecting periods so that they
don't get hurt.
A multiple times I've seen her
limping and the like, hey, are
you OK?
And she says, no, I, yeah.
being a kid
A couple days ago and back
really hurting.
But what's there to protect
them?
OK, that's Mr. Chair and
senator, that's a core piece of
the bill.
Training is essential in order
to protect everyone's health and
safety, Mister Chair, how to
restrain without
Uh, to protect the safety of a
child, given their age, given
their condition, their size,
everything we know about them,
but also to protect the adult
for exactly that reason, a major
focus of this bill is on
training staff who might be
called upon to do this training
and certification are the
requirements by this bill.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
Representative.
Um
I was also looking on the fiscal
implications because there's no
appropriation hospital bill 260
0 for training, school's
personnel, and 4 meetings.
It needs to determine policy
both before and after incidents
that occurred are likely to be
substantial. This analysis
assumes these costs could be up
to a million dollars.
Yes, Mister Chair and Senator,
um, training and professional
training for her staff always
has a cause, but I think the FIR
goes on to say that
clarification of these
definitions and terms and doing
this training could lead to
substantial savings in terms of
litigation.
Mr. Chair and Senator
Representatives. So what's going
to be the different type of
training that they're getting
now versus.
And I'm gonna let merit answer
that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. I want to be clear
that training is already
required in code. This is just
adding specific specificity.
It's also setting a minimum of
staff that need to be trained.
School districts who can afford
it and charter schools who can
afford it and obviously train
more than that. We're just being
responsive to school staff and
asking for what they needed. We
are leaving a lot up to school
districts and charter schools to
choose themselves.
for this specific type of
training that meets these
requirements. They're going to
submit to the public education
department for approval, but
we're leaving some up to
discretion for the school
districts, we just providing the
specific specificity that
stakeholders ask for. I hope
that answers your question.
Well,
I just Mr. Chair, I just would
like to see what new train is
going to be available.
if they're already getting
trained.
Would this be a waste?
Mr. Chair and senator, because
of the clarity and definitions,
no, um, and I would direct you
to page 6, where it goes through
the training nets starts in
Section E.
Right, um
Page 5
Section D is about the safety
plan, Mr. Chad schools already
have to do a safety plan, um,
and with respect to the safety
plan.
This bill would indicate that
part of the planning team that
drafts the safety plan, uh,
includes someone who is trained
and certified in positive
behavior interventions and
de-escalation.
And then restraint techniques as
well.
In addition to what's already
required to be on that safety
plan drafting team, one special
ed teacher at least, minimum.
Um, and that the safety plan
address school district supports
and the school district
strategies applicable to
physical restraint.
So we're requiring that that be
in the school safety plan, that
the schools are already making
and that there be a section to
deal with elopement, Mister
Chair and Senator, then if you
get to section E on page 6, it
goes into more specificity, more
clarity of the training. So
there's training happening, but
that training isn't necessarily
clear enough on these issues,
and that was the impetus of this
entire bill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Anyone else, uh, Senator Boone.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members
committee and senator, uh.
I do have some concerns here.
I understand where you're going
with it and I.
I think that it's a
Many-headed monster
Got to deal with here.
And uh
And maybe it's been answered and
I just hadn't grasped it, but.
If, if this goes into effect,
What, what will happen if, if
that incident does arise.
Or
Restraint really needs to be
used. What, what's gonna happen
there?
And then what are
The ramifications of that gonna
be of going against this.
I'll let you go on to that.
Thank you, Mr. too.
And and Senator, you're right,
these emergency situations
happen, um, and I would direct
you to page 4 of the bell where
we try and address that.
Right, this is a mixture of
already existing law, and then
we're adding new clarity.
So public school may allow the
use of physical restraint
techniques on a students.
If the students' behavior
presents that imminent danger of
serious physical harm to the
student or others, and that's
already current law, and we're
leaving that that is super
important, Mister Chair, and it
does say that less restrictive
intervention should be tried
first, but then I'm gonna look
for the page and Merritt can
probably tell me.
Where it specifically says in
the emergency situation where
there's not time to get that
trained person there. The school
still needs to do what it has to
do to keep the child safe.
And Merritt, can you tell me?
The page number to reassure the
senator.
Yes, absolutely. Um.
I don't have that on the top of
my head because when I was also
going to point to you first and
then I'll go to that is that for
seclusion, we added an amendment
to allow supervised confinement
with continuous line of sight
supervision in the same way that
we would, we would allow um
restraint. If there was a
significant danger to the
student or others, and yes, we
want everyone who is um trained
to be able to use that as the
senator said, but we do have
Um, an exception for if there is
um danger to the employees and
I'll, I'll I'll find that for
you.
And Mr. Chair tag teaming, she
gave me time to find it. It's in
section F.
And that is section F number 3,
physical restraint techniques
shall be used only by the school
employees who are trained in
safe and effective use of
restraint unless that's the key
word, an emergency situation
doesn't allow for time to summon
those trained school employees,
and the imminent danger to the
student or others is greater
than the risk of harm of
physical restraint to the
student.
We have to protect the ability
of a school to react in
emergency situations that are
under time constraints.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you.
That, that helps me understand
and I've got one more question
and it's, it's just
For clarity, you know, for me to
understand it a little bit
clearer, but in, uh,
In this one analysis here.
Uh, PED noted if HB 260 if
enacted, the department would
need to to amend.
And it may see 611.2 rights and
responsibilities of the public
schools and public school
students, uh, to conform to the
provisions of the bill. PED
would also have to create a
form.
To provide written documentation
to parent, students, parents
following incidents of
restraint. So that, that just
means exactly what it says,
right.
It would
Yes, Mister Chair and Senator,
it does, and that pertains to
the information in section 8 on
page 8, in terms of timing.
Um,
The prior language already said
that parents needed to be
notified and even gave a time
frame. Um,
The school is this is prior
language.
The school employees shall
provide the student's parent
with written or oral notice on
the same day that an incident
occurred, so that is already in
practice. What this bill would
add is within 3 school days,
there needs to be a written
follow-up, and that will be on a
department issued form. That's
line 19. And part of that is to
ensure consistency across
districts across the state, and
how we report incidents so that
we can collect data. Part of
that is to ease.
the burden on the school that
has to fill out this form, um,
but that is the new parental
rights that the analysis you
quoted was referring to.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for that, that clarifies a lot.
Thank you very much.
This chair I move would do pass.
All right, we have a due pass
Senator Souls, uh, we have
senator.
That movie.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I appreciate this bill
coming forward.
Some of the questions I have
have been answered, so I'm not
going to be redundant here.
But unto your.
And I think this is all under
your, at my, I might be right.
Yes, it is, it does start under
your.
Definitions
And it's the time out that that
aspect of it.
Um
According to your definitions,
time out means a continuum of
behavior management techniques
designed to address
inappropriate student behavior
that begin with minimally
intrusive strategies up to
separation of the student from
the classmates or for some
amount of time before we return
to the classroom.
And then right below that under
B, said the following activities
are prohibited in public
schools. So isn't that
contradictory when it was the
first one says seclusion.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, see,
now I've done it.
Mr. Chair and send her, um,
timeout is in this section of
definitions because that is
specifically excluded from the
definition of seclusion. If you
go up one paragraph, seclusion
means involuntary confinement of
a student alone in a room or an
area from which their egress is
prevented, providing that
seclusion does not
mean the use of voluntary
behavior management techniques,
including timeout.
So timeout is allowed,
seclusion.
is defined as not time out,
seclusion is prohibited.
OK, then mister Chairman and
Senator whenever we are talking
about.
time out.
If you will look at uh
a mine a mine is a little bit
different than everybody else is
under F.
I think that's where it is.
Under G is his timeout shall not
be used as a punishment.
So again there is there not.
double standard set whenever
we're talking about timeouts
shall not be used as a
punishment versus
Time out needs to continuing and
behavior management techniques.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, a
timeout is a response to student
behavior to help a student
control that behavior, isn't the
same as punishment.
Um, and that's the
differentiation she is trying to
make. You are not.
and I will use an example from
my experience, Mr. Chair, as a
teacher. You are not stepping
into the hall to think for a few
minutes and write me a little
note about what you could do
instead of what you just did.
Right? And it might be we get to
that step after I've given you
the look, after I've said, hey,
and we've had a conversation and
this behavior still continuing
like.
Sweetheart, what's going on?
Let's give, have a, have a 5
minute step out, think about
what's happening. Write me a
note or then we're gonna talk
about what you could do instead
when you are so upset, you start
screaming.
That's, that's not a punishment
for the behavior that's uh we're
gonna try and find a way to
manage that behavior and
continue with your learning.
OK, well, mister.
Chairman.
Senator
Whenever I was reading all your
definitions. I also read about a
love movie.
Which means the student even in
assigned area without permission
from her knowledge of the school
employee.
So if you say, OK, I want you to
step out in the hall, calm down.
I want you to tell me, write it
down why you feel this need to
exhibit this behavior that's
unacceptable to the rest of the
class, that is trying to learn
and that student decides hm.
Let's, let's take this next
course of action there.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes
elopement is not as romantic as
we all thought it was
yeah, um, when, when, uh,
I do time outs and this may be
more specific than needed, Mr.
Chair. My eyes are on the
student as well. I'm standing
where I can see them and my
class and timeouts can also be
under the supervision of another
teacher. Go to the teacher's
room next door to do this, um,
alopement here is particularly
addressed in this bill, Mr.
Chair more to address the
previous senator's example of a
student running into a dangerous
situation. That is the situation
where we have to protect the.
the child.
OK
And Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
those responses there I'm glad
you brought a little bit of
levity into it with the
elopement aspect of it.
I also noticed that there is
going to be some work to be done
by PED, is that correct? Can you
further expand on that.
Chair, and I'll let me go
through those steps. OK.
Mr. Chair, Senator Isel, yes, we
are adding some specificity to
work that PED is already doing.
So as previously mentioned,
there's already a school safety
plan that the department
approves, but we're adding some
specificity to what needs to be
included in the approval of
those school safety plans. He
will have to update rules that
already exists on school safety
plan to be in alignment with a
spell, they will also have
have to issue a department
approved form.
ro a explained earlier for
parental notification. That's to
ensure consistent, consistency
in reporting and collect data
and also to reduce burden on
schools as they're reporting.
OK, so Mr. Chairman and
representative and senator.
But the parents still has
The right to question what has
been done. Is that correct? What
is the liability towards the
teacher or and or the uh school
if the parent.
is successful in saying no, that
is not what happened.
Mr. Chair, sender Isel, we
worked closely with PED's legal
team to ensure that everything
that we were doing, um, was
exactly how they wanted it to
be. So we are to our
understanding and PD's
understanding, we're not
changing liabilities that
already exists. We're just
adding specificity and if
anything, protection by
increased clarity.
OK, thank you very much for
that.
I, I
Probably read it and I.
didn't mark it. I, I'm not
really sure if it is in here.
What happens if this behavior by
a student continues where it is.
Escalating to the point that it
has happened not once, maybe not
more than, more than 3 times.
What happens to that student?
I'm not seeing it in here. Am I
missing it some.
Mr. Chair.
And Senator, it is.
On pages 9 and 10.
Where there is reference, Mr.
Chair, to more than one time. So
repeated actions.
So this lays out in area 3 A and
B. What must happen and on page
10.
Number 4.
is key because when the team
gets involved when it when this
is a repeated incident, a team
gets involved and it might be an
IEP team for a special education
student or might be a behavioral
intervention team, Mr. Chair,
um, or student assistant team,
we call them SA teams. Whatever
team can gather, which would be
parent administrator, teacher,
diagnostician perhaps to look at
what this child needs.
Because the school is
responsible for meeting the
needs of the student. So that
whole team then can address
repeated behaviors and what is
sparking it how to address it as
a school within the system.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, thank you
very much for that just as you
started saying that, I found it
again and I was reading it.
The problem I'm having with this
particular bill, Mr. Chairman,
and Senator.
Well, one other thing before I
go on to that, you have stricken
a bunch of language at the very
end of the bill like.
Old age and a quarter.
But it says that this the
provisions do not apply to any
school located within a county
juvenile detention center or a
state operated juvenile
facility, I understand that is
current language right now.
And can you tell me why this is
not applicable?
Mr. Chair and Senator, I cannot.
It is current language and I
don't know the history of its
creation. OK.
Thank you very much for that.
Mr. Chairman, problem I'm having
right here.
Is
The teacher is there to teach a
classroom.
This room is the key. There's
gonna be one more than one
student in there.
And with
That teachers or the staff's
hands more or less being tied on
what they can and cannot do to
maintain decorum in that in that
room.
There's a problem because if
it's one student.
Out of the rest that class that
might be just.
5% of that classroom.
And the rest of the students are
the ones that are gonna be
suffering because they are not
getting the education that has
been afforded to them by our
constitution.
I, I understand.
That some of this behavior might
be from another student bullying
another student. I do get that.
Or something that triggers this
out outburst.
But until a teacher does have
control of that classroom,
that's the other students that
are missing him.
Mr. Ferman
Cents representatives, thank you
all very much for your
responses.
Thank you, Senator. We have a
due pass from Senator Soles in a
second.
other questions.
Well Senator Thornton
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just a couple of clarifying
questions, uh.
This bill, this bill does not
apply just to students with
disabilities, right? It applies
to all students.
Mr. Terry, Senator, that's
correct.
Do we have, uh, Mr. Chair, do we
have uh an example or do we know
of
Do we have records of how many
students are typically
restrained.
Secluded
In a typical year and the
school, is there something that
happens a lot or is this a a
rare occasion.
Mr. Chair, sender Thornton. So
that's actually one of the
issues is Bill is trying to
address. We currently do have
reporting requirements, but we
know for a fact that the data
that we collect is not
reflective of how often this
happens. The last school year,
the data from PED showed 11
instances and within our working
group, we had more examples of
restraint and conclusion that
happened among us. I'm a Senator
Ramos mentioned earlier today,
we know that's not reflective.
That's one of the reason.
Since we are requiring this
department approved form so that
it's easier for school districts
and charter schools to report on
this, so we know how often it
actually happen. I hope that
answers your question.
Thank you. So what you're saying
is this bill will have a much
better reporting structure and
have a better handle.
How much or how often this
occurs.
Uh, I understand that.
Um
I too have sort of uh same
concerns that Senator Zel
mentioned with regards to
fact that there are a lot of
There's gonna be a lot of
professional development for the
teachers given.
new definitions or the
clarifying definitions.
And
And then, of course, um,
The other question I had was
with regards to, and I'm not an
educator, so, so I'm coming at
this moment.
sort of an analytical view. How
many teachers, aides are in a
particular room at any given
time. In other words, as a
teacher's teaching every teacher
have an aide in the room with
them.
They start laughing. So I think
the answer is no, but
Mr. Senator, the answer is, oh,
I wish. Um, no, and every, every
teacher does not have an 8, and
even the ratio of students to
teacher there can vary widely. I
can tell you, Mister Tay, in my
34 year career as a teacher,
I've never had to physically
when I once had to help
physically restrain a student,
and that wasn't a student of
mine.
I teach what's called general
ed, not special education,
general education courses. So
one of the things Mr.
That is, that I like about this
bill is that it leaves it to the
schools to decide who is
trained, who needs to know this?
Who are we going to call to come
running if a child needs to be
restrained because they're
endangering themselves. And, and
often it's not the general
education teacher and schools
may choose to teach positive
behavior enforcement
de-escalation techniques to the
general ed and then choose who
on their staff will be the
special.
Listen this area.
Thank you for that. Um,
I think, I think that covers
most of my concerns.
The um
I like the idea that there is a
reporting requirement. I think
just important for us to get a
handle on.
But I'm also concerned that the
95% of the students who are not
disrupted.
That
may be hindered if the teachers
having focused their time and
energy.
Going through these series of
steps to
sure that this person was
treated fairly.
and treated appropriately at the
same time while his teachers
doing that.
Dudes.
So I'm struggling with this, but
I, I can tell you all did quite
a bit of work.
Show, so thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Noble.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, Senators for bringing
this bill forward. On page 6, it
speaks to the training of school
employees, um, and it's, I, I
believe on line 8 at states
training of school employees
designated and the school safety
plan occur biannually. Um, with
this apply to police officers or
security officers at the
schools.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator I
could, that would be determined
by the school safety plan, as
designated in the school safety
plan, the school would decide
who is re.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, I think we've run around
the committee with all the
questions and comments. I think
we're good to go. I, I just want
to reiterate to folks that a lot
of the concerns
liability and ambiguity on what
can be done, I think.
Getting the data, that's what
this bill is actually going to
address.
So the concerns that folks are
bringing about this bill. They
actually have those concerns
now.
I think this bill will address
that. That being said, we'll go
ahead and call the vote. We have
a motion from Senator Sos a
second.
And boom.
so
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes.
cinder Hickey.
Yes.
No.
Yes, Sierras.
No.
Senator Thornton.
No.
And Pope
Yes.
Tender souls. Yes.
And Representative, you have
representative senator, you have
a due pass 5.
And favor for against.
Congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Mr. T,
um.
I would like to request that we
have a dead start in 30, we have
that.
of your own.
22.
Um
I'm sorry, which?
out of the floor, I don't know.
Is it 10:30?
Mr. Chairman, could I ask my
students to stay, please, from
Sierra Middle School.
students, can you hold on one
second?
Like there later.
If we could have the students
come back in and we'll have uh
Senator, he introduced them, and
then I want to clarify what was
just asked from Senator.
And Mr. Chairman, I didn't mean
to interrupt, but I know what
they were leaving and I was
gonna give you an opportunity,
but.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.
So I think some of most of the
students are coming back in now.
And I met them.
I, I met with him whenever they
first got here, I, I knew they
were outside and so I had the
opportunity to shake hands with
each one of them, and if I could
have the students and chaperones
from Sierra Middle School,
please stand up.
I mean, Mason Middle School. Oh
my gosh, what was I thinking?
Mason Middle School, please
stand up.
And Mr. Chairman and members, if
I could have the young lady
start here and state your name
clearly, please.
Madeline, what?
The logos?
Nice to be glad you're here.
Is.
Fernandez
Andola Junior.
Hermila Zuniga.
That you leave.
I'm, uh, Eric Gomez is a
principal with Mesa Middle
School.a.
And Mr. Chairman, this cla has
contacted me over a month ago
wanting to come up here and see
how the process worked.
And I am tickled that they are
here today. Some of them will be
joining me on the floor, and
they left home at the brisk hour
of
5:30, is that what I was told
that they, they came up here. So
they, that shows their
dedication to what we're doing
up here and I would like
everybody to help me welcome
them up here. Thank you very
much.
And I apologize for using the
wrong school's name. I apo I
knew which school it was and it
just came out differently. I
apologize.
Go Mesa.
All right. Um, that is for the
committee members and those
online, that is going to be the
last bill for today. I'm gonna
go ahead and pass it back over
to the chairman, um, just in
case he has any before we
adjourn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I
apologize to the other sponsors.
We got notified late that the
governor is meeting with all
legislators, I believe.
Senators in the finance room uh
due at 10:30 and so others on
the bill, I apologize. You will
be on the the list for Monday.
There are things we can't
control this time of year, so.
So sorry, um, but thank you for
everybody who was here, and we
