Early on Monday to pick up any
do we we might not get to
the process for those who are
going to be giving testimony or
public comment is we limit each
person to two minutes I will
somehow I'll try and be back to
work whatever would you have
about ten seconds left but my
zoom authority when I say thank
you that's two minutes you will
cut you off no don't embarrass
yourself or B. by getting cut
off right in the middle of the
wait at the very system if you
can please
Trying to think if there any
other main things I'll try and
keep reminding people of which
bills were on I think it shows
up between any of the little
transitions which bills were
covering as well anything from
committee members as far as.
Issues technicalities or
anything of that sort and if you
weren't on just a few moments
ago I'd indicated center Kernan
I know as a little bit of
connectivity and brought
and with where she is so a word
about and she drops off we will
come back to her to tally her
vote so that that doesn't become
an issue or for anyone else I
know some time Senator renewable
as indicated he might have an
activity issues that we
certainly don't want to keep
anyone spoke from getting
counted because the the
broadband gods decided to point
out on.
Committee members Senator Brandt
yes.
Thank you Mr chairman your.
We we really have to follow the
rules that we set this the when
we were here the few moments of
session.
and basically it means that the
if the broadband dies for one of
the committee members were
really supposed to stand in
place until we can get them
reconnected we did in tax and
business
did a unanimous consent to allow
someone to vote I I really
believe the rules that's the
only way it's really allowed to
do so
is to come back to it later and
do that
but the committee has to do it
has to be done in a public venue
so I think we have to be really
careful that we're not doing
rolling form which I've seen in
other committees in the past
and that's gonna be really easy
to do in this situation so
and and not trying to.
If you were just trying to put
some yellow the rules we passed
made it really simple your solos
connectivity were supposed to
stop allow them to get
reconnected
and then restart once they get
reconnected.
Yes in a red that was my
intention not to go on to other
bills and then that just how it
later but the wait until they're
able to make sure they're both
gets cast.
Yes thank you anyone else.
It's not that we will go to
Senate bill thirty one centers
the panic on full time nurses we
add that wagers of five new four
some amendments and if you would
like to give us a quick recap of
the bill and what the amendment
does.
Mr chair members of the
committee I did take your advice
and recommendations you have an
amendment that is point two one
nine four oh one point two we
did change the language from
may to shall on page one line
twenty four so that the
department shall grant the
waivers not may and then the
other
Language there is cleaning up
about licensed by the board of
nursing as a nurse and as a
school nurse to to clarify that
and then on the second page of
the amendment is in
appropriation all in all we're
just talking about three nurses
how we do not think that the
department of health needs any
extra staff to monitor putting
on three nurses but the Public
education department we have a
program put in an appropriation
of two hundred thousand dollars
to cover salary and benefits
with three full time nurses it
might turn out to be part time
nurses but there would be a
savings at that point so I would
stand for any questions or
comments.
And thank you this isn't
something where we need to go
out to the public we debated
lots of this I think everyone
fairly clear is that this is not
a debate about whether nurses
are important or needed or
anything of that sort of by the
way if anybody needed there up
on the screen now we have a copy
of the amendment and so I will
in the I will go out and.
Got questions from the committee
and I see Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and this
is more of a of a.
Point of order again
you know when we're sitting
there we get these amendments in
our hands to where we can look
at them hi my my computer
monitor that I use for zoom is
is smaller and then I'm pulling
everything over that I'm reading
on to much larger.
Screen but I this wasn't sent to
me for me to be able to actually
look at it but I think in the
future we need to be able to
have these email to us so that I
can you know so that we can read
through them and follow along
with them.
it is that could be done that
would be greatly appreciated I'm
not going to ask that we hold
this up because of that I think
we've done that enough but I
think in the future be great if
if USCIS Committee members yeah
even if it's submitted we get
email during the meeting we can
pull it up on our email so that
we can actually read through the
amendments I I can't see that
and I have really good I so I'm
not sure how you guys that don't
being able to read that on your
screen unless you have a very
large monitor
these were make a law again this
is really important for us to
get things right so it it's
really hard to follow where
exactly were what we're changing
with the help of those in front
of us thank you.
And and read your your point is
very well taken let me check I
know our secretaries have some.
I have rules they have to follow
about whether things can be are
made public on amendments until
the amendment is introduced
are there it I mean there's some
of the political side to
different things like that as to
whether people are are not going
to introduce amendments and
whether they want them out and
tell it's I do not use that let
me work on that and certainly as
it gets introduced and if we're
able to then send it as an email
right at that point yet that
would be helpful I think that
certainly is appropriate to do
so and so we'll try to work on
it on the side into the future
whether amendments of that sort.
Any questions on the.
On the bill we're on the
amendment to a Senate bill
thirty one.
I'm not seeing any I have.
Just a question or two if I
might of the sponsor and centers
the panic that when I first
looked at this two hundred
thousand seems like hardly any
money that you indicated it was
up for only three nurses where
with those three nurses the year
for which districts schools
areas.
Are you still there yes the one
mute I'm I'm there now okay so
if the three areas were
don't think.
And one other and I have to go
to my full list.
Because we're talking about
public schools.
Only.
So this.
With four hundred four students
does say with five hundred
ninety nine.
And.
I'm not sure.
If it's Red River or not.
I'm looking at the top there is
that there was a charge.
That was provided to us of all
the schools with no nurses but
some of those are charter
schools that will be exempted.
And.
I'm sorry I'm not sure about the
third screen.
So Senator is it a similar type
one it's kind of it's not one of
the micro districts that shall
be granted a waiver now type of
thing but but that just doesn't
have the resources.
Correct and if there is a rural
school that has to request a
waiver.
Can you hear me is the host is
not alone participate mute you
can hear me yes you are muted
Senator okay thank you so
basically the two hundred
thousand would cover extra costs
us in the only way that one of
the public schools could get a
waiver is if been back they
didn't have the funding so if
they do have the funding they
would not
Receive the waiver so the
funding has been provided for
the three public schools and it
is possible that.
Account that it would be a part
time nurse versus a full time
nurse.
Mr chair okay and I guess the
only concern that a band that
brought was.
That the districts that are
providing funding for all of
their nurses yeah I would fight
twice the state funding for some
districts that not providing for
the nurses that they found money
in their budgets for
I don't know I mean we're
talking about a fairly small
amounts but is there a response
for that.
Well.
I had originally assumed that
the districts would have the
responsibility but this
the discussion in this committee
indicated.
That it probably would not
happen was very small school
districts that are very
stretched to the limit with
providing everything that's
required and that the request
was to provide the extra money
to get them started we did
discuss Mr chair members of the
committee in the first committee
presentation that there are
several outside foundations that
probably would fund up starting
a start up of a school nurse the
Robert wood Johnson foundation
that catalog or the macarthur
foundation are just a few
longstanding in state
foundations but I believe that
the.
Many requested me to put in
appropriation and that's why I
did.
Yes thank you Senator up and
again Mr some of the text
messages I'm getting is just
concerned that other districts
that it's up.
That it's inequitable to those
that are already funding at into
discussions I had with with
people is now and I'm always a
bit of the opinion is put in
appropriations larger than you
think knowing the finances but
thanks there saving us money by
cutting them back up but to
assist all eighteen districts
that are struggling to provide
nurses regardless of size
but I'm not going to hold that
up but you might want to look at
an amendment as it goes board
finance to increase it to a
million or two million dollars
or something of that sort of
anyone else have questions.
I'm not seeing any other hands
go up.
The other questions on the
committee if not I'm open to
other.
First worry are on the amendment
is Senate bill thirty one.
I move forward option have a
motion heard for it to adopt the
amendment Senator Pinto second.
Seconded by Senator Padilla.
If you'll call the roll please
may I.
Senator Brandt yes on the
amendment.
Senator Hickey.
Can you and you can.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville.
Yes Senator Padilla yes.
Senator.
Excuse me senator pemco.
Yes the pope yes Senator souls
yes we have Senate bill thirty
one we are now back on you maybe
bill is there any further
discussion on the amendment bill
from committee members please
raise your hand I'm trying to
monitor that.
I'm not seeing any hands go up I
know it takes about the Senator
Padilla.
I thank thank you Senator
Padilla Mr chair with that I'll
move it to pass.
We have a motion for do passes
their second second second good
seconded by Senator Kernan if
you will call the roll on Senate
bill thirty one.
Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Neville.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes.
Thank you so also yes thank.
They do pass senator and thank
you for taking the committee
suggested bringing it back to
us.
Amended thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you we are going to move
on to the next bill that we had
as a carry over from Wednesday
this will be Senate bill one
hand which is Senator Stewart
will be carrying this bill just
for those watching this is
Senate education we just passed
Senate bill thirty one is a
carry over from our Wednesday
beating we are now on Senate
bill one ten increasing the
employer contribution I the
Senate pro tem Senator Stewart
that are stored are you with us
and if you would please.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
can you hear me yes ma'am.
Mr chair I'm going to ask the
committee to do something a
little unusual and that is what
this bill is site don't leave
that don't keep it on your
roll over Kerry over I'm because
I really need to see if I can
work with the budget committee
to see if there's any funding
for this this is a non as this
is a recurring expense to the
budget and so I would like this
to rest in your committee
somewhere.
Senator Stewart we certainly can
do that so we will put this
aside I'll just keep it on my
list until I hear back from you
so for the public we will not be
hearing Senate bill one ten this
morning the creasing the
employer contribution we will
move on to Senate bill one
thirty one discretionary program
units with Senator Stewart are
Senate pro tem Senator Stewart.
Thank you so much Mister
chairman so this bill is a
cleanup part of these cleanup
was and of the bill that
Representative chat he'll high
cost in the January session that
we had to repeal in the special
session because of the cost so
it does two things this is the
capital improvements act also
known as Senate bill nine it
allows districts to a mill levy
up to two mills for six years
work instruction renovation
grounds improvements maintenance
activity vehicles so the current
language states that the
calculation be based on the
average of the prior year total
program units on second and
third reporting gates but the
PED doesn't calculate total
program units on these reporting
dates so it's a bit of a glitch
so that's just the cleanup that
it corrects the lottery prior
year final program units that's
a change we did when we still
had Representative Rauch it
makes it more certain for
districts to know what kind of
money they'll get because it's
based on the prior year final
program units and additionally
it excludes what's called
discretionary program units so
things that are of voluntary and
done by some districts and not
others this course that that
will improvements act remains on
a stable footing and people
understand how much they're
getting and that's the part that
was in Representative Chatfield
of bills that we all voted for
that we had to reinstate I could
go on but this is pretty
technical and simple and so I'm
ready for questions.
Thank you senator this point we
will go out and for public
comment and so mark hello if you
can kind of take over for me as
to who is in the the room to
give public comment and I knew
that announce them and use them
please.
Absolutely first we'll be
hearing from choking in.
Mark hello says Senate bill
thirty one on the little screen
and I think we've moved on the
Senate bill one thirty one.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
members of the committee.
georgianne with the New Mexico
school boards association and
ice also serve on the.
Public school capital outlay
council as chairman and we
support this legislation I think
it provides a lot of clean up
language that is very necessary
and we think Senator Stewart for
for bringing it forward for us
again thank you.
Thank you Mr again.
The market next.
Next we'll be hearing from
heather Bassett.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is heather
Bassett and on behalf of
Albuquerque public schools we
stand in support of this
legislation thank you thank you
for that.
And now we'll hear from stand
rounds.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee good morning stand
around representing the
superintendents and education
leaders in New Mexico we stand
in full support of this bill we
want to thank the sponsor for
bring this forward I serve on
the scooter if we call to
capitalize oversight task force
this is one of our
recommendations coming forward
your removes an unintended
windfall to districts to
participate in the LTP and K.
five plus and we're pretty
cleanup in again as we did in
the regular session before we
support as well thank you thank
you Mr Allen's.
I believe that was the last
person who emailed her public
statement there's anyone else
who would like to speak please
raise your hand at this time.
I believe that is all for now
Senator thank you there is no
one else that will we're open
for questions from the committee
upper Senator stored any
response to any of those I know
thank you Mr chairman.
From the committee any anyone
from the committee with.
Questions I'm trying to stand
down by committee members.
I don't see any and I would give
it out Senator Brandt.
Mr Mrs or no questions I would
move to pass.
Have a motion for a new path
Senator Brandt.
Second.
And seconded by Senator Padilla
and million if you will call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt yes.
Key yes Senator Kernan.
At.
Senator Kernan yes.
Well.
Yes Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope S..
I'm sorry Center pope.
Yes.
Yes Senator souls yes.
Apps.
Thank you so much good luck
today.
Thank you the next bill that we
have is going to be Senator
Hemphill bill Senate bill fifty
one after that we will have
Senate bill seventy seven which
is Senator Kernan to quest you
pilot project but on right now
will have Senate bill fifty one
charter school enrollment
preference Senator Hemphill.
Welcome to Senate education.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I'm Siah Correa Hemphill and
it's an honor to be here today
and have this opportunity to
sponsor in introduced Senate
bill fifty one which provides an
role properly store students
whose parents are employees of
the charter school.
I worked at a charter school for
eight years and I also have a
thirteen year old son who's
attended elderly uncle charter
school for three years so I
understand how beneficial it is
to have your children at the
same school where you're working
but not all charter school
employees are able to do that
right now said this enrollment
preference is already provided
in traditional district schools
in New Mexico I've also worked
in traditional district schools
for many years and I know when
my children attended the same
school that I was working and it
made life so much easier it
reduces family stress helps
parents be more involved in
their children's education helps
morning and afternoon commutes
be a lot more efficient and for
these reasons that help schools
recruit and retain teachers and
employees and helps to foster
stronger connections with in the
school environments which is
very conducive to academic
achievements because of this
it's so important to pass this
charter school enrollment
preference bill especially right
now when teachers have done so
much for our children and had to
indoor so many challenges during
this difficult time so this is
one thing we can do to help make
their lives a little more so a
little less stressful thank you
Mr chairman and I think that
there are some an expert witness
Casey Bennett beat us if she on.
It's actually a he.
If you would please our.
Yes Sir Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name's Casey
Benavides I'm the director of
and I was international school
in Albuquerque been and charter
school business for about
ten years now I'm going on my
twenty fourth year of education
yes and I was international
school we have a maximum
capacity of the capacity of four
hundred twenty four students and
every year with we does the
lottery that we came about three
hundred lottery applications and
so any new applications that
come in they have about a ten
percent chance of being accepted
to the school with only two
exceptions exemptions in state
law those being current students
naturally they automatically
gets rolled over to the next
next school year and siblings of
current students at the school
at least leaves very little
chance for teachers to get and
Senate bill fifty one will
assist in require recruiting
highly qualified teachers which
is very difficult specially for
charter schools or specialty
charter schools that have for
example I have to look for
bilingual dual language teachers
and not only that it will assist
with retention and highly
qualified teachers
So right now I have the we're
staff members that are
desperately hoping to our.
Take advantage of Senate bill
fifty one to
and.
To allow for their own students
the exemption I have a
kindergarten teacher for example
that had to wait three years to
get her own students into the
our charter school myself I had
to wait a couple of years to get
my own son into our charter
school just because it's so
highly competitive this will not
if this bill is considered it's
not going to require any
additional funding it's not
going to need to be consumed and
any school operational fund it
will just assist with those two
key options for our school and
and particularly its recruiting
and retention of quality
teachers
thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
have another expert witness
Matthew Paul.
All.
Thank you Senator Hemphill
We're very supportive of this
bill at public charter schools
of New Mexico and you know the
bill would give educators a
charter schools the same
enrollment preference as
educators that traditional
public schools and we feel like
that empowers families to get
the kind of education that fits
their needs New Mexico just X.
of before and after school
transportation and care much
easier which is which is real
positive for working families
our teachers so just want to
thank the the senator for
bringing this forward this year
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
not sure if it's there yes I
have one more expert witness
Todd news.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and I'd like to first
thank senator Graham help for
bringing this forward this goes
a long way to correct some
inequities of employment
practice that exist between
school districts and charter
schools both of which are are
are public entities and and in
other areas equal I I suspect
that speaking last on this
position leads me little to add
to what has been brought forward
by my colleague and twin Mr
Benavidez we have very similar
needs at our school we've had
often employ the potential
employees and it's not accepting
employment because their
children could get in because I
couldn't offer them what they
felt I could give them in
regards to letting their
children join our school and
have to go through the lottery
which
you know as a slim chance of
getting in on any given year so
I don't have much more to add
other than these are
and and Roman preferences that
are specifically included in
federal non regulatory guidance
on the issue with yes EA and
we're just not specifically
included in the current language
for the statute as it stands
whether that was just in there
or not has brought in a lot of
interpretation from PED over the
years and this just seeks to
just clarify the point should
should and your employees
children be included in
enrollment preference like
districts received and charter
schools and other states.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the board thank you
Sir have built thank you Mr
chairman and closing I just
asked for the
chair and the commission to
support this bill so we can
improve the equity with charter
school employees and make their
lives a little less stressful
for those employees who have
children that they'd like to
enroll in their charter school
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you and with that Martel
if you will help us anyone with
public comment in the section.
Absolutely Senator will turn to
Amanda are gone.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is made out of
on I'm the executive director of
New Mexico kids can we stand in
support of this bill as Senator
Hemphill stated this preference
already exists for teachers and
are traditional district schools
and all it asked for is parity
for the educators in our public
charter schools thank you for
your time and thank you Senator
Hemphill for bringing this
forward.
Thank you the end who's next
please tell.
The I don't have anyone else on
my list committees and raised
hands from the public if anyone
didn't get a chance to our
themselves to list.
It appears we're done with
public statement at this time
Senator.
and then we'll go to the
committee so questions from the
committee I see Senator Padilla
with his handout.
I thank you Mr chairman and I
don't really have a question I
just want to thank senator quite
a Hemphill for for bringing this
I have been
I've attempted it to be the.
One half to three quarters
champion for public charters
hearing in the Senate for a long
time as many others have done a
lot of really wonderful work in
this area and and I have to say
that this is a move in the right
direction I really like the
spirit of what's trying to be
accomplished here and I think
that these employees in these
teams in the schools are just as
important as anything else
that's going on in the state and
this really does bring that that
parity that so badly needed and
I I see you know that career
path here there's a number of
things that the gonna be
wonderful you know for for what
ends of transpiring here's I
don't have a question I just
want to thank the center and
thank the advocates to keep the
brought this forward to put this
together thank you Mr chairman
thank you Sir for the Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator have you for taking the
time to bring this bill Ford can
you speak about the equity
bility for the students.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for that question yes I
think that it reduces a lot of
stress for the student as well
it's always nice to be at the
same school where your parents
are they can build that
relationship with the teachers
that are going to be educating
them and up for I can speak for
my own personal experience my
son left to come into my office
and have lunch with me and it
was a place where he and his
friends could come and as a
school psychologist if they were
dealing with difficult
relationship issues with and
their classmates they felt
comfortable coming and talking
to me so I think that it was it
really benefited his mental well
being it helps when he
transitioned into met middle
school to to have his parent
there and and so I I think that
those are aspects I don't know
if any of the expert witnesses
want to weigh in with that thank
you for your question Mr
chairman Senator.
The other.
Members that question to check
Mr chair and yes ma'am.
The when I'm speaking about the
billet that equitable lady for
the student.
Chart.
Why do we have charter schools.
Thank you for that question Mr
chairman and senator I'm going
to let my expert witness Matthew
Paul speak to that thank you.
Thank you Senator Hemphill in Mr
chair Senator Pinto in statute
in New Mexico charter schools
have been established to provide
mission driven education for the
state and they're driven by our
communities to provide an
education that's right for that
community so in some cases we
have schools that focus on on
the arts we have other schools
that are focusing on language
and culture and we have still
other schools there's focusing
on stem and other other focus
areas that are appropriate for
that community so that really
embodies the spirit of what
charter schools are there to to
attain for students that go to
them is finding an educational
model that's right for them one
thing I'll note about the
teachers the teachers are
charter schools is there a
tractive that mission as well
they're attracted to teaching at
a school that implements the
kind of education that that
charter schools trying to
execute as part of its mission
and they're likely in there
likely invested in that with
their family and that's why
allowing their students to to
join them on campus is something
more support about.
So what we're talking about
community and the students are
in the community and a lot of
the dates disadvantaged areas
and the charter schools started
up at but some of to me what
we're asking is for a student to
jump the line that there's
opportunities there for the
students that already exist in
the community student is already
invested in the community
they've been waiting to to get
into these charter schools and I
understand we do want to have
preference and make life a
little bit easier but I don't
really see how that is being
equitable to the students in the
community that are also waiting
to have this opportunity because
they are probably unable to move
out of that community based on
poverty based on a lot of other
factors unlike
you know teachers being having
that profession to move there
and have that the.
The lady not to say that we
should do what we can for the
teachers but I find that this
kind of speaks against the
students with in the area that
need to probably be in that
charter school in have that
advantage to change their life
thank you.
Thank you Senator Pinto us
center Brett.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
really appreciate Senator Pinto
so comments they.
making me think about this a
little bit.
I I understand Sir him pull him
full I'm probably saying that
wrong but and you stand the
convenience for the teacher or
the staff member charter school.
But I I guess the concern I have
is that every time we have one
of the teachers children take a
slot then we have a community
member who doesn't have access
to that slot into the public at
the charter school education
yeah a concerns me that some of
our charter schools through the
lottery process only ten percent
of the students that want to be
in those schools are being able
to be in the school the whole
purpose of the charter school.
Movement in my understanding is
to give parents more choice.
If they don't believe that the.
Additional public school that
services there home.
Is giving their child the best
opportunity.
in my getting that wrong Sir
helpful.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for the question I guess
what how I would respond to that
is it creates the same
preferences that the teacher or
an employee and the traditional
districts school would have and
I'm gonna see if my expert
witness Matthew Paul has
anything else to add to that
thank you.
Yet I'm just add two things
Senator Hemphill and and Mr
chair Senator Brandt and that is
I mean the assumption behind
this is that the teachers aren't
a member of the community on the
teachers that met most of our
charter schools the to the
teachers are member of that
community and while there while
well I do think that you know
this preferences it would be
taking would be taking a slot it
it is it is providing the kind
of preference that we have at
the district schools as that as
Senator Hemphill mentioned so we
find that while there are a
number of other
enrollment preferences that are
in statute for traditional
district schools we are only
requesting for this additional
one because we find that it's
important for staff.
Mr chair Sir him full and I get
that I think the world is coming
and I and I'm I'm planning to
support the bill but I just I'm
really struggling with the rub
is that the traditional public
school doesn't have a lottery
they have to take everybody
and so that changes the whole
you know situation as to how
children are admitted into the
schools if you're a traditional
public school and I live within
the boundaries of that school
district whether they have space
or not they have to take me.
and so you know I think that's
the major difference that we
have between traditional public
school and the charter school
I think some of the charter
schools who are doing a greatly
good job and it's obviously a
charter schools doing a great
job if they have a waiting list
is so long that only ten percent
of the students are able to get
it right there those charter
schools are obviously in demand
those are schools I think need
to start looking at how do we
expand our capacity so that the
students that want to be part of
the school's can be part of the
school's otherwise we're we're
hurting
of parental choice when it comes
to education and so you know and
there's been reasons in the past
that those charter schools have
tried to keep their size at a
certain level is there have been
financial benefits to doing so
and so I I think all of us is
going to coming together for me
right now I'm trying to figure
out what is the best thing
because I do understand it's
really difficult for teacher.
I'm going to X. Y. Z. charter
school if there's an X. Y. Z.
charter schools and I'm sorry
use you as a as an example but
you're going I'm going to teach
it X. Y. Z. charter school but
I've got to get my child on the
bus to go to the traditional
public school that one starts at
yeah you know eight but I've got
to be at work at seven right and
so there's that you know there's
that balance as well and so I
think restraint figure out
what's the right thing for the
students and what's the right
thing for the balance and my
concern is that our charter
schools are are purposely
keeping themselves small and
purposely keeping themselves in
that range for a variety of
reasons and one of those
financial when we have a line up
of students wanting to get into
that screen so I think that's
where the differences and that's
where the rub is coming for me
thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Brandt I about
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman
Senator right thank you for
bringing this bill
I have to confess that this is
not an area that I have a lot of
knowledge and our charter
schools and I am hearing
probably for the first time for
me that there seems to agree
great popularity for the schools
and probably because of.
Creating good results and I
guess I'm.
Wondering if that's the case why
are we either a creating more
charter schools or have the
ability to create the size of
the class or work in
the of of of second to second
grade or whatever and charter
schools so that's just kind of
the a general observation I
could get a little answer to
that I also though do want to
point out I think one of the
very important reasons that was
mentioned and I understand the
convenience for the parent but
my observation is that I've
become more participants to and
and multiple public issues in
New Mexico is that we do have
difficulty either tracking and
or retaining good talent and
what you're telling me is that
this is something that I
understand correctly that would
help retain the excellent talent
that we're getting in the
charter schools and I think the
state needs as much as they can
to both attract and or retained
in growing talent in the state
and for that reason I am very
supportive of this bill thank
you very much thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senators.
Thank you I'm looking at I did
have Senator Kernan had had he
end up but I don't see it up now
Senator Kernan are you still
there.
Yes Mister chairman I think that
well I'll go ahead and just make
a quick comment this is been a
good discussion and I think that
Senator Hickey for raising the
issue of why we don't have more
charter schools and and can
raise the cap and maybe that's
something we should consider
because I many of them do a
wonderful job I I see both sides
of this issue but as a former
employee in a public school I
didn't know district by district
that have rules with regard to
transfers and so it is possible
if you're public school teacher
and that you would like to have
your child in your school you
can apply for transfer and and
that opportunity is there and I
I guess I think with regard to
to parity probably this should
be possible for our charter
schools as well just to keep
them in line with what we can do
a public school the traditional
public schools so I'm for that
reason I support bill and I'm
but I I do think let's see if we
can't the increase the
opportunity for for more
students to participate in
charter school and so I would
bring Senator Hickey on that
that's all thank you Mr chair.
Thank you any other committee
members who have not spoken yet.
If not I'd I'd like to share
just a short little story I did
the.
In many areas of education and
when I first became a principal
of one of the elementaries in
Los crucis my daughter was able
to then go to the school with me
it was not within our designated
area and she was a fifth grader
and as we were riding in the car
that day she said that.
You know don't let anybody know
don't tell people I'm your
daughter yelled I just pretend
like I'm any other student in
the lunch line and stuff and I
was like okay I can do that so
one came that I'm reading all
the students and one little boy
in her class comes up as as are
you Erica's dad.
And I said yes out.
It goes okay.
And I asked my daughter are you
didn't want me to know anything
about yeah that I was your
you're a father shows well he
was pulling my hair and teasing
the in class I told you better
watch out because my dad's the
principal yeah I'm so what is
she trying to use that to her
advantage when it when it worked
and then again when I was
teaching at high school she was
a student there probably work to
our disadvantage she was trying
to sneak out one morning after
the buses that that dropped
everybody off just for school
started in some of my colleagues
at the school are leaving the
school grounds and I have we we
went out to get hurt so I think
it worked to our disadvantage
that everybody knew who she was
and up you can get away with
anything like normal high school
students might so.
just a short little stories of
center but the.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
with that I would move it to
pass.
Have a motion for two passes
their second.
Second Senator Kernan Kernan
Kernan seconds Marianna's you
will call the roll please.
Brandt yes Senator Hickey yes
Senator Kernan yes Senate Bill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Yes and thunderstorms.
Yes.
Senator you have a after the
Senate education congratulations
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
And of thank you and just have
some updates as we transition to
the next bill here the next bill
will be hearing is also a
rollover from our Wednesday
agenda will have Senate bill
seventy seven which is Senator
Kernan to question pilot project
the next bills after that will
be the Senate bill eighty no
school discrimination for hair
that Senator pope and then we're
going to switch over to today's
business where they'll be a
number of bills that I'll be
Kerry starting with the at age
eighty Institute and then
research closing requests.
Funding and so with this in the
just the update for the public
we have passed Senate bill
thirty one we have that we laid
over Senate bill one ten past
one thirty one and now Senate
bill fifty one we're on Senate
bill seventy seven Senator
Kernan if you'll please to
question pilot project.
You very much Mr chair and thank
you committee that Senate bill
seventy seven addresses some
issues related to the post
secondary education articulation
Act that was introduced and
passed several years ago and for
those of you that recall
basically what that what that
act was required and.
Better implementation of.
A common course numbering
systems among our higher
education institutions from the
community colleges independent
colleges and branch colleges to
the four year schools that also
required implementation of a
common general course court and
definition and creation of meta
majors so much work has been
done to make this equipment
transition from a two year
institution to our four year
institutions but but in many
cases that is still lacking the
work has not been completed so
I'm several of our I
institutions in southeast New
Mexico decided law with the
support actually of a chair
Lundstrom following an LESC
meeting in December where she
asks for better collaboration
between our institutions so we
got together with her and have a
discussion of what we could do
to help move that forward and so
what Senate bill seventy seven
does is create a two by two hi
I'd like to bust.
Senator I we've lost your your
sound.
And your back on yes ma'am okay
and so basically what this or
this group will do is work
directly with eastern New Mexico
university we have New Mexico
junior college we have Clovis
Community College the branch
colleges for eat for eastern New
Mexico university we have New
Mexico military institute and
the branch college in Carlsbad
New Mexico State University and
so these these universities and
and community colleges are going
to work together to complete the
work of the traffic that and the
purpose of this is to make it
better for students to transfer
without losing credits to move
seamlessly from the two year
schools into the four year
schools improve graduation rates
reduce the piling on of credits
that really aren't needed for
graduation and basically from my
perspective we have many
students that complete the two
years in New Mexico and moved to
Texas because in many cases it's
much simpler to move across the
state line where their credits
are accepted so we're trying to
keep those kiddos and in New
Mexico and and keep them home so
with that I have several expert
witnesses I have General Gristle
from New Mexico military
institute I have Dr Caldwell
president chancellor of the
eastern New Mexico university
campus main campus and also
Larry Sanderson with New Mexico
junior college so if Markelle
and could begin to maybe let
some of my experts and to offer
support for this program thank
you the more calories you can
have the expert witnesses come
in and introduce them.
Senator Kernan is there
particularly when you would like
first.
That I let's go to Dr grizzle
first at General Gressel first
place.
Mr chair representative doctor
works as well I do hold an arm
doctor degree so thank you.
This opportunity to address this
issue it's very important for
students and to create this
pathway.
My tenure here at New Mexico
military institute we have dealt
with this frequently I've been
very fortunate to have to
registrar to take this issue
very seriously every time one of
our students has tried to
transfer to an in state for your
school and this issue has come
up they have taken the time to
solve that issue on individual
basis with that student but more
importantly they've taken the
time to solve it permanently so
it if it comes up again and it
will not be an issue in that
transfer as a result of that
we've had great success in
getting our students to transfer
be in state institutions but is
often more hello our records are
just letter other the experts
they got in and that I'll be
back with my pictures back on
hope it's only been because our
registrar has taken the time to
resolve those differences.
Here in the southeast quadrant
we do have a great challenge and
that's primarily Texas tech
Texas tech will accept our
credits the absolute deterrent
have pretty much carte Blanche
so at the point that our
students graduate with an
associate's degree they are
being
courted by Texas tech to go to
to Texas tech and bring their
credits with them source student
for leaving the state they're
giving up the opportunity to use
the opportunity scholarship in
the lottery scholarship to help
with their cost of education.
What we saw here was an
opportunity to use our close
proximity yes the state has made
great stocks strides in
rectifying some of these issues
but we believe our close
proximity to each other and
using Rossell kind of is the
center not because that's where
I'm located but if you use Ross
Allister Senator center where we
could get together on a frequent
basis all of the seven schools
are no more than an hour and a
half apart.
And so we believe that our
ability to work together to
rectify these issues in a close
regional proximity gives us the
ability to solve these issues
create these pathways for our
students so now you have six to
your schools working with a four
year comprehensive university to
provide this pathway for
students we think we can also
lessen the time to a four year
degree and therefore possibly
lessen the time to a master's
degree show less time for the
students left call for the
students and it keeps them in
the state and if we can keep
them here to finish the degree
maybe we can keep them here
after they have the degree to
enter the workforce so the whole
concept is based upon finishing
with start was started by the
state we're doing it on a
regional basis if we're
successful then we can share
this concept with others two
year and four year institutions
in the state I think if you look
geographically around the state
as we've done there are clusters
just like we are they can be it
adopted same philosophy around
the state so we would very much
appreciate the support of this
we will share everything that we
learned in this pilot and
hopefully can be adopted
elsewhere in the state thank you
very much for this opportunity
to share what we believe is a
very meaningful project thank
you.
Could we go to our.
Dr Caldwell next.
You very much Senator Kernan
members of the committee and Mr
chairman I won't take much of
your time because I realize your
time is precious and my
colleague spoke very eloquently
I am the trees couple chancellor
of the eastern New Mexico
university system the end of
your system looks forward to the
opportunity that this pilot
project affords to help students
stay in New Mexico and to design
and refines and strategies to
streamline and clarify their
seamless transfer between and
among our institutions by two
plus two pathways to their
degree completion this is a
modest initiative it's created
among partners with a history of
sharing students.
Years have discussed how we
would form the partnership and.
On the goals.
I
liked and examine data I would
like to make adjustments and
then widen the circle
participation this is the
purpose of.
Start small you open it out
we're not requesting funding or
asking for the opportunity to do
something good for students and
work with each other
the legislature has repeatedly
called for more collaboration
across institutions and this is
our response.
We're aware that such an effort
require legislation but neither
do new year's resolutions and we
do those to improve and to be
better and sometimes we make
resolutions with thanks to
ensure the greater success of
those reservations so these are
the partners we have spoken to
about this idea and with whom we
have to use for history the user
can as our students County
squirrel Amman and we believe we
can accomplish some good
innovative work with this pilot
project and serve the students
of New Mexico well thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
favor of this file.
If I might
From on to my colleague Dr very
Sanderson that New Mexico junior
college.
Yes can we get the next one on
please.
it looks like next on
Larry Sanders and he is here.
And asked him to on mute.
The man stepped away.
I'm sorry Mr chair Senator
Kernan members the committee my
name is Dr Larry Sanderson my
service vice president of
instruction and New Mexico
junior college we thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
favor of SB seventy seven this
bill is a pilot project that
would bring together higher
education institutions in
southeastern New Mexico with a
single objective of helping more
students complete their
education in the state of New
Mexico emphasis added all too
often our young students leaving
the state to continue their
education we need these young
people to stay here we need to
finish their education in New
Mexico we need to rural they
need to remain as contributing
members of our society and
economy this bill will support
our efforts in several ways and
recognize pilot project with
defined participants has to
focus to help you stay on task
legislation offers clear
definition of objectives and
goals for students and by
passing this legislation you
will be supporting our efforts
by sending a clear message to
our stakeholders both inside and
outside the institutions that
education students in New Mexico
is a priority and perhaps most
importantly you will help us
create a model action has
objectives and accountability
before closing I would be to
tell you that the members of all
members of our groups have
worked with other institutions
in the state to develop and
implement to try factor of
concourse numbers from general
education curriculum and madam
majors we continue to support
the leadership of the G. D.
secretary Rodriguez she works to
bring try factoring into
operation but the try fact it is
a massive statewide initiative
the success of that mission has
to occur at the ground level
which institutions such as our
what we are proposing with this
bill is to create a project will
begin immediately to support
students and keep them in New
Mexico by establishing control
pilot project we plan to achieve
success in the near term and
build a model that can be driven
to scale throughout the state.
We thank you for your support we
thank you for your leadership
and direction Senator Kernan.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
thank my experts and I will
stand for questions at this
time.
Thank you senator and I think
we're gonna go out the public
comment at first I'd like to
apologize I I didn't realize my
Mike was still on and that kind
of the opposite of you're on
mute is that your Mike is hot so
I I apologize everyone how
embarrassing we'll go out for
public comment Akhil if you'll
just this but that is to.
Public comment yes first we'll
hear from Dr Sean Powell.
Mr chair of Senators thank you
for the opportunity to speak in
support of Senate bill seventy
seven I'm not going to keep you
on either and I do want to thank
Senator Kernan for bringing this
bill forward it's my belief and
my experience in another state
where we have this kind of
arrangement set forward to do a
two plus two agreement that it
will benefit students it will
also benefit faculty and
advisors and family members who
are working with the students to
help them understand what
courses they need to complete in
order to move for forward from
high school into an associate's
degree in eligible bachelors
degree so I stand in support of
Senate bill seventy seven thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today.
Thank you mark hello who's next
we will now hear from Mister
Campbell Mr drone Campbell.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
senator Kernan bring this bill
and I'd say a couple things I
think the overall sometimes
there's a stigma of community
colleges but in my experience
even I never attended one I
think is a very viable option
for students I'm not I'm the
leader of aces take charter
schools here in New Mexico my
students graduate obviously the
goal is for them to be accepted
into four year colleges but to
have a strong and viable two
plus two program gives them
another option particularly for
those who want to save money for
the first couple of years ago.
So many kinds of provide a
rigorous program just as a four
year college would and in my
experience when I was in college
there were students who came
from community colleges when I
get my thirty fourth year
engineering and they were just
as capable and is prepared as we
were for those rigorous classes
so I definitely support this
bill and hopefully it'll pass
that will have some strong
stronger options for students
with a graduate and they'll be
able to stay here in New Mexico
for school.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr Campbell and now is
there any other members of the
public who would like to speak
Mr rounds I see your hand is
raised thank you Mr members the
committee very quickly I want to
focus on three sets of public
school students would profit
from this Advanced Placement
students dual credit students
and early college high school
students and we appreciate the
sponsor bring this forward it's
not just junior college two
other higher ed institutions it
goes all the way to public
schools thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Adams.
Hello is there anyone else.
Cheryl did you want to speak as
well.
The.
For.
The money that they're
is no.
Our goal is someone there agree
thank you Steve status can you
hear me out there we go you.
Yes I can hear you
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
Just orders this bill keeps
students out front and center
and is aligned with the higher
education legislative goals so
we we strongly support this bill
and up thank you.
Thank you.
Right we have the the other lady
might up.
If you'd like to speak.
You'll hear me.
Just barely.
Well says is that that federal
that's better perfect thank you
so much Mr chair in the Senate
that the senior vice president
of policy research and strategic
communications with the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
Believes the value of the
activist transfer provisions and
will spell
They need to
be hyper Education Commission
was under credentials faster
with less with less that we also
believe it's both the seven
smaller scale pilot program
might result valuable data and
systems that one insult
statewide application.
All of our postsecondary
students thank you.
Thank you hello do we have
anyone else.
No Mr chair that was the last
person thank you they will then
go to questions from the
committee.
And I see senator Neville.
Thank you Mr just a this goes
along with the articulation
problem we've had for years of
prior to all of our two years of
Representative Townsend from up
here passed a bill back in the
nineties to required
articulation of courses where
they were all the same from one
university or one does any
school to the other screen
within the state.
Barbara Daman this former US
secretary of PED she undertook
the process and the very
aggressive about it I thought so
where are we as far as just the
articulation part of this whole
whole problem of getting a hobby
junior college kid admitted the
New Mexico state are you in
ma'am those kind of things my
own daughter lost a a good
semester to try to transfer from
San Juan college should like a
hundred hours which what down
there she still came up with a
good semester short this is
about twenty years ago so I'm
the betraying my age but maybe
someone one of the experts or
someone can.
Fill me in on where we're at on
the general articulation issue
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and and
you're correct we have made some
progress with regard to the
common course numbering but the
rest of that that progress has
not been as successful so I
would doubt.
Yes my experts who would like to
respond to that that the
General great so would you like
to take a stab at that.
Yes ma'am thank you and please
a.
President call literary if I
don't get this correct to help
me but there was great effort
made to synchronize the
concourse numbering system the
articulation agreements that
required first dissemble fact of
getting the number correct
between universities and a full
two year schools the second was
the name so that the English one
oh one was called English one on
one at all institutions the
difficulty.
Lied underneath that in getting
the some of us and the
curriculum at that at the
classroom level in sync so that
when the course transferred it
was accepted at that level
because the there were follow on
courses so that English one oh
one was dovetailed into English
one oh two and that's where it
really broke down is that level
of synchronization didn't occur
and so when we stop and not to
the provost and didn't take it
on down to that next level
that's where program that's why
we believe this pilot is so.
It is so critical because
working closely together at the
regional level we've got the
ability to bring those but does
the faculty together and do that
synchronization so that my a in
my A. S. degrees absolutely bill
Taylor synchronized with the B.
S. the BA degrees at Easter so
the setting in my classroom is
essentially the same this
setting in their classroom and
that's what we hope to do and we
believe again the the close
proximity of the schools will
allow us to do that and please
again president call well Larry
I didn't say that correctly
please help me the fire
department engine chair members
commissioner courage
General wrestles expressed
regret that the house the
decision situation more stages
that that the transaction in the
common course number in Janet's
it creates the structure.
But now you have to have the
agreements to go underneath that
and and that's where the rubber
meets the road in this case just
to give you a number of
something reminds I look at our
students New Mexico junior
college in orchard from twenty
fifteen to twenty eighteen.
And we have from here we tracked
six hundred students who left
our campus and went to four year
schools of those six hundred
students two out of every three
four hundred of them went out of
state to for your school two
hundred and state and state.
We'd like to reverse those
numbers we thank you to we
checked with our students should
stay in New Mexico and it takes
the it takes the actual hard
work and run after the grams the
articulation agreements are the
are the next major step out
beyond the creates the work with
eastern.
I we think we create models it
and time to regroup and scale
the the start of the prostate
why work is going right now
we've got to do the hard work we
have to students.
My.
What part is that the I think
general wrestle said something
about a Texas tech would take
students as a.
As we send them out to so are
their articulation agreements
with with Texas tech or is it
just they are more lenient in
their acceptance of our
coursework.
In our case we have articulation
agreements with Texas tech
they're very aggressive the
state Senator cross the state to
they want to students
we think.
Strong agreements within the
state will be the tools that we
need to keep those folks in
place.
It's it's we're seeing all over
the country that four year
schools are competing with each
other for students we want to
make that we want to compete as
a state and keep folks right
here.
Do our articulation agreements
that exist with New Mexico state
and UNM.
Some do in our case on the and
we we need more of those things
H. R. technology agreements
speaks specifically to the
questions that questions
adventure during the college to
a major actor Mexico starting
your to your money on orchard
Easter are we pay our then there
are many more of our students
are interested in the eastern
because of proximity
and timing cost proximity are
big factor.
Process and we feel like we can
sit down now you're really roll
up our sleeves with transfer
call on her to you and create a
broad spectrum of these
agreements and those things
service great model for Russian
state.
Turn up okay that's all have Mr
chairman thank you thank you
senator Neville representative
pope was next on my list.
Thank you Mr chair and I want to
thank us Senator Kernan for
bringing this bill forward as a
military person that started my
academic career and community
colleges and transformation
about UNM I
I just of that opportunity is
what brought me here so I
appreciate the work you're doing
and I want to give opportunity
my opportunity to New Mexicans
as well of course is gonna be
opportunities in other
universities around the country
but they should have that option
so thanks for doing this and I
will be supporting.
Thank you Senator pope Senator
Brandt thank you Mr chairman
present at the and the maybe I
can work with the Sir paying on
the another issue that deals
with the US I passed the bill
Sir we years ago around the sort
of ticket articulation of matrix
dealing with veterans and the
credits that they get through
their service
and we're supposed to get a
report on that every year
haven't heard from the higher at
department and several years on
where that's at and so I'm I'm
thinking that maybe Sir open I
should pull that bill out dusted
off and put some more stringent
language on it as approach likes
to say we can pass the bill that
says we really really really
really mean it this time you're
going to have to do it because
we tried to suggest and force
them to do it through a bill but
they still haven't done it so
it's really disappointing to me
they haven't done it Sir I
really appreciate this bill I
appreciate what it's trying to
do but I just wanna take the
opportunity to call out the fact
that we're still having the same
issue with our veterans who
served in the military to get
credits for that service then
they go to colleges and those
credits are not being able to be
used towards an actual degree
that something that they've had
six or seven years can't
remember how long ago I passed
the bill to deal with and they
still haven't done what they
were ordered to do in that bill
so I guess so Sir pope but I may
have to pull that out and put
some forceful language and it
was some penalties to make sure
it happens so that it actually
happens this time thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir current
for giving me opportunity get
back on my soapbox I appreciate
it.
What Senator Senator that so box
sometimes can get very tall but
the you're always appreciated I
think some of the problem I'm
just kind of conversational Lee
is that higher ed department
doesn't really have any interim
committee that it answers to so
you know and I know there's some
discussion about whether that
might get moved into the alley
S. C. R. A. which case then
there would be interim committee
with some level of oversight of
things within higher education
but that's another conversation
I just have one very short
question for us Senator Kernan.
Is there any reason we need
legislation to do this it seems
like as I read through it that
any of these things can be done
there's not appropriation
there's is there anything that
the barring this from being done
without this legislation.
So Mr chairman you know it's
possible but I think when you
declared a pilot there's a
requirement to report and I
think that it's important for
going to spend the time working
on this effort that we should
come back and
Potentially have a good report
that other universities and
community colleges could take a
look inside well it worked there
so let's try and do it in our
area as well so now we probably
could do this and I think the
work is occurring obviously much
work is been done between many
of our branch colleges and
community colleges with other
universities but I think the
fact that this is going to
require data keeping we're gonna
have to really dig dig dig deep
and and show some results and
then report back so that would
be the right reason I would set.
Thank you Senator Kernan I don't
disagree I think it's a
wonderful idea concept and it
sounds like all the people
involved want to do this and so
it's not like we're telling
somebody to do something they
don't already want to do so yeah
with the end of one matter it's
a little bit about it will good
legislation that there's not yet
do it already and report but you
know I'm certainly happy to
support it because I think it's
a good thing and we'll show
across the state yeah that we we
need to continue to move forward
election of our our higher
education systems.
With that is the the pleasure of
the committee please.
I would like to make a motion.
I would move it to pass Mr
chairman.
But should you pass I think that
was senator Neville thank you.
Representative.
I'm sorry was that Senator
Brandt that seconded.
Yes yes and second by Senator
Brandon million if you will call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
Senator Nobel.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
On.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes.
Your soul.
Yes.
The given paths that are thank
you very much committee and and
thank you I appreciate bringing
that forward and kind of our
little update for where we are
that we have between one is the
next bill will have is Senate
bill eighty which is the notice
will discrimination for hair
which is Senator poke and then
we'll move to the new business I
will start with that we're gonna
do we work out just a little bit
from the.
The agenda for efficiency sake
Senate bill thirty the and a
date institute the Senate bill
forty four research grants
closing fund and then we'll get
into several bills dealing with
a school capital outlay and with
that Center pope are you ready
for Senate bill eighty no school
discrimination for hair.
I am ready Mr chair if you would
please Sir.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members today I'll be presenting
SB eighty no school
discrimination for air which is
also known as the crown Act the
acronym for crown means create a
respectful and open world for
natural hair this bill is
cosponsored by senators Linda
Lopez so the Lopez Shendo and
Pinto and I will I would like to
thank them for supporting this
legislation.
So why are we bringing this
legislation forward because in
twenty twenty one black women
are still suffering from
workplace bias against our
natural hair styles these
workplace biases in corporate
Grumman policies unfairly impact
black women but also impacts of
black women's ability to
celebrate their natural beauty.
A recent a research study
conducted by dove show that
black women are thirty percent
more likely to be made aware of
a formal workplace a parent's
policy.
Black women are also eighty
percent more likely to agree
with this following statement.
I have to change my hair from
its natural state to fit in at
the office.
Finally black women are one and
a half times more likely to be
sent home from the workplace
because of their.
This is not acceptable black
woman should black women should
have to fear scrutiny and
discrimination when expressing
their natural beauty in the
workplace not only is this a
discrimination issue but
inequity issue as it has a
social and economic cost.
This bill seeks to remedy remedy
this any discrimination under
public schools charter schools
and workplaces New Mexico would
be the eighth state to pass this
legislation without already
being passed in the US house of
representatives and more
recently by the City of
Albuquerque by a unanimous vote.
The bill we're introducing today
is one of the most inclusive
built in the country providing
protections for race based
hairstyles and hair covering for
all people.
On a personal level I feel
discrimination as a child in
school myself.
This may come as a surprise to
my colleagues in the Senate but
I can remember going to school
and being unfairly treated.
And I remember being the only
black student and I remember the
antis one time and being asked
as velcro stick to my hair.
And there was another time to
where I was teased at school and
made fun of because my mother it
braided my hair and put in a
corn rows and I I did not get
that support from the school
staff when that happened.
So if we're truly going to make
the New Mexico for all.
We must have protections in
place that respect all New
Mexicans so right now I would
like to introduce Leah Luarkie
who is a member of indigenous
women rising and she would like
to tell her story.
Okay good morning can everyone
hear me I don't know if yes yes
yes you're on okay good morning
thank you for the introduction
Senator pope Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Melina
Luarkie I'm a co founder for
indigenous women rising and I
support this bill because I am a
black implement I'm not black or
pueblo I grew up on the look in
their eyes of ation and as a
child I was constantly teased
and disrespected because I look
different.
The teasing wasn't limited to
just hello classmates but to
their parents and school faculty
as well I began straightening my
hair from the age of ten years
old to twenty years old and
twenty four as I've gotten older
my fear for younger black ended
and indigenous students has high
and no child should have to
worry about a fellow student or
teacher disrespecting them
because of their hair.
Imagine your elementary student
coming home and asking you to
help achieve things from there
that people through it them.
Then one day having to take into
account what college or job they
may have they want to apply the
have to consider the fact that
they may be rejected because of
their beautiful hair.
My father served as the governor
of Laguna for two terms and
while he was in office the
teasing only got worse.
Not only was I hearing things
about myself but about my family
as well.
As a young professional I love
to feel and look my best for any
occasion whether we're in school
or at work we deserve to
participate without wondering if
we will be discriminated against
for hairstyles in twenty
eighteen according to the bureau
of labor statistics fifty three
percent of the black labor force
for black women we are keeping
this economy going.
In twenty eighteen and our own
state we made national news for
a teacher who cut a need a
student's hair.
As a black in public when I
understand the power and the
divinity our hair holds for so
long it's been disrespected and
taken from us it's time that we
received that this the respect
that we deserve.
Most black people have here that
requires more care and being
seen as irresponsible are
incapable because of how our
hair has roots in racism knowing
I could potentially take care of
myself and my family to be
rejected due to my hairs and
just I urge you to support this
bill thank you.
Thank you Senator pope.
Thank you million next I would
like to introduce Asia Brooks
from the New Mexico Black
lawyers Association to to
discuss some of the legal
aspects of the bill.
Mr chair members yes thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning my name
is Asia brexit I'm the president
of the New Mexico Black lawyers
Association I'm first of all I
want to thank the sponsors of
Senate bill eighty for bringing
this forward for your
consideration today.
Discrimination is rooted in our
country's history beginning with
enslavement and the
dehumanization of African people
it's not surprising that for
more than forty years there have
been court cases about this
issue.
One of the more recent cases and
the case that inspired the crown
Act in the movie to prevent hair
discrimination was equal
employment opportunity
commission versus catastrophe
management solutions and in that
court case an African American
woman's job offer was rescinded
after she refused to cut off her
dreadlocks at the employers
request the employers grooming
policy prohibited excessive hair
styles and they considered her
dreadlocks as an excessive hair
style
so so there are court cases
around the situation in addition
to the work place schools are
another place for discrimination
against black people here has
been very apparent.
The N. double ACP legal defense
and educational fund has seen a
troubling up tick of instances
of black children being targeted
for natural hair textures and
styles that are prohibited in
the school's dress code in
recent years.
In Massachusetts there were
twenty sisters who were given
detention and kicked off sports
teams for having parades the
school said that they're here
was distracting in Louisiana a
young woman was sent home for
having braids with extensions
and at the school said that her
hair was not natural because it
was in braids and and so they
did disappoint her.
In New Jersey there was the very
public incident of a high school
wrestler who was forced to
either cut off his dreadlocks or
forfeit a championship wrestling
match and the referee was
overheard calling his here and
natural.
So why do we need this here in
New Mexico you've heard the
statistics from Senator pope and
those you know they speak for
themselves but we also know that
we're not immune to this in our
state we you know I've
personally had instances of here
discrimination I am from New
Mexico native I and we've had
situations of black children
being disciplined or sent home
from there here in our state.
In preparing this legislation we
have presented to interim
committees we presented to
community organizations city
council members the media and on
Wednesday we presented to the
house Education Committee and in
each of those spaces we heard
stories from people all over our
state of New Mexico people who
go to school and work in our
state to support this bill and
and have been brave enough to
bring forward their personal
stories appear discrimination
here in New Mexico so we know
that we need this bill.
Specifically our bill adds
protections against
discrimination to the public
school code the charter school
Code and the Human Rights Act
our bill is unique it is focused
on black women but it extends
protections to cultural head
dresses as well it says cultural
headdresses includes head wraps
or other had dresses used as
part of an individual's personal
cultural beliefs we specifically
use this language includes
because we wanted to ensure that
the definition was inclusive of
the mentioned here styles and
the other hair styles that are
not specifically mentioned like
he job squash blossoms eagle
feathers and others it also
includes protection for length
of hair.
And so now is the time for
change seven other states have
passed the crown Act even the
army and Air Force have approved
braids of increased sizes wells
twists for female soldiers and
have removed words such such as
I'm came from their grooming
policies as Senator pope said
the City of Albuquerque
unanimously passed amendments to
its human rights ordinance to
incorporate the crown Act so we
hope that you will agree that
New Mexico deserves this bill
and that we will be at the
forefront of preventing
discrimination in our state and
our country thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you senator.
Thank you thank you Mr chair I'd
like to give an opportunity for
to the sponsors that are here
Senator Pinto or Senator a city
Lopez a baby would like to make
any comments.
And thank you senator pope I I
just want to say that it was an
honor to participate with the
many individuals many
individuals who worked on this
bill and who support it it's
something that needs to stop in
the state this kind of
discrimination if we're to
really become a state that it's
free for these vestiges of
discrimination this is this is
one step in that direction and I
sincerely ask for your support
thank you.
Thank you senator Senator Pinto.
No I don't have anything to say
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to let everyone know that this
bill was started by Albuquerque
high student named Augustine
signs who sought a remedy for
discrimination he witnessed
occurring to us Black Hawk
classmates he reached out to
Senator Sedillo Lopez and that's
how this process began.
I would like to thank Augustine
Senator Sedillo Lopez senator
Linda Lopez for getting the ball
rolling but also the members of
the New Mexico Black central
organizing committee made of
black women around the state who
worked hard to get this year
let's make sure that we and
discrimination based on race
pace hairstyles cultural
headdresses hair texture and
protective styles such as braids
locs twists and knots in the
workplace and public schools
thank you Mr chairman committee
members and now we're ready to.
Thank you senator Martell a if
you will open up the.
Munity response.
Senator first we'll hear from
Nicole Rogers.
Mister Rogers are you available.
Yes I am sorry.
This is Nicole Rogers and I am a
member of the BCSC and I'm so
excited to be here with you
today to share my support for
this bill I'm a mother of two
children both who are African
American and my son's three
years old and still gets the
stairs in the weird comments
when I taken to preschool with
his beautiful Afro going out
and I find the teachers don't
know how to handle that it when
it comes up in class I have a
situation technical is after the
kids are like your hair is weird
she didn't intervene and so I
took it upon myself to be
in such as parents not weird
it's just different from yours
it's magically grows to the sun
and it changed the narrative for
the kids that something was
wrong with his hair because
there's nothing wrong it's just
different and this is why and
really just hiring people to to
change the narrative for our
kids this is so important to me
because it also translates to
the workforce when I worked at
CNN in human resources
I had to have a conversation
with the director who decided to
make his own
dress code that band a
dreadlocks and so we had to
teach him that that is not
something that you can just make
up your own passcode and
discriminating against people so
it's something that comes up
enough that we need this bill
thank you so much Mr chair and
members of the committee for
your time.
Thank you and please mark L.
we'll be hearing from Fernando
Trujillo Mr Trujillo.
Yes it
can you hear me.
Yes we can yes okay
My name is that number to your
from Espanola New Mexico very
chairs it and members of the
committee my name is that of non
though to heal from Espanola New
Mexico and I'm what the policy
associate with gold futures for
many young women United and will
feature stands in full support
of HB twenty nine.
what's I'm sorry in.
But we saw the full support of
SB eighteen I. communities I
particularly particularly
communities of color should not
be discriminated against based
on prior occasions this
discrimination is entrenched in
our institutions and all all
across our country and even in
correctional settings
individuals are constantly being
singled out here asked any men
reprimanded because of their
hairstyles.
Sometimes even sent back to
prison.
Here is so important to people
from so many cultures and hair
is beautiful we stand with
incredible leaders who have got
this bill for it and ask you
to support SB eighty thank you.
Thank you explains Marco.
Hi Anna Sanchez.
Hello thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John assumptions regarding
I'm an Afro Latina native New
Mexican a graduating senior
attending a predominately white
high school and playing to be
human rights lawyer I was a
competitive gymnast for nine
years I've faced the struggles
of Eurocentric beauty standards
in both school and sports up
until the last couple years ago
I kept my hair straight and so
it would be manageable which is
a lot of work and sometimes
painful once I started to work
more naturally which took some
time to get back I faced
criticisms ranging from
micrographs use in my
progressive looks and some
coaches and from some coaches
and judges tourist teacher
sending me to office because she
mistakenly thought my braids are
a public health hazard you might
be surprised but yes people
still think that way and these
were all people to have power in
my life in each instance I have
had the confidence to hold my
head high and stand up for
myself but I've been inspired to
do more to my education and I
think cities and law I was
searching for community when I
didn't find one I helped create
one a fellow students and I re
created a black student union at
our schools to give students of
color and now is a safe space to
discuss issues concerns Lucien
I've also been a proud I've also
been proud to be part of the
central organizing committee
pushing this legislation.
We've seen instances we've seen
instances in use and locally
around the country were minority
children have been assaulted and
forcibly had their hair cut or
had been sent home in the school
because of our because of the
hair style it's clear that
educators and employers need to
be educated on this the contact
is important to show other
little black girls and boys that
they are not alone at the
national here is beautiful and
that discrimination of any kind
should not be tolerated
education is a strong weapon
against discrimination and hate
all over differences should not
be only accepted but celebrated
and I'm proud to be from home
town that believes that thank
you.
Thank you.
Next we'll be hearing from
heather Bassett heather.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is heather
Bassett with Albuquerque public
schools and I am here today to
support this bill it's I'm
captured the attention of a lot
of people throughout the
community it's really and
demonstrated evidence of the
grassroots conversation I've
heard from students teachers and
administrators so I think the
Sanchez for bringing this
legislation and listening to
constituents.
Thank you heather.
Now we'll be hearing from
Marshall Martinez Marshall.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I Marshall
Martinez in the executive
director of equality New Mexico
the statewide LGBTQ education
advocacy and civil rights
organization.
As LGBTQ people we've always
known the impact of
discrimination on individuals on
whole communities in fact LGBTQ
people in New Mexico have been
working since nineteen ninety
three to be granted access to
basic human rights most
importantly to be protected from
discrimination against us in our
jobs in our schools and our
housing and in public.
We applaud and strongly support
the crown Act Senate bill eighty
house bill twenty nine an effort
to clarify in statute what so
many of us have always known
without clarification those that
would discriminate against us
based on our sexual orientation
race gender identity or religion
we'll do so based on their
perception of us not their
knowledge of us the color of our
skin the way we style our hair
the physicality of how we carry
ourselves are all
characteristics that often
identify as queer or trans
people.
When we amended the Human Rights
Act The New Mexico in two
thousand three we wrote language
that ensure that LGBTQ people
could not be discriminated
against fired from their job for
example because of the
impression or perception of
their gender identity that is
because we knew even then that
is the perception of people
physical visible characteristics
or assumptions made based on
those characteristics that
result in discriminatory
practices the quality New Mexico
sees this clarification as a
strengthening of the Human
Rights Act the thought put into
this is one step closer to
achieving full liberation for
all New Mexicans especially
queer and trans New Mexicans who
deserve to be given every
opportunity to thrive in
education in workplaces and in
our communities the quality New
Mexico strongly supports and ask
for your support Senate bill
eighty and house bill twenty
nine for all of these reasons
thank you.
Thank you.
Please part Amanda are not.
Then.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is chair
on the executive director New
Mexico kids can I stand in
support of this bill as it is an
important step forward in
ensuring that New Mexico
students can come to school as
their whole selves fully
embracing their culture and
identity I'd like to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward thank you.
Thank you Mr Matt Paul.
Thank you my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico we support Senate
bill eighty as the statewide
membership association for
charter schools we represent
dozens of schools who have
formed by their communities to
fight against racial and
socioeconomic injustice this
bill contributes to that mission
by assisting in the creation of
a school communities where
students have the right to feel
safe in school regardless of
their race or culture we support
the bill and we think the
Sanchez for bringing to the
legislature this year.
Thank you Mr call now we will
hear from Monday are Tupac.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Monet
artifact a member of the black
central organizing committee and
I stand in support of HB twenty
R. S. V. eighty sorry this bill
resonates with me because I've
heard the stories of black youth
with the New Mexico that have
been sent home from school on
the condition that they change
their hair due to the discomfort
that their braids locs had
wrapped in natural hair have
caused school administrations
although the discomfort of
school administrators towards
black hairstyles stems from
their own implicit racial bias
there's been no remedy for the
type of harm that it imposes
upon black students I advise all
members of this committee to not
simply dismiss this bill due to
the lack of proximity our
awareness of hair discrimination
within New Mexican schools I
feel that failure to pass this
bill do this committee will
contribute to future acts upon
to our most vulnerable students
in closing I would like to
remind everyone within this
digital space that legislation
that centers the most
marginalized members of the
community will benefit society
as a whole thank you.
Thank you Mr Trebek next you'll
hear from drone Campbell Mister
Campbell.
Good morning Mr chair just want
to stand in agreement in support
of SB eighty
I don't really have much to add
because I'm just thankful for
all the personal relevant
testimony has been given by the
others in this meeting I just
hope that everyone can agree
that just knowing actually no
space in society boards
termination and hopefully this
bill will get passed thank you.
Thank you and now we will hear
from miss Erika Davis crop.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee it is my honor to
be a space with you all today I
ask that you support and pass
this bill SB eighty we recently
as of yesterday
lost in my icon in where year
and women and force of nature
Cicely Tyson she pioneered so
much and was authentically
herself for ninety six whole
years and as a black woman
myself and a second generation
New Mexico and an advocate a
mother a daughter a friend home
girl sister
and I'm T. I you will just of
last as of last year last
February when we were still in
session right before this that
shut down have to go advocate in
space for a young eighth grader
who is threatened to be
suspended by her administration
in a public school system but
because of her beautiful from
the least with the she had her
hair.
It was such a detriment and it
was so embarrassing that for her
for her mother for all of this
one of the things about
black women and we all show up
and we all show out in one of
the things about standing for
our youth and all of the
generations to come is that we
are here to make sure that this
change council that we can be
authentically and
unapologetically ourselves
because we're we're ourselves we
see a co opted in society what
we do might cause being
unprofessional or unacceptable
but then it's often dire fashion
wanted Jenner Kardashian.
So please restore what it really
means to be beautiful and that
they take and we're so grateful
that you Dennis and worked on
his behalf of this legislation
and Mr chair I just want to say
nothing about grace and
flexibility to you in this time
of working this virtual session
and mark Kellett thank you so
much for bringing the black girl
magic to session thank you.
Thank you so much Erica and for
those who do not know I am a
black woman and I am fully in
support of this as well I
experienced many things that my
fellow beautiful black women on
this particular committee
meeting has spoken about now we
will turn to miss me see Taylor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexander in the C. Taylor and
the deputy director at the New
Mexico coalition a sexual
assault programs and a proud
member of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee I
am the daughter of New Mexico
born and raised in Alamogordo
and I'm raising my son here that
makes five generations of my
family living and thriving in
New Mexico the crown Act is not
only necessary and sounds policy
for our state it's very personal
for me as a black New Mexico and
I to have personally face
discrimination based on my hair
two years ago when my son was
only ten years old he wanted to
lock his hair and I was so
afraid for him that I required
him to write a three page
research paper on hair
discrimination and to learn
about all of the cases of young
black people being forced to cut
their locks by people in
positions of authority and I ask
as you consider this bill today
if you've ever had to make such
considerations for yourself or
your children on how you choose
to wear your hair it is time for
us to take a stand against race
based care discrimination in New
Mexico and I look forward to
working with you on passing the
crown Act thank you so very
much.
Thank you very much miss Taylor
now we will turn to heather
Smith Mister Smith.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can all right thank you
so much Mr chair and members of
the committee my name is heather
Smith and I was born and raised
in Los crucis New Mexico I come
from six generations of black
New Mexicans and my family and I
take great pride in our
beautiful state.
All my schooling has been from
New Mexico I'm situations public
and private ranging from
preschool to college and her
discrimination followed me
every.
Well in every educational
setting that I've been part of
In elementary school my
classmates made a game of seven
pencils into my Afro
and when I complained to the
teacher I was sent home because
my hair was quote unquote deemed
distracting to other students
not only was I being bullied I
was punished and I was forced to
miss school and as a kid who
loves school and never misses a
day because I love school so
much I was I was traumatized
that's the day that I started
straightening my hair.
For for many many years after
that I'll be shamed and
disciplined in schools for your
natural hair protective
hairstyles are cultural
headdresses is blatant
discrimination and our students
and US citizens need protection
from that
locally New Mexicans are around
the state are implementing
policies get scared
discrimination are.
The City of Albuquerque just
passed an ordinance against her
discrimination in Los crucis of
the New Mexico State University
students have adopted the crown
Act into their student
government and as a black woman
and a lifelong New Mexican
resident.
I like my home state to join the
national movement against their
discrimination so please passed
Senate bill eighty and please
please you know and support the
black people and other cultures
that need this protection thank
you very much Mr chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you so much miss Smith I
believe that was the last member
of the public that which to
speak anyone else would like to
Oakes I see you again Steve
stands go ahead.
Thank you very much good morning
Mr chair and members of the
committee speaks yeah.
Mexico.
Our members from across the
state work digitally digitalen
plea to organize and to ensure
student equity and opportunity.
Sadly educators have would be
this how students are
discriminated because of
culturally based hair styles.
We know this is evident and this
affects how students are viewed
and treated and all to meet we.
It affects their self worth.
Their self dignity we all know
these are critical elements for
academic growth.
We applaud and thank the
legislators are sponsoring this
bill as their values reflect
ours.
In our goal in building an
education system built on core
values of honoring our students
well being.
And and building systems of
discrimination.
We join in amplifying the voices
in support of this bill.
We stand in support of SB eighty
thank you.
Thank you and whether any other
people who wanted to make a
statement from the public I
don't see any hands at this time
okay thank you mark and will
come back over the committee and
Senator pope and then will head
to questions from the committee.
Great thank you Mr chair
I just want to say thank you to
the community and the other
senators that worked on this
bill this is being worked on
before I was even elected in I
just want to say thank you and
thank you for putting their
trust in me and bringing this
forward in presenting this I
just want to say thank you to
the committee.
To the community out there I
just hope you heard the stories
these are real these are members
of the community at this is
impacting these are your friends
your neighbors your colleagues
at work these are issues that
we're experiencing.
Even myself you know is is
Amanda served over twenty years
in the military and even though
I had to keep my hair short
these are the experience that I
dealt with growing up something
that even I could skate so I
just want folks to understand
that and now I would just close
their Mr chair and open it up to
questions from the committee.
Thank you senator on the list I
have Senator Padilla and then
Senator Brandt.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I just want to rise in full and
in equivocal and complete
support of the work that's being
done here thank you senator pope
for taking on an issue the
moment you hit the ground in the
Senate I'm very proud of you and
the work that you're doing I I
know governor the working
million and I am very excited to
see you here today something
tells me there's another
governor in the making here and
so and all the other speakers
you have taken the stand on
something and you've you're
you're making it happen and it
was very thoughtful all your
comments and they were very
timely and right well you know I
I to they weren't timely to be
honest with you we should have
been doing this you know decades
ago I don't know why we're
dealing with this now in two
thousand twenty one shame on all
of us for that situation and so
I want to help you get this done
yeah I do have maybe a couple of
questions again full full in a
critical like I said support I'm
with you a hundred and twenty
seven percent on this thing
Try being a Padilla.
East of the Mississippi my name
is been pronounced every which
way from Tuesday and my A. I'm
not the tallest guy in the room
usually when I get on the other
side of that river and any
number of other things that you
know we all deal with but I am
so proud of you for what you're
doing I can't go I can't say
enough about that but Senator
pope can you tell me and I I did
scan the legislation on make
sure I understand so once when
whenever this is identified as
happening in the community what
is going to be the penalty or
the correction methodology for
for Andrew this is identified
and called out in the community.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Padilla I have Asia Brooks to
kind of help me with this and I
actually have secretary mccamley
on online as well to kind of
help with this question HM if
you can help.
So I will answer and then I'll
definitely turn it over to Mr
mccamley because I think that he
probably knows the procedure
very well
but I do believe that you know
if there's a situation that
arises and I think there's
probably going to be two
different situations I think
because we're amending the Human
Rights Act any complaint under
that Human Rights Act would need
to be filed with the Human
Rights Division
and then go through an
administrative procedure
that person would have to end
exhaust all their administrative
through they would have to go
entirely through the procedure
and then they would be able to
if they received a non
determination letter they'd be
able to proceed in in District
Court and so that is my
understanding of the procedure
through the through the H. R. A.
and and I'll turn it over to
Mister McKinley because I think
that he probably knows very well
what that procedure would be.
Mr Senator is it okay if I
address that.
Yes secretary thank you Mr
Senator so if anybody has an
issue regarding the employment
part of this Act obviously the
education stuff would stay in
the education ball court but if
for instance someone felt like
they were being terminated or
being demoted or treated not as
good in their place of
employment because of their hair
if this were passed they would
file a complaint with the Human
Rights bureau our investigator
would then go and do an
investigation and make a
determination and this is the
thing we're actually pretty good
with this a lot coming in we
don't think it's going to create
too much of a burden a lot of
times when new laws come in
without any kind of
appropriation allowing us to
hire more people it causes
concern but we kind of looked
over this and we don't think
there's going to be too many
people who had issues with this
so we think we're good with the
workload Furthermore we're also
good with the context of the
type of
investigations these were these
would come under because our
people are pretty familiar with.
Racial discrimination type stuff
so someone came in the file
complaint are people going to
best the gate and talk with the
the person who filed the
complaint talk with other
workers talk with employers see
if there was any evidence and
they will come up with a
determination.
Then if there is a determination
that comes out that says Hey
look at the the employer may
have had an issue here the
person has a couple options they
can either take it before our
human rights council which is
appointed by the governor and
can make these decisions or and
this is what happens most of the
time that they take it to
District Court and can then you
know have a right of action
under the Human Rights Act if we
determine that they have the
standing to do so and then it
goes through the court system Mr
chair senator the answer
question I thank you Mr chairman
Mr Secretary it does and I
appreciate the the the the the
thoroughness on the work
environment and and and that's
that's what this question I
think to Senator Sedillo Lopez
one at.
Yes that is an excellent that
was absolutely excellent
coverage about the work
environment the reason we also
have of the information about no
school board shall allow for the
imposition of discipline
discrimination or disparate
treatment to get to student case
on the students race or culture
because the students use of
protective hairstyles of
cultural here direct their
dresses the reason we believe
that so important is because so
much of this happens in the
school system.
And we want to put a duty on PED
and responsibility on PED to
work with the school board and
ensure that that that everyone
gets training on how to deal
with bullying and and to make
sure that the the coach's don't
don't forcibly cut off children
care and to make sure that
everybody knows that this is
this is not to be tolerated.
Educational system and the
concert this is an obligation
we're putting on PED and that
that's very important that's why
became of came to for this
department.
You Mr Senator add one more
thing wonderful yes yeah Mr
center I'm sorry I have to go to
Levin to meeting with the
governor also let me just bring
this up because this got brought
up in in the house equivalent
committee the other day there
was a question regarding what if
there is a safety procedure for
instance if I'm at a place of
work and I have you know long
dreadlocks or whatever and
there's an issue of Hey we want
you to keep that up for any kind
of safety or health reasons that
would be something that or
investigators would look at and
say okay has there been a
reasonable accommodation may
have the allowed someone to put
that into wrap rather than
forcing them to cut it that sort
of thing because the the issue
that ms Brooks brought up with
the wrestler in New Jersey who
had is here for you basically
said if you don't cut your hair
you're forfeiting the
competition yeah that's
something that could quibble and
happen in the workplace
environment it and our
investigators are pretty well
trained in saying okay we're
they're reasonable
accommodations made for this
person to try to figure out a
way to to meet those health and
safety standards and also be
sensitive to the issues that
that are that we're talking
about today will handle that on
a case by case basis but I just
want to bring that up because
that was a specific question the
Government House and I want to
see if I can answer before I
have to take off is that okay Mr
Senator I I.
That yes thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Mr secretary and
Senator Sedillo Lopez and
Senator pope
yeah I I was hoping you would
say all of those things I'm
really happy to hear all that I
can only imagine what would
happen if someone came to my
child and cut their hair without
my permission or without my
child's permission so the fact
that anyone has ever had to deal
with this it just blows my mind
to it you know it really does so
on the flip side of this Senator
pope can you give us a little
more maybe Senator Sedillo Lopez
and Senator Pinto what happens
when I when I'm maybe feel like
I was discriminated against when
I go into a business so I will
tell you a story of what
happened just very briefly so.
Totally wet behind the ears you
know sixteen years old me and my
buddies won the state
championship in in mock trial we
we stop in Dallas on the way to
do see we've never been outside
of our county just so you know
and out and and the flight gets
you know delayed and so we
Representative you know we're
gonna go into Dallas and see
this town we have like nine
hours let's do something with
our time and we were immediate
there's a mall there called the
gallery I don't know if anyone's
ever been there but the gallery
is like a two or three four
storey mall and I I see some
head shaking.
We were blown away we've been to
Coronado.
Mall and it's a beautiful mall
however this thing has a skating
rink right in the middle of it
that.
Edible so we go in there and we
realize that none of us brought
ties we had a few dollars so
we're gonna going to one of the
shops and
and we try to buy a time we were
immediately shushed out of there
and to me the those nothing here
for you know you can't buy that
here no you know you need to
move on in a I didn't even
realize until maybe ten or
fifteen years later what was
happening there and and I can
only imagine how this you know
so what happens when someone
goes into a business Senator
pope and is being disputed that
this is something that that is
happening to them do you have
provisions in the legislation
for that type of activity.
Mr chair Senator Padilla I'd
like to refer that to Senator
Sedillo Lopez if you can help me
out to the.
Not this particular legislation
this is about employment and
educational system that would be
a different bill okay not a bad
one Senator Padilla if you're
interested in in Sanchez yes I
would like to work on on that
with you because I think that's
definitely something that can't
be happening as well because I
can see particular customer
being treated differently as a
result of this very same topic
that we're talking about here so
Senator kopen Senator Sedillo
Lopez I would love to work with
you on that
I think that's about it Mr
chairman I appreciate the time
and again I want to underscore
might complete the in a devotion
to helping to get this done in
my complete support and just so
proud of all of you for taking
the stand and making something
happen for New Mexico this
should've been done years and
years ago thank you.
Thank you so that Senator Brandt
on.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
guess I'm a little bit with
Senator Padilla on going to be
in a little bit shocked I will
tell you the story about the the
young person's hair being cut
off by the teacher was the
infuriated me I was just like
are you kidding me I hope that
teacher how their license
removed and isn't in the
classroom anymore because that
was unacceptable behavior
and so I I just was surprised
this isn't already covered in
Law Center pope under our
current discrimination laws can
you address that for just a
minute I'm just I'm I'm just a
little bit shocked that it
doesn't fall under what we
already have been law.
Mr chair senator brand if I can
refer that to Senators the Lopez
did you know.
thank you senator pope
Discrimination laws in this
country have not included
have not included how people's
appearance such as hair it's
it's just unfortunate the law
hasn't developed that way in the
courts and we don't have
anything like this in the books
this would be an extension of
discrimination law as it exists
right now and the courts have
simply not not done that.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir I
appreciate that that's that's
helpful so why address it in all
these three different sections a
lot not just put it in our
discrimination law which schools
are already required to follow
would that not have been a
little bit simpler to do I'm
just trying to figure out the
format of why we're doing it the
way we're going.
The reason we felt it important
to put it in with regard to
making a to do directive to
school districts was to impose
the duty on the on PED the
public education department to
to train people because if if we
don't do that and we're just
relying on parents and students
to bring legal action then it's
just a more convoluted way and
the way the trainings tend to go
when when school districts are
boarding liability is kind of
all we have to do this to avoid
liability when PED has an
affirmative obligation to
teachers teachers it's going to
be a more positive experience
with let's make sure there are
African American and are needed.
Who have cultural it cultural
hair feel welcome and feel so so
we think that we we think it's
important that this be a
positive directive to the PED to
ensure that there's no
discrimination as well as a
legal claim for parents and
students.
I'm looking at the the section
Mr chair senators to where this
was was but
To see if or other
discrimination of our.
Racial discrimination questions
or in that section
So I'm just and this may be some
that just needs to be looked at
when it goes I'm I'm guessing it
goes to Judiciary after this.
Okay so that may be a committee
that needs to look at just make
sure it's in the right area I'd
hate for us to do all this work
and not be in the right area and
not not be something that they
will be enforced because of that
you know so just.
Hello the concern of that the
other thing that the LFC
analysis brought out the bank
needs to be addressed is that
the definitions or examples not
an actual definition
it and and maybe that's the only
way we can do it I I don't know
but can you trust that because
it was brought up in the LFC
report.
Mr chair Senator Brandt
I will pass it referred that to
Senator Sedillo Lopez are to
Asian Brooks if you can help.
Well and I'm I'm happy to hear
us well from Asia but this is
the cultural hairstyles we felt
that if there weren't examples
of people would not understand
what was meant by it so there
were there are plenty of
examples but for example and I
think this will develop as
people come in with different
cultural hairstyles I for
example
Some of these hairstyles I
wasn't familiar with and I
imagine some of the teachers
will be familiar with and so so
we wanted to give guidance I
examples but also make sure that
it wasn't limited to that so I
think that it's up to the
student if it to to make the
case that this is my cultural
their style and the students and
the parents and then just has
law develops it will be in query
well is a culture is it just you
need to this individual or or
that back kind of analysis of
which they're very familiar with
doing in the courts.
Okay and then I think I see Mr
chairman Senator Lopez and I'm
seeing that you know the so
under cultural headdresses you
includes workers had wraps and
other addresses I guess the
other is where we're at but
that's really not a definition
and I'm wondering if if we need
to take a look at and to provide
a little better as to what this
means because otherwise you know
your kid that always wears a
baseball caps as well that's why
right now my culture I come from
yeah.
I'm a cowboy that's what I
always wear you know and and so
I'm just I'm concerned that this
could get used a little too
brought in less that's the
intention I don't think that's I
don't think that's what we're
going for I think that what
we're going forced to address an
issue where we see some
discrimination a lot of
discrimination against people
based on their hair more than
anything else and so I just want
to make sure that that's what
we're addressing
well I I suppose we could
limited to African American or
native American cultural more
but I I mean I'm just suggesting
is one possibility for what
you're talking about however I I
don't think so I think we we
need to let this developed and
if we see that it's going out of
you know it it it's going far
beyond than you think then maybe
we could come back and fix it
since this legislation was
introduced I actually had
someone call me and talk about
how they wanted their their
child's to wear feathers for
graduation it was a native
American who wanted to wear
celebratory feathers and they
were prohibited from doing that
and we didn't add feathers to
this to this thing but I think
that would be a very clear
example of of discrimination
based on the cultural cultural
practice of of here.
Thank you Mr chairman I I see
that is Brooks has a random.
I just want to I just wanted to
add I'm sorry Mr chair members
of the committee I think that's
why we wanted to use kind of the
inclusive language that you see
in the definitions because we
didn't want to just limit it to
the examples that are in within
the definitions we wanted to
make it more inclusive however I
do think that it is restricted
in some ways so it can't just be
other head dresses and has to be
other had dresses used as part
of an individual's personal
cultural beliefs so I think with
the example of the baseball cap
although somebody could argue
that maybe their sports team as
part of their cultural beliefs I
think when they brought that
issue forward I don't think
hopefully that school officials
ordered the school board would
would think that that was part
of their cultural beliefs I
could be wrong about that but I
think that that's why we have
that specific language in there
about the personal cultural
beliefs and tying that to the
head dresses so that we wouldn't
have people who you know said
well a baseball cap is my my
cultural beliefs.
Mr chairman the server thank you
I appreciate that as the the
just want to come up with all
the if you've ever spending time
in Oklahoma they believe that
baseball caps are part of their
cultural heritage it there you
know just not knocking on
Oklahoma that's where my family
comes from but if you spend any
time there they think it is.
I'm not sure that it is but they
think.
Yes we know that was an easy
example for me to use so I just
I just wonder if we should look
at and tighten up some of that
it's not really definition it's
more of a list of examples I
don't know that we want.
Well personally I don't want
this to become another attorney
job bill to make sure that all
this is going through the courts
to make the definitions are
really I prefer that we as a
legislature make it tight enough
that it's not.
Having to go to court every
other day because I really just
you know I I know there's some
attorneys that like to make a
lot of money and is is nothing
against the making money but I
don't think we should write
legislation just for the purpose
of that or that we don't like
right it tight enough so that
the courts have to decide I
think we as legislators need to
make those decisions so there's
a little bit of you know
concerns I had with the how it's
written of the logistics of how
it's gonna play out
and yet again it's just it's
surprising to me you know that
in our day and time I I will I
will repeat what Sir Padilla
said that in our day and time
that we're dealing with this
kind of an issue
I just I don't understand I
think secretary mccamley covered
very well you know if you're in
a workplace and yeah I think one
of the easiest ones if you're
serving food you have to work at
your and then that.
Those can fit over anyone's hair
style so there's no reason that
you have to change your
hairstyle to be able to work you
know and that to purpose so in
the that case I think it would
be easy to to say yeah we can
take care of that safety
concerns still so it's up to
that I miss anything on that
Senator Sedillo Lopez no I think
you made an excellent point and
and the one of the things I
believe in law or I would be a
legislature is law also sets up
examples in addition to creating
court cases and so I and that's
why I think it's important that
it be that the PED does training
and that we they serve an
educational function and
hopefully with the passage of
the law we won't have a lot of
litigation because people
realize that it's not okay to
discriminate and to treat people
differently based on various
styles thank you for that thank
you Mr thank you Sir and this
doesn't you know like my
daughter I you know now up in
the Bible Joseph had a coat of
many colors I always teach my
daughter that she's the the the
girl that has the hair of many
colors this this doesn't really
allow that because it's not
really it's her personally is
that right that's correct okay
great thank you very much
appreciate it appreciate you
offering the bill.
Senator Pinto.
Yes thank you thank you for
being thank you Mr chairman
thank you for bringing the bill
Ford.
And to what Senator Brandt
Talking about what it's going to
lead to.
Because I do believe that we do
there's discrimination across
the board but we're gonna get to
point to and I don't know how
statistically if there's any
data to back it up.
But that there's name
discrimination to.
based on not just until you see
the person but prior to that and
you know they're talking about
this closing resumes and all of
that for certain positions for
public transparency but based on
that too I think we don't have
to move to a point where we
don't use any names word
identified by number and even in
the court systems that that
discrimination should be taken
when we going to virtual with
this virtual
COVID.
Issue that it is probably better
to have it almost virtual but
where we don't put names to
faces we're just seeing numbers
to give you really.
Get rid of that discrimination
across the board especially when
we talk about job retreat so I
think this does open a bit of
discussion about it but I really
would like to see it go further
and dept where we're almost to
the point of not having a our
names are faces
that we're really doing things
based on the work and we are
thank you.
Thank you of.
I don't see other hands up at at
this point and so
vote for a motion on this bill.
Mr chairman I would move to pass
the summer Brandt.
About your passes that are
Brandt and I'm sorry who was the
second second.
Thank you Senator Padilla yeah
if you'll call the roll please.
Grant.
Yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes hundreds of Bill.
Senator Padilla there.
R. exposes.
This very as senator Neville.
Senator Neville Senator Neville
are you there.
I think he's trying to access
looks like he has a your PC will
place trying to fix the sound on
this computer.
yes.
Senator Neville are you hearing
this.
We don't hear.
L. is one of those instances we
talked about where we can kind
of stand in place until you get
senator bill back if you call
the rest of the role of will
compact and that these.
Senator excuse me center
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes.
As senator Neville your hand
your thumbs up is saying yes.
Everybody agrees comes up
indicate yes we will gather has
a yes vote if there is no
disagreement that we have a due
pass thank you Sir hope you have
a two passed.
Of this time with the directing
less than fifteen reminded
committee we have a hard stop at
twelve o'clock we got through
all of the old business or the
carryover we're now over to new
business we will first be doing
SB thirty and at age eight
Institute followed by SB forty
four research grants closing
fund and then moved SB twenty
nine all of these bills are my
bills and so I will hand over
the chairmanship to our vice
chair senator I hope.
Senator pope are you there I am
here Mr chair.
Your is our right and what is
the next bill I apologize.
The next bill is Senate bill
thirty an aged Institute.
All right.
Senate bill thirty and.
I'm sorry I don't have the list
here for the sponsor
all of these next ones are me
okay I apologize.
So Senator souls are you ready
to present I am ready and then
you many of you on the committee
are aware of the and AJT
institute it was be done with
the help of many of you got a
copy of I get on the camera at
age eight of the data driven.
Are prevention of childhood
trauma and maltreatment the HSD
two was established two years
ago using junior money out and
we got it started on a
shoestring it isn't expanded to
four what are we six or seven
different counties now where we
are working.
Okay and that happen is giving
me out I'll have her talk your
cue what was she can give me the
latest updates on things she is
one of the executive directors
of the at age eighty Institute
and now is it's moving towards
hundred percent community what
this is is moving upstream and
rather than just dealing with
the effects of child abuse is
trying to help thank healthy
communities so we prevent child
abuse on the front end we've
done numerous events on Saturday
mornings for people we
distribute the book if there's
anyone on the committee was not
gotten a book of either in a day
or a hundred percent community
please make sure let me know I
will make sure that you get
those but this is to now
increase the funding so that we
can expand statewide of
currently the counties we are in
we are limited that staff they
don't have enough staff they are
running from here to there there
actually is a training in Los
crucis of which happen is that
holder so I will go to try and
be here with us today but it's
to expand the funding so that
truly can go statewide we've got
several communities in counties
that are waiting for this so
that they can be in being part
of this and it truly is historic
it is the first in the country
to do this I move upstream
towards the prevention of child
abuse and prevention of aces
rather than just dealing with
the facts after the case with
that if I can I would like to
turn it over to Dr Catherine
partly
who lives here in Santa Fe but
is one of the executive
directors of this bill actually
provide funding New Mexico State
University is the fiscal agent
for this Dr Courtney.
Good morning thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senators I'm
happy to be here to support this
bill we are currently working in
now nine counties and a pueblo
in New Mexico and I'll go over
specifically which counties
those are but first I want to
just give a little bit of an
overview of our initiative so as
the senator mentioned we are
dedicated to the mission of
preventing childhood trauma and
we're the only institute in the
nation that has this kind of
mission to look at the social
determinants of health in order
to prevent social adversity in
childhood trauma for one hundred
percent of residents both rural
and urban and of any no matter
where they come from no matter
what the code kids are born in
we.
Firmly believe that they should
have an equal shot at success so
we focus on ensuring that one
hundred percent of community
members have access to ten vital
surviving and thriving Services
and the survival Services
include things like medical care
which as you imagine now is
super important in our
communities
we focus on a continuous quality
improvement methods so we are
data driven initiative we start
with looking at the data by
asking residents about their
access to the services including
what barriers they faced when
trying to access the services in
the past we then form ten action
teams for each of the surviving
and thriving Services based
inside each County so that they
know what is actually going on
in the county what are the
residents saying about the
services and how can we best
address them so the institute
supports these task forces in
the counties in the communities
to ensure that whatever
solutions they come across our
site on our best suited for the
residents of that community to
support one hundred percent of
their residents.
Thank you doctor Courtney and
again this is a very short bill
it is a six million dollars
appropriation my understanding
is there somewhere right around
nine hundred thousand dollars in
the budgets currently of
recurring bodies
However that is insufficient it
will be on the line counties
that we are currently working in
and those nine counties quite
frankly need more services that
they are able to be provided
that we are doing it on a
shoestring right now up this
will have one I don't know if
wonderful but should have very
good fiscal implications into
the future in that is much
cheaper and easier to prevent
childhood trauma and abuse that
it is to deal with that after
the fact and so this should have
a long term benefit for our
schools as children are coming
in from healthy communities and
healthy families as well as all
of the extra costs and expenses
that society what for as a
result of the problem and the
the abuse that we have in so
many of our communities no
communities are viewed from this
and this really is trying to
build healthy community so that
children are traumatized where
we that deal with it in our
schools and with that I we would
be open for any questions.
Thank you senator souls and for
the folks on the webcast we are
now hearing Senate bill thirty
so Markale I would ask for any
folks public comment in
opposition to this bill if we
have anyone.
Absolutely at this time we will
hear from Sharon Berman.
Share your available.
Hi everyone I'm not speaking in
opposition though so I'm not
sure this is good timing.
Yes we didn't have anyone for
opposition so.
So then I will up we will start
with folks that are in support
thank you.
Go ahead.
Thank you thank you and good
morning Mr chair vice chair and
committee members my name is
Sharon Berman I'm a civic
engagement policy manager at New
Mexico First and I'm also a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico First.
last year we held our town hall
on health body mind and spirit
and one of the primary focus
areas of the town hall was toxic
stress trauma and resilience.
Continuing this important
program and expanding it as
you've described is entirely in
keeping with the recommendation
of over five hundred people and
organizations statewide who
participated in the town hall
and also community conversations
we help leading up to it thank
you Mr chair and senator souls
for sponsoring this last
legislation and we stand in
favor of Senate bill thirty
thank you.
Thank you and I'm of any other
members of the public would like
to make a statement at this time
I'll go ahead and raise your
hand.
Shani Montoya I believe wanted
to make a statement.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Johnny Montoya how the state
director of government affairs
for New Mexico State University
and I just want to provide a
couple of points of
clarification from the FY are
I aged is a program in our PS
get New Mexico State University
a program that's very very
important to our institution we
submitted an FIR on January
twentieth and I think there were
some technical difficulties with
the FIR system so I just want to
clarify with regard to a point
made about the budgeting process
New Mexico state's budgeting
process begins are in may and
typically runs through about
November so cation we get these
constituent requests come in the
fall outside of that window so I
just want to clarify that this
it is just legislation we
support it just fell out of our
typical budgeting process thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you and Mister Steve
Cialis like to speak.
Yes thank you good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee on say yes with any in
New Mexico
our members I'd like to share
one of our core value in
legislative priorities and that
is that are any New Mexico
members believe that all
students should have sent access
to successful programs that
close educational opportunity
gaps.
Looting programs alike and at
age eight that address student
health for these reasons we
stand in support of SB thirty
and think center sold for
bringing this legislation or
thank you.
Thank you and there any other
members of the public that we're
able to get my attention earlier
that would like to speak.
We that is public statements at
this time Mr chair.
Thank you mark Taylor next we'll
move on to committee members I
believe Senator Padilla was
first.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you chair souls I think you know
I support this fully throughout
your entire effort I've been
right behind you up vote to lift
you up on this thing and help
you with dollars and capital
dollars any number of other
things that I can help with.
I I see the true
the help and and wonderful
things that this is going to do
for the state I think that
building at the way that we are
learning how to put it all
together were we have been
flying this plane without it
truly being built I don't know
how many decades now so I
appreciate your work on this the
question that I have is do we
have.
So I'm not sure how much money
we put into it so far it's it's
a Sanchez you know kind of this
is your swim lane you you been
leading this we're all swimming
behind to try to help you with
this thing
do we have a a dollar of of a
return on investment for every
dollar yet and economic studies
or any data out there I don't
know maybe when your witnesses
would like to maybe mention
something along those lines but
I would venture to guess that
you know we look at say early
education and and and we see a
thirteen percent return per
child per year for the rest of
that child's life if they get
the home visiting early birth to
to thirty six months and in the
early education component early
pre K. pre K. up to five the
fifth year of life we see a
thirteen percent return per
child per year for the rest of
that again that child's life
what sort of right return on
investment we get on these
dollars that we're putting into
this program.
Let me ask you very briefly and
then I'll turn it over to Dr
Courtney
Certainly parts of this our
early childhood education and
ensuring because we do not have
high quality early call early
childhood.
Learning and education and all
visiting in every community and
we don't even know where all
those gaps are and so part of
what this institute is find
those gaps so we can start
filling them so we can get that
thirty dollar return on
investment similarly community
schools are a major part of this
and we know the return on
investment in community schools
that got data within those
programs but we don't have a
real good data as to how many
community schools where and how
to function with all of those
and so this is almost even
upstream from those direct
things to set it up so we can
get those returns let me turn it
over to Dr Courtney to talks and
specific about some of the data
that's already been collected.
Thank you senator Mr chair
Senators.
Of the Senator answer that
question exactly right we are
going so far upstream that we're
actually looking at do people
have access to the services that
we know for example home
visiting is one of the services
we ask about and we know that
even before the pandemic people
were having trouble accessing
services like that so just as an
example in Socorro county forty
nine percent of those who said
that they needed child care
services were unable to access
them.
And the barriers were everything
ranging from waiting lists of
ours don't meet our needs so
what we're getting is priceless
data that shows us exactly what
the barriers are for those
services and now we can use that
data to close those gaps
specifically in each county so
we don't have exact number on
you know cost savings that we
hope to get there and we hope to
be able to show using our survey
that those gaps are closing and
then we'll be able to make those
kinds of fiscal calculations but
we also know is that because of
our free market which we have
all of the key stakeholders in
the county sort of involved in a
specific task force for example
for food
you know when the pandemic hit
some of those counties were able
to to rally those groups and
really focus on on getting food
distributed at that moment and
working together in ways that
were not that we haven't
typically seen in other counties
so we know that our framework is
having an impact already in ways
that we didn't expect.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
chairman souls and that doctor
Courtney.
I think it's a super important
we maybe take a look at that I
think it would help maybe tell
the story a little better along
the way because we we do want to
continue I want to continue to
fund this I hope the rest
legislature agrees with us
it was I had a a bill two years
ago that some of the and and I
think most of the people that
work in the legislature the time
wound up supporting this was to
provide the additional
fostering to two aged out youth
from the foster system at age
eighteen to the age of twenty
one.
We have about three hundred and
fifty of these youth that wind
up are aging out of foster care
with the floor dropping out from
under them we are now for a
providing employment housing
training on how to utilize
credit higher education
transportation food all that
those things until that the
child is is there the young
adult excuse me
that's a new term that we
created in that legislation that
turns to the age of twenty one
if we if we don't do that we see
seventy to eighty percent of
these these you wind up having
children and having their
children in the foster care
system.
With states that have done this
about fourteen or seventeen of
them have staff almost nearly
eliminated that very thing so
therefore that is the kind of
economic and cost savings and
and and benefit to the into to
the taxpayer into the community
that that that I would like to
see I'd like to understand that
data so I would just make that
as a as a suggestion as part of
the the continued effort to get
this thing to thank you Mr
chairman thank you for your
comments.
Mr chair if I could respond very
briefly one of the things that
was very this as the pandemic it
is up in the Las Vegas area
which is one of our very out
happy and communities that
really is embraced all of that
is they were one of the very
first communities to go from red
to yellow because the community
came together to ensure that
health care the testing the food
all of the things to the
pandemic and got the community
to all body into all of the.
The safety protocols and they
were one of the very first ones
to come move from red to yellow
up and we think what I it was
because and eight eight hundred
percent community was very
active in that community getting
the information out.
Right thank you we will move on
for the public we are on Senate
bill thirty and next will be
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator souls
this is a continuation of what
you'll hear from me periodically
as if you enter upstream
and and deal with issues you're
going to save an immense amount
of money as well as decrease in
a huge amount of suffering
downstream and this is and
entering upstream I just want to
comment on how to look at the
Senator Stewart is observation
on how to develop an R. O. Y. I
think in this whole area of what
we call social determinants of
the hair of
course the determinants of
health we're just beginning to
learn how to really calculate
some of that but we do know that
if that child has three or four
aces their probability of ending
up in prison not finishing high
school and and we're just
looking at the number four areas
of chronic disease substance
abuse etcetera but in the in the
area of jail in high school it
increases up to about thirty
three to fifty percent and so
the early detection
of potential risks for an ace
and then action to
actually identified and work
with that is going to be huge
and I can tell you in health
care again we're just beginning
to learn this we've got big data
now we can do relations to
relationships between a lot of
data fields we never could
before but we're gonna start to
find that this type of activity
will have an are alive about ten
ATS and and I'm not exaggerating
just downstream not only in
terms of cost savings and better
Life
but also contribution to society
contribution to taxes are
contribution then to for even
from the taxes to for the
program so I want to highly
commend you for doing that
I assure you Senator Padilla
I've tried we tried to look with
our S. twenty one at the impact
of removing.
The cost sharing from behavioral
health services it's complex the
data but it is it is doable and
that the the initial our data
from the top is is very good so
that that so getting into a
substance abuse particularly
Turner early ages and ace
activity and so being able to
get that early on so again I
commend you for your vision on
this and for bringing it forward
and I hope we just find it we
take a lot more dollars in their
future years invested in
activities like this because it
will save so much money for the
state in other areas that we
been spent are on other programs
that we so thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Pope if I may Senator do you
ever been here before but I I
can tell you that for the in the
essence of time I did what tell
the whole story is about how the
and the state institute got
started and and with my
psychology class giving the aces
of.
Survey ended up that was all
part of the the origin story and
I'd be happy to share with you
thank you.
Thank you would really
appreciate that.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Hickey we're
on Senate bill thirty we will be
moving to Senator Brandt
followed by Senator Kernan
Senator Brandt thank you Mr
chairman Sir souls I appreciate
the the intention of the bill
this is really a huge jump in
funding though exists over six
hundred percent increase in
funding can you give us a little
bit of details as to how this
money is planned to be spent.
And you're also going to be used
for because it's I mean it's not
just a little bit of an increase
in fact a recommendation from
higher ed was to decrease the
funding not increased so.
Thank you center Brandon I'd
have been disappointed you
didn't ask that question so let
me turn that over to us to our.
Dr here with it was with me.
Thank you senator the other is
So our original budget that we
have projected to make this
project really really work
involved funding for coordinator
full time coordinator in each
county which we are not able to
do with the current levels of
funding so basically the
additional funding would allow
for that as well as for support
staff the we are relying on
people who have full time jobs
in the counties doing this work
because of their passion and
love their communities to
improve the lives of the kids in
their communities we are not
able to provide the sort of
support to the counties that we
would like to given our current
budget so this would allow us
not only to support the counties
were already working in with
full time coordinators as well
as admin support to help with
scheduling and all of those
things a full time survey US
support researcher we have now
completed our survey in four
counties we have three more
under way to more ready to join
us and so it's not for lack of
interest that we have not been
able to expand its really just
capacity issues so this would
allow us greater capacity both
in the counties as well as in
the central institute to support
those counties in ways that they
truly need we're able to do the
assessment phase fairly easily
with volunteers and you know
relying on the community members
to go out there and collect
surveys when it gets to the
point where they're analyzing
the data and coming up with
solutions and really
implementing their plans that's
what the point we're at now and
that's where we need the
additional support in the
counties to make those things
happen.
Mr chairman
Miss Courtney I'm.
So this year increase of six
million dollars would go to.
Hiring people.
The vast majority would go to
the counties themselves so that
they can
either provide coordinators or.
Compensate the people who are
now doing that work voluntarily
in a way that they can truly
move the work forward so it
would support surveys that would
support the assessment phase and
the planning and action phase of
where they're identifying the
barriers identifying the
solutions and then now closing
those gaps and reducing those
barriers so obviously you know
funding.
What increase that in every
county and depending on what
solutions they need and that's
going to vary a lot by county
they're gonna need funding to
close those gaps so it could be
anything from you know a public
information campaign on the
importance of mentorship or
being trauma informed to needing
to build
Schoolbased health centers it
just depends on the need of the
county and given the level of
funding that we have at this
point we're not able to really
implement any solutions we're
we're able to identify problems
and barriers and start that
assessment phase and identify
solutions but we can't really
implement the solutions without
additional funding.
Mr chairman Senator
This great.
We're just a small increase in
funding is is humongous increase
in funding.
the did you build a budget to
figure out how much you were
going to request
is there any way we can get a
look at that budget to see if
this is a reasonable request and
this is not a small increases
Masser it's a it's very
ambitious and the guard good way
of putting that to say we're
going to get a coordinator in
every county I would guess that
there are some counties that are
too small to need a coordinator
in their counties we have some
very small counties at least
people wise in our state
and that is just I mean it's to
me it's a very ambitious goal to
try to do in one year one year
funding it seems like you know
the the asked should have been
you know to increase the funding
you know a small portion every
year so you can grow this thing
at a controllable level afraid
if you this you're you're you're
going seven times well you six
hundred percent increase of what
you're actually it's more than
that of your current budget.
That you're going to.
The growing too fast would you
see a lot of companies and
you're not gonna bill handle.
we're talk about taxpayer
dollars here that that some of
us are trying to be hawks on to
make sure that we don't
overspend them this would become
recurring funding I'm sure and
so you know we're in a position
where
We're trying to figure out what
the referring budgets going to
be it's not looking good with
some of the actions of the
taking from our current
administration and some of the
actions that are proposed by our
current legislative body of the
funding won't be there in the
future and so it gets a lot of
money I'm sure that finance will
talk about that more than I will
but it it's very ambitious.
I also love Mr chairman Senator
always love that you know the
return on investment argument we
hear that from everything and
from everyone on everything that
if we put this investment in
here then and then we'll see you
know these great results in this
great return on investment I've
had yet for someone to come back
to me and say Hey we put in all
this money here and look at our
recidivism rate went way down or
look at our graduation rate went
way up.
Hasn't happened yet look forward
to the day that that finally
happens because at that point
all believed in the investments
right that you're talking about
the return on investment because
to this day on no program that I
have ever had anyone tell me in
this legislative body have they
ever come back to me and say Hey
here's the evidence that proves
what I sent.
So I look forward to you doing
that some point in the future
Service rules thank you Mr
chairman that's all I have.
Thank you Senator Brandt we're
hearing Senate bill thirty and
we will be going to Senator
Kernan followed by Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chair and I
apologize I had to step off and
I didn't hear the initial
presentation but I know chair
sells knows that I know quite a
bit about the program and and
attended a wonderful up
precipitation I think it was a
couple years ago on the for the
Senate about asus and so I am
familiar and certainly believes
in that concept that many of the
things that are children
experience and and their
response to these things often
times
I think as we become more
familiar with aces and what that
means and the life of the child
I think the treatment of those
responses by the children will
be done differently and in I
think about that trauma and how
children respond to that and
then how they're treated for
that I think if Dr Hickey
Senator Hickey mentioned that
the health care field is just
now beginning to understand
about a system about how aces
contribute to behavior issues
with children and other issues
and and how they live their
lives following a significant
number of faces and so I'm
hopeful that as more people
understand what asus me and
The treatment of those children
will change I know we have a lot
of young children basically that
are treated for different issues
particularly behavioral issues
in school are within their
families with medications that
that perhaps aren't needed and I
don't know if doctor take you
could respond to that I think
they're treated with that often
times separate proprioceptive
trumpet medications and I think
with aces if you relate their
behavior back to their
experiences that maybe that's
not the best way to treat those
children so I think this is a
very very important
Opportunity to continue I think
it's important for people to
become educated specifically
teachers and our schools they
need to understand the reason
behind many behaviors exhibited
by our kiddos I do agree with
Senator Brandt I am course you
know I spoke up the other day
about my concern going forward
with the budget and I just I
hate to start at a major program
and then two or three years down
the road when revenues decreased
which if things are on track of
according to what we're hearing
from the federal level at we
know that's going to happen in
New Mexico revenues just will be
there so I I would agree our
whole heartedly to maybe do a
slight increase or even agree to
the LFC recommendation.
That that are really struggle
with
the huge increase in
appropriation I'm sure finances
I'm going to take a long look at
that and and I think that's the
appropriate place maybe in this
case to to let that happen
because I do want this to move
ahead but I am extremely
concerned would have difficulty
supporting that level
I do have a question it says in
FIR that there was room response
from CYFD I didn't say can you
realize what their responses to
this
Chair selves they have a
response to.
To this.
And Mr chair I have not seen
directly from CYFD up from when
the new secretary came on we
have had many meetings with him
and he's been very busy managing
other things and is supportive
of the N. AGD Institute but has
not been as directly involved as
some other areas and and
agencies but doctor Courtney you
might have more information as
to how the institute is working
with CYFD.
Thank you senator Mr chair
Senators
yes what the senator said sums
it up with CYFD we've met with
Secretary Blalock several times
he knows what we're up to he
supports what we're up to he
agrees that the end game of our
initiatives to make his job
easier and to have fewer kids
funnel into that system so what
we don't work directly with CYFD
we work kind of foresee YFB in
that we hope that families and
kids have access is to the
services they need before they
get to the point of needing CYFD
involvement and so that's really
our goal so I I don't know if
all of you know we my co
director and I started in CYFD
effort in juvenile justice as
well as in protective services
and this working directly out of
our observations and research
that we did well in that system
trying to find a way to prevent
these terrible outcomes we were
seeing for our kids and up to
and including child fatalities
which we weren't okay with so we
really dug into the research and
figure out what can be done to
prevent this and the answer was
far beyond anything CYFD could
do a long and involved everyone
in the community coming together
with the goal of ensuring that
kids have a fair chance by
having access to all of the
services that you would find in
in some thriving community some
communities already have access
to these things and so we want
to provide that chance to a
hundred percent of kids in New
Mexico.
Thank you very much and go ahead
okay if I might add and and
Senator Kernan you're absolutely
right we've got to provide lots
of services for kids who have
already have lots of bases but
the other agents the date
institute for the side providing
some support for communities in
doing that is really trying to
get to where those children
don't come with the aces to
where they need the extra help
and that's where some of the
return on the investment
problems is if we can have
healthy communities that we are
happy to go back and it's not a
good way of saying it but six
kids that that have been damaged
by their their unfortunate
circumstances.
Thank you very much and I'm
again yeah I I certainly support
the concept I am very concerned
about the appropriation would
support at that much small donor
appropriation just to get this
think again continuing and off
the ground but I do get delayed
and and that what what you're
doing thank you that's all I
have.
Thank you Senator Kernan will be
going to Senator Padilla than
Senator Hickey we have about ten
minutes left till twelve so I
would just ask that you know we
move along I don't want to cut
anyone's conversation I think
this is been great dialogue.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you chairman souls I am going
for a second time else I'll be
very brief chair pope did just
want to make mention you know
I've I've been able to create a
couple of new things and state
government the early education
department to a couple of
different things but you know
when we take a look at return on
investment I just just want to
make the mention that you know
I've only been here for nine
years although it feels like
thirty but I've only been here
for nine years and when when
you're implementing something
new and you're building the
funding for it you're doing this
and that it takes a good decade
in order to take a look in in a
program like this we're talking
a child so we're looking at
eighteen years before we but we
can't wait around and just
assume that because we don't
have an are a Roy is quickly is
is maybe something else like a
McDonalds or something that's
not what we're dealing with here
you know what what we're dealing
with programming that we're
building something it's a very
fruitful thing for our state I
just wanted to add that extra
context return on investment
because we need to get things
time to set in and and to get
built the right way and and then
as we go along in a collecting
data and information on what
that did for us so I just want
to make that mention and then
for the for Senator souls I know
knows a lot about this Senator
Kernan others who are former
educators and for doctor
Courtney you know when we talk
about say De Baca County in this
I don't know I think there's
about two thousand six hundred
people that live in that county
my net even be that much and a
few other counties that are very
small Guadalupe and what have
you for the school districts we
take a look at at regional
cooperatives to get work done so
when you're looking at
management across multiple
counties it might be smaller
whatever I I encourage you to
take a look at that model
because that may be helpful in
in in managing the budget that
you're looking for thank you Mr
chairman I don't have a
question.
Thank you center but it will go
to Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
cells and fell Senators up
number one Senator Kernan you're
absolutely right there's way too
much knee jerk and putting kids
on drugs and stepped up getting
them into treatment therapy and
interpersonal number two I do
believe that there is a lot of
data and other states are that
could in direct we substantiate
the return on investment I don't
know what agency are whether the
CYFD early childhood LFC or the
educational council but someone
you Sir to take that up and roll
that out in support of this
legislation and hopefully do so
before it gets to the finance
committee because I think you
will see that there is return on
investment of these type of
programs are put into place
secondly I would recommend not
to be put in the bill but that
there be process measures in
terms of goals to be achieved to
be able to put this into place
and that we see that those are
being met and review at the
appropriate time over two to
three years thank you very much.
And
This thank you.
Thank you Senator Hickey and us
Mr chair I will I would just
close in saying that I think we
all share the concerns of of
where we are as far as the
budget I think this is a
priority but I think we need to
look in and understand that our
budget is our values and this
should be a value here in the
state so we just need to look at
a way to to fund programs like
this
that being said do you have a
motion
To this Mr chair by Mike you can
opportunity close I'm sorry
Senator souls if if I might just
very quickly
and with the comments about the
budget is absolutely I get it I
understand about the budget your
comments about it reflects our
values the real end game of this
is for the counties to be able
to pick up this whole role and
have it as part of their they
don't have the capacity right
now we've got to start it does
it's going at all of those and
so going forward we don't
foresee additional increases
their budget and potentially
decreases in future years as we
get work counties up and running
on their own but initially it
takes more resources to get
things started and the actual
Services go thank you.
All right hi so move.
Do pass.
Do I have a second.
All right out of the bill all
right I'll take I'll take I saw
Senator Padilla so Martin Hickey
bay the motion Santo a second.
Could we have Marianne could you
take a roll roll call vote yes
your plant the.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Center Nobel yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla.
We've lost to Senator Padilla.
In fact now okay.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes Senator all
yes.
We have a due pass.
Thank you congradulations
Senator souls I will pass the
chairmanship back to you.
Thank you up and thank you
everybody who has been here
today we are about five minutes
or so before are are cut off
time I apologize to other people
who are waiting many of them are
my experts we are going to put
out a schedule for Monday
morning I understand I think it
was better for the are you may
be a little late joining us and
senator Brett do you have of
time line for when your caucus
meeting was going to be so we
can work around that.
Senator Brandt.
Mr chairman I tried you three
times.
Well the problem I think we're
big boys and girls controller on
the.
The Mr chairman we are are are
not planning a caucus after all
so we would be able to help the
committee meet with at your
discretion.
And I thank you center I
appreciate that and if you don't
have to have a caucus meeting it
the my recommendation that is
that we meet from nine until
about ten forty five the board
is scheduled for eleven that day
and we will try to get through
the rest of the bill that are on
our list
and if I if I were my list is
here somewhere in front of me
and I can't most of them are my
deals it the first one that we
would be hearing is going to be
research grants closing funds
and then there are four built
that deal with the public school
capital outlay process for
things that we've got two bills
one from Senator borders and the
last bill and I don't have in
front of me and I don't recall
what Senate senator Senator
souls is Marianna yes it is
career readiness system
statewide by Senator Gonzales
yes and then Senate bill one oh
seven we will adjourn until nine
o'clock on Monday for for
approximately an hour and forty
five minutes then and see if we
can get through the rest of the
bills that have already been
referred to us.
To anybody who has been waiting
yes Senator Padilla was trying
to a way that you once I
selected for the.
It looks like it Mr chair sounds
like he's still having the issue
with the sound that we can't
hear.
Okay well yeah you've got my
contact let me know if there's
something you know as far as we
can excuse so we've been able to
get here or sell or manage some
other way so Senator Padilla
please let me know if you're
able to hear if there is nothing
else than we are adjourned until
Monday at nine.
Throughout right.
