Uh, the chairman is out.
Um, presenting a bill this
morning, but we're gonna go get
started a little change in the
schedule this morning for the
1st 2 bills uh on the agenda,
the carryover bill bills will be
heard a little later. Uh, we are
gonna start right now with
Senate Bill 163, the tribal
regalia at school events, and
Senator Schendo, you have the
floor. Thank you, Mr. Chairs of
the committee. Thank you for uh
moving us up.
Uh, Senate Bill 163 proposes to
support students enrolled and
are eligible for enrollment in
federally recognized Indian
tribes.
Pueblos, uh
ensuring that they cannot be
prohibited from wearing tribal
regaliaully significant objects
were tribally significant
footwear apparel and gradually
ceremonial public school events.
To my left is the Secretary of
In affairs
Victor Monet.
And uh
Make a few comments.
We do any, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
morning. Thank you for having us
this morning. We're here to talk
about SB 163 Tribal regalia
Bill, uh, we're excited to bring
this bill and hoping that it
gets through this year, uh,
you'll see we have a.
There's a proposal to do an
emergency clause to the bill so
that it will go into effect for
students this year for
graduation. This bill adds
language, um, to the, uh, and
I'm 22 section 22 and allows
will allow Native American
students to wear their regalia
to their graduation ceremonies
and school events uh at public
schools throughout the state of
New Mexico, uh, we think this
bill is important to ensure that
students have the right.
To be able to wear their
regalia, which include a um
could include a determine is
important for them, um, and
their families and, um, so we're
hoping that we're able to get
this bill through again, uh,
just from personal experience
and I've told this story before
is when I graduated from law
school, I wore a beaded cap with
my feather and eagle feather
attached to it and uh wearing
and being able to wear your
regalia is often a symbol of
honor, um, and it allows.
you and your family to honor and
recognize the accomplishment
that you have done, so it's a
significant event and um, right
to be able to wear regalia.
Thank you, Madams. I believe
there's
An amendment
Right.
Yes
Thanks.
Senator, Madam Secretary, if you
can explain the amendment.
Of, of
Mr. Chairman members committee,
it's just adding a
Emergency class
So that uh it becomes law so
that hopefully.
Uh, students don't have to wait
till.
2026, yeah, before it comes law
that finds effective for this
graduation. Right.
Thank you.
Uh, in the room, are there, is
there anyone who isn't
supportive of the amendment. If
you could just raise your hand.
Is there anyone opposed?
I think for the sake of the
room, I'm not gonna have folks
come up on the amendment. We'll
talk about the bill later and
let you talk about that.
Um, but I wanna go ahead and,
are there any questions on the
on the amendment.
And.
We have a second from Senator
Ramos.
All right, Senator, you have
amended bill now.
Now we are back on the bill.
Did you have a, I don't think
there is anyone against the
amendment or comments, so we'll
go ahead and move on to public
comments and questions.
For those in the room
Do we have any supporters of
Senate Bill 163 amended.
You can raise your hand.
All right, and we have a few
online. If I could have folks
line up in the middle, we'll
allow you some time for
public comment. You have
2 minutes. Uh, try not to be
repetitive, if possible, uh, you
know, I, I understand there's a
support, but
I think you have the support to
get.
And make sure to uh give your
name and who you represent.
You may begin.
Go with the old kiwaris.
Good morning, chair and the
people of the committee. My name
is Dmitri Smith. I'm from Santo
Domingo, Pueblo, Navajo Nation,
and San Carlos Apache.
Currently, I am a senior at
Sandia High School in
Albuquerque, as well as the, as
well as a youth intern with NM
Native Vote, and I am here in
support of SB 163.
As a young indigenous man,
tribal gaily on what it
represents is a powerful symbol
of my culture, heritage, and
identity. In my family,
education is always encouraged
and being able to wear my
traditional clothing while
celebrating my accomplishments
will allow those who came before
me to walk alongside me.
Much of what I have learned came
from my grandfather who was no
longer here, and being able to
wear tri tribal regalia will
honor him and allow me to feel
his presence as I continue to
learn and grow.
Passing this bill would
demonstrate respect for the
right and traditions of
indigenous people as well as
recognizing the freedom to
practice and express our diverse
religious and cultural beliefs,
please vote in support of SB
163. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yet a Benee Karan in not
bashindale.
Yet a Benee Karan in not
bashinchinidae nae.
good morning chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Kaya Brown. I am from the Navajo
Nation and born for the big
water people. I am a Curtain
tribal student at Southwestern
Indian Polytechnic Institute in
a recent 2024 graduate at VU
Cleveland High School. I was
restricted from wearing my
traditional regalia during my
graduation ceremony.
As a native youth, achieving
such a milestone in my
education, graduation day was
intended to be a day filled with
joy, celebration, and pride.
Instead, I was shunned by my
high school's administration for
wearing the sacred pieces that
represent my identity as a Dane
woman.
The exact regalia I wear before
you today was deemed too
distracting.
In truth, my moccasins carry the
strength as I walk my path.
Theta recognized me as their
daughter when I wear my
turquoise and tie up my si.
I urge you to support SB 163 for
the future of native native
scholars. So our students may
walk the the stage in beauty.
Yeah.
Thank you.
That be alatadi and his
sharegoniishani buche.
I am currently
I'm currently a senior at Vo
Cleveland and I'm graduating
this year and as president of
the Native American Student
Union at Cleveland. I feel it is
my duty to stand up and
represent our Native American
students, wearing our
traditional regalia is very
important to our people because
it represents the sacrifices our
ancestors made for us.
To be here today and the pride
of our heritage that we have. I
wear my moccasins and my
dresses, not only for myself but
for those who could not. Thank
you, yeah.
Thank you.
Let's see him at our hope for
Alicia creme on my assbo masota,
New Mexico native E touch, uh,
greetings, uh, vice chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Carris and I'm
from the Pueblo of Santo Domingo
and a lobbyist for New Mexico
need to vote. And today, you
know, you've heard from our
native youth that have been
pushing for the recognition of
their identity to be honored
because as native students we're
walking with two worlds within
us. One
For our westernized communities,
and then the one that's probably
um more sacred to us is our
tribal communities. It carries
so much knowledge and cultural
pride. I know that we can also
find that cultural pride within
us as New Mexicans when we are
supporting our native artists as
well, um, you know, I see a lot
of turquoise and, you know, all
of the inlay, you know, uh, from
our communities. And so with
that, they all carry a little
piece of our culture, our
language, our prayers.
So that we may in turn represent
the beauty that is within all of
us so that we can make a
difference. So today, I urge you
to help make a difference and
listen to those prayers that we
all have when we represent
ourselves. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Conroy
Chino.
And I represent the Pueblos of
Taos and Akima, and also the
center of law and poverty.
And we stand in strong support
of this legislation.
You know, Mr. Chairman, I think
we're all aware that native
culture.
Runs deep and wide in the state,
and there shouldn't be any doubt
about the passage of this pill
rather expeditiously.
But more than anything, this
bill protects the freedom of
expression by the students as
you've heard from them, the
freedom to wear traditional
tribal clothing or even a
feather plume in the graduation
cap as a
An expression of tribal pride,
affiliation, and identity.
But more than anything, Mr.
Chairman, this bill protects
students against harassment and
intimidation.
And discrimination for simply
Expressing themselves, um.
And they, they shouldn't have to
be subjected to that, uh,
especially at a very celebratory
moment and they're young
academic lives. And so for those
reasons, Mr. Chairman, we stand
in strong support. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, greetings base chair members
of the committee, uh, thank you
to the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward. Uh, my name
is Mike Gabrio and I represent
the Lannel Foundation. We, uh,
we support this bill.
Uh, I don't want to repeat
anything that's been said, but
uh show appreciation to the
students that um have come here
to to support this. It's really
amazing. Um, I just want to
emphasize that this really is a
protection for students from
school boards or charter schools
that may want to restrict them
from being able to express
themselves.
As a former principal of a
tribally controlled school and a
teacher in, in schools that
serve native students. I know
how vital it is for native
students to know that they can
succeed academically while
maintaining their language,
cultures and values.
Our foundation believes that
everyone deserves the right to
celebrate and honor their
cultural identity without fear
of or discrimination. We urge
you to pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
Kwasikaita Josh, uh, good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Katie
Anne Waiko and I'm the assistant
secretary of Indian education
for the Public Education
department, uh, the public
education department supports SB
163 are now ready to take on the
work collaboratively. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. Uh, my name
is Anna Hanson. I am the
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo Auake,
and they stand in full support
of this bill. Um, I, they are.
Uh, tribal secretary and
lieutenant Governor attended the
meeting last Tuesday and we're
in full support and I'm just
reiterating the pueblo's support
for this bill and please give it
a due pass.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Carrie Robin
Bruder, I'm the registered
lobbyist for public Charter
Schools of New Mexico. We fully
support this legislation. We
have schools that have already
operationalized these policies,
and we think that it is
absolutely appropriate that this
be in the law so that all of our
schools across the state have
the same standard that they have
to follow. Thank you so much.
I think I'm the last one. Yes.
Thank you. And we have a couple
online, uh, Carmen Lopez.
And
Yatta, Carmen Lopez,
initia in Schladonada but on a
tanilla,
um, uh, good morning. I'm Carmen
Lopez, parent of a senior at
Cleveland High School. Um, I had
sent an email to the committee,
uh, and we'll just reiterate a
couple of items from my letter
to be in support of this bill,
um, as a couple of students at
Cleveland High School have
already mentioned current
the policy that we as parents
have to sign by March 14, 2025
does not allow our students to
alter or decorate their cap and
gown, they cannot wear
traditional jewelry on the
outside of their gown, they
cannot place a ceremonial
feathers on their cap, um, and
although we have a uh lovely
senior dinner that is provided
for the families. It's
celebrated off a stage and in a
separate event.
And the problem is that we have
these mixed messages that are
sent to our students where
during Native American History
Month, our students are sent to
the Rio Rancho Elementary
Schools to dress in the regalia,
show their cultural heritage,
but yeah, at uh high school
graduation, a major milestone of
our children's lives, uh,
students are denied the cultural
demonstration of this lifetime
achievement. Um, I spoke at a
the previous committee, um, and
was dismayed by some of the
committee members who brought
up, uh, First Amendment rights,
examples of if uh someone wore a
swastika on their cap, what
would happen? Um, there's
already current dress codes uh
regarding this that should not
allow that to happen. The issue
is that oftentimes when Native
Americans are, are bringing
forth the reasons why we want to
provide, um, have this
opportunity, it's always put
back on us all of these what ifs
when there are current policies
by the schools.
To, to address these issues. So
as the committee discusses this,
I hope this doesn't put uh the
burden of racist ways of our uh
potential students back onto
Native Americans to solve all of
these problems that other people
are engaging in. Thank you.
Thank you have one more, Jason
Morgan online.
Yes, hello. Can you hear me OK?
Yes, we can hear you.
Thank you. Uh, good morning. uh,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Jason
Morgan. I'm the principal at the
Academy for Technology and the
Classics, and I'm in full
support of this bill as a
school, we had experienced.
Quite a few years ago, uh, a
native student and his mother
requesting prior to commencement
exercises to wear his
traditional regalia, and for us
it was kind of a no brainer. I
mean, we just felt nice to be
asked, and I think the previous
point made is one I'd like to
emphasize. Um, the burden should
not be on the student and the
family to justify um
This opportunity, uh, it should
simply be uh afforded as a right
and a privilege, and I just, I
cannot understand any reason why
that would not be acceptable,
um.
So please consider uh passing
this bill, and I thank you for
your time.
Thank you. I don't believe there
was any opposition in the room.
Is there any opposition online?
There's not
So with that, um, I usually give
a chance for comments, but
there's no opposition. We were
gonna, now I have any comments
or questions from the committee.
Senator Ramos, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, thank you very much for
bringing this bill to us. I, I
think it's a great bill. I
really do. The only question I
have is, can't this already be
done?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Ramos, I
think, uh.
I, I think it's district has
their own policies. I think
that's why, you know, in some
instances schools are already
doing this, but I think there
was an incident last year that I
think a national news, uh, and
really I think sort of catapult
this to the point where, you
know, uh, we have to have it in
state statute so that.
Everybody's clear what it is as
opposed to leaving it up and
then all of a sudden.
You know, one or two schools or
a handful of schools are.
Policies against us
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um, this
is the Department of Education
have a.
The authority to develop policy
on this issue.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Ramos, I'm not sure we
do have the uh assistant
secretary of PED here. Maybe she
can speak to that.
Uh
the secretary.
Morning again, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee offer
guidance. We can offer guidance.
We do support that this, um, of
course, be through law again for
the, uh, everything senator
mentioned, but yes, guidance can
be offered for sure, but law.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Shundo for uh bringing
this bill forward. I uh want to
know something that you stated
last week, Senator Sendo, um, I
believe you spoke about the
richness of New Mexico and of
the spirits that continue to
walk besides us each and every
day because we.
Speak to them and we walk beside
them, um, in this.
Um, in this land, uh, across the
state. But I also want to also
know to one of the um
The handouts that we receive, we
received from the secretary, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, which states
that I think over 18 states
already have regal similar
regalia uh laws of secretary.
Are these all of the uh of the
regalia laws, exact, uh, the
exact replica of what we're
trying to do here now.
Mr. Chair, Senator, they're not
all exactly the same, they each
are just a little different, um,
however, we are mimicking our
bill very closely mimics
Arizona's. Thank you Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to also.
think folks who stood in
support, um, because I believe
that in a day and age when
diversity, equity and inclusion
is being attacked across this
country. It is extremely
important that we as a state of
New Mexico uplift our cultural
values and the richness of our
communities and our people, and
as an immigrant and as someone
who deeply understands the
meaning of culture, and who
understands what culture brings
to self-worth and to um, hope
and optimism. I just.
want to applaud you for bringing
this forward and teaching our
communities, the value of
cultural competence and the
strength that it brings to the
generations to come. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
So
Center for girls.
Move a do past, Mister Chair, if
it's time.
and
2nd from Sanriel is gonna make a
few comments and then we'll move
on that motion. Uh, Senator, I
just want to thank you for
bringing, you know, when I first
came in, we did the, uh, it was
the Crown Act that we made and
really just respecting
everyone's.
Cultural hair, hairstyles, and
even headdress. Unfortunately,
This didn't cover what happened.
That graduation.
I can tell you that that was
probably my most viral social
media posts that on TikTok, you
know, just talking about that
issue. Um, it just went
nationally.
and the outrage of what
happened.
Um, and it was wrong and we, we
came back.
You know, I, I just have so much
respect for
Uh, your culture and your
language and trying to protect
it and secure it.
As an African American.
here in the US in some ways.
We had to make our own culture
in the.
We don't have, I don't have that
cultural headdress.
And so
To have that here.
have a community that has that,
they should be able to show that
pride.
that in graduation.
And we can
All work together on that and,
and, and be inclusive and and
respect that, so.
Um, I love this spiel. I love
that it's gonna protect folks.
And they're gonna be able to
really
Um, celebrate their culture and
their achievement.
Uh, one thing I will say, and
this is not a criticism of the
bill at all. Um, I think going
forward we need to look at what
are we doing for folks in our
country that come from other
cultures that are immigrants as
well to make sure that they're
protected at graduation because
um I think that's something that
we need to.
Look at going forward, and
that's not to knock anything on
this bill. This needs to have,
so I'll be supporting it.
Just want to thank you for
bringing this forward, and I
want to thank the young people
and the families for standing
up.
To really get this done. This is
our community steps up to really
work on an issue and, and so
with that, um, we'll go ahead
and, and do the roller.
Yes.
Senator, you have a do past, I
believe it is 88.
8 to 0 with 1 excuse.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you.
All right. Next up, we're gonna
have Senate bill.
280
It's going to be NMMI in capital
outlay Act.
Senator he's ill.
Mr. Chairman
Members of the committee.
Thank you for taking the time to
consider this bill, Senate Bill
280, what were you're asking is
one change in this particular
part of our bill of the bill.
And it is relating to public
school capital improvements
adding the new to the public
school capital Outlay Act as one
of the the change.
That we are asking for will take
place on page 2 of the bill.
Only at the end of line 8 onto
line 9.
And
What we are adding is and the
New Mexico Military Institute to
be a constitutional special
school.
Which right now it is for the
blind visually impaired, and
this New Mexico school for the
deaf.
That's the change we're asking.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.
I do have very 2 we have uh.
Colonel David West, and I'm sure
that many of y'all have met
Colonel West before and we have
our new.
President of New Mexico Military
Institute Brigadier General
Boris McBurnett.
And he will be, uh, he has taken
the reins at the Mexico Military
Institute, which in my opinion
is the best education a young
person can get in our state.
But I'm kind of biased there
too.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee currently in New
Mexico Military Institute is the
only special student that is not
included in the public school
capital outlay Act.
It's unique that it serves both
as a high school.
And a junior college and like
other special schools serves a
unique mission unlike other
schools in the.
This would allow the New Mexico
military institute an additional
tool for access to state capital
outlay funding to upgrade the
school.
Dormitories and other facilities
as y'all are all aware.
All aware of
There are female cadets that are
at New Mexico Military Institute
and they have.
70s
1977
So it's been a while and the the
school does need to upgrades to
especially with the girls sports
included.
I would like for uh.
Colonel West and President.
General Boris McBurnett to make
comments at this time if it
meets with your approval, Mr.
Chair.
Yes.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the Senate Education
Committee.
Mimi is a one of a kind
institution within our state.
Founded in 1891. It has excelled
in providing memory.
Many commissioned officers,
general officers.
And state employees in their
history.
We are planning ahead for New
Mexican student leaders.
And New Mexico
Providing Mimi with access to
state school capital outlay
funds will allow us to upgrade
facilities and meet the
challenges we face as an aging
but historic institution in the
state.
Like the other two special
schools.
Which requires special standards
to be applied to their
institutions.
Mimi is prepared to work.
With the PSFA.
To develop special adequacy
standards that would apply to
NEMI and take into account its
unique mission.
And the historic nature of its
campus.
Additionally
Nemi would work with the PSFA to
ensure that funding allocation
to public school capital outlay
would apply to those facilities
that serve the secondary
education mission.
Nimi is seeking additional state
funds so that it can address
certain funding needs.
Allowing us to explore the use
of
Public school capital outlay
funds.
That
Does not provide me with a new
avenue to meet the many needs of
its changing institution.
That it is seeking expansion to
meet New Mexican student needs.
As we see it.
Thank you.
Thank you
Do we have any supporters in the
room.
Do we have any online?
Once again, for everyone, we are
on Senate Bill 280. Good
morning.
Vice Chair Pope, members of the
Senate Education Committee,
Vanessa Hawker, I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, and we proudly support
this bill adding New Mexico
military institute as one of our
constitutional special schools
to this. Thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have any opposition in the
room?
Do we have any opposition
online?
You did not, we will move to the
committee.
Any questions or comments from
the committee. Do passwords, but
Senator Thornton.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
I just wanted to make a comment
that uh
Senator, I, I've been to
Mexican Military Institute did a
tour maybe a couple of years
ago.
Great facility. I know you just
won the National Football
championship, saw the great, uh,
uh, of the work that has been
done for the athletes there, but
I did also walk through the
dormitory, so I think this is an
excellent bill to get improving
those for the students as well,
so that they could sort of the
same uh sort of the same.
Adelaide's or or alkylates that
that that's your athletes did,
because I was really in
basketball, uh, facilities that
you guys have created there.
I think this is a great bill. I,
I think it should be fairly easy
for PED to incorporate uh your
requirements into their normal
routine. Do we have any idea
sort of the impact overall
financially what this would do,
uh, for PED, in other words, I,
I couldn't see any numbers
coming out of the fiscal impact
report in terms of Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much, Senator
Thornton, I will let my expert
witness.
President answered that
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Thornton.
So
Where we are right now is we are
in the middle of our
New strategic plan.
So for me to give you numbers,
I, I can't really do that for
you today.
However, I can tell you things
that are being planned.
That is why this is very
important to the future success
of
New Mexico Military Institute
and our initiatives for New
Mexican students.
So as we move forward,
Uh, one of the reasons that this
has been vitally the helm at in
the beginning of July, I looked
at our numbers.
And I looked at
Our student success rates with
New Mexican students.
Now, one of the things that
we're proud to say is that.
Our admittance this year, we had
48% New Mexican students. But
one of the other things that I
looked at and in looking into
the past.
5 years of what we've been
doing.
Is that we have been steadily
adding.
And in making the amount of New
Mexican students rise in our
school.
However, one of the things that
I saw was that they were having.
Issues and staying in the
school.
Because our school is one of
the, the top academic schools in
the state.
And
Our education is measured off of
Where we send our students.
So we send our students to Ivy
League schools.
And we send our students to all
of the service academies.
And in order for us to maintain
the reputation that we have.
We have to continue on that
path.
So one of the things that I was
thinking about was how do we
get?
New Mexican students.
On that same path.
And that's a part of the
initiative of why we're here
today because one of the things
that I looked at right away is
that
And
I can't take credit for any of
this. This was already in the
works, but the expansion of it
is, is what I see in our, on our
horizon.
So we started an intermediate
preparatory academy.
In Roswell, where we started our
own middle school.
To start to handle this issue
because we wanted to make sure
that not only were we taking New
Mexican students, but were they
ready?
To meet the challenge of coming
into New Mexico Military
Institute, and that we would be
able to retain them.
During their tenure of being
there to get them to graduate.
That is why that initiative was
started, and that is a, a big
reason of why we're here today
because we seek.
To expand that across the state.
So that we can always cause
One of my initiatives is that we
always have
50% or more New Mexican students
in our school and that they are
able to succeed. That is a big
part of what
Uh, the reasoning.
Behind that. So, with that being
said, this is new schools in
different places.
And the financial impact of
that, I, I can't really share
with you at this point.
But, uh, let me close with this.
New Mexico Military Institute.
Is one.
Uh, of a
I hate to say it this way, a
dying breed of schools.
In the nation.
Because
I go to a meeting, uh, and
actually next week.
And what I find is that
More and more military schools
are closing.
And actually that is leading to
the academies and their
foundations to look more toward
us.
Because of that, uh, high
academic standard that we
provide.
Or their.
prep students to come when they
don't have enough space. So that
mix along with our international
students and our 50% New Mexican
students provides that.
Educational culture that makes
Mexico Military Institute what
it is and how it
Uh, is
Um
Peking
At the right time.
Thank you.
Thank you for that background,
uh, general, um.
Mr. Chair, so.
I just want to make sure I
understand this middle school
that has begun, uh, Mr. Chair,
this middle school that has
begun, is it?
Is it now a part of MMMI? Is it
actually incorporated into MLI
the the middle school that you
just mentioned, or is that a
separate school in the
Mr. Chair MMI
Very good.
Just one quick question, uh,
what is the enrollment uh.
For the entire school and then
how much is high school or
secondary versus
going.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Thornton, uh, I've been there
about 19 years, so that's why
I'm answering some of these
questions.
Uh, the answer to your question
is 782 this fall, and the mix is
about 50/50 uh high school and
junior college. Remember there
were 4 years of high school and
2 years of junior college.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair, uh.
You know.
What is the graduation rate for
it or um high school students.
The
From I think you're asking for
if I come in as a freshman, when
do I finish? Is that correct,
Senator, Mr. Chairman, Senator,
the answer to that is about 60%.
For that area and what the
general's talking about is
attrition.
We handle things a little
different than to say a normal
school, so we invite some
students not to return. It might
be because of
Uh, the deportment element, the
leadership element of the
school.
Or it might be because of
academics. When you have
rigorous academics, um,
obviously that becomes a concern
or an issue that's the reason we
were reaching down into the more
formidable years, 6th, 7th, 8th
to try and progress them, get
them ready.
If they had a desire to to come
to the institute.
So we find out about out of
every 10 Mexican students we
test.
7 don't test at grade level.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you for that. I think
that's the reason why this media
exists is to
Improve the
Uh, education level at in all
grades, obviously, uh, I think
you are maintaining your
standards is important and, and
insisting upon that, I think
it's critical. Uh, I support
this effort. I think, uh, you
guys are unique here.
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Senator and general and expert
witness, you've already
mentioned a couple of the
questions I was gonna bring up.
And one about adequacy standard
we have Mr. Chair state adequacy
standards for.
All of our schools
All of our public schools, I
should say, um,
And the two special schools.
For the visually impaired and
for the deaf have a different
set because their populations
have some different needs, so
they have a a special set of
adequacy standards and imi's
gonna need.
A different set as well because
that population is going to have
different adequacy standards, so
you've already talked about
developing that.
Um, the other difference that
jumped out, Mr. Chair.
In discussion the other schools.
Under our current public school
Capital Alley council.
Do free education for all.
So their local match portion
that's required, they do
generally by bonding.
And my question, Mr. Terre, how
is Mimigan do the match part,
because Mimi does tuition. Is it
gonna be a burden on your
tuition rates?
How are we gonna handle that?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Figueroa.
New Mexican military institute
is unique in that aspect. I will
not deny that what we're asking
here is.
Help with
Capital outlay and you're
talking about the adequacy
standards.
And process and it addresses the
physical condition capacity and
technology infrastructure of the
schools.
As the general was.
Remaking his remarks, it was
pointed out this this school
was.
And the history of this school.
is unique in the graduation rate
it has what these young people
do, females and males, whenever
they do prep there before they.
Either complete their junior
college career or they're
prepping there to go onto one of
the service academies.
And to me, I think it's a
shining star in the state of New
Mexico that we do have the
school but they do need help in
updating their facilities,
especially with the female
cadets on campus now and Mr.
Chairman and Senator Figueroa, I
know that my two expert
witnesses here, they do an
excellent job representing the
institute. I would like for them
to make some remarks too.
That's agreeable with Mister.
Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Chair, I would clarify, I
think we've already discussed
the adequacy standards they need
to be developed, that'll take a
little bit of time, but that can
be done, that's not an issue. My
question is more about how
Nimi's gonna handle the burden
of the match piece in our public
school Capitol outlay system if
we could focus on that, that
answer. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Figueroa, uh,
New Mexico Military Institute
and it's uh
Most recent past has matched the
capital outlay fund and that is
due to our ability to do that
with our land grant permanent
funds.
And for uh answer about students
and uh tuition.
I would say to you that a large
portion of our students.
are able to capitalize on.
Uh, scholarships.
Thank you Mr. Chair and thank
you General.
Yeah, I think that addresses the
concern. I didn't want tuition
to have to be raised to get this
done.
Um
My other question, I think is
more about process, Mr. Chair,
um, because.
New Mexico Military Institute
has the community college part
and the high school part.
This is gonna allow access.
Is it gonna be
Both options available to Nimi
now. Are you gonna be able to
pursue capital outlay through
HED or the junior college and
Capital Oley through this method
now for the high school part,
and are you gonna be able to
keep
Those requests
Separate, because I imagine
facilities are often used by
both groups. So how are you
gonna handle that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Figueroa, I,
I think that that is the
Goes back to the uniqueness of
NMMI.
And we are willing to work with
both sides on that is happy with
how that is coming out, but
For us to
Just to say that we would not
use this.
Um
Side of funding would, we would
be remiss because as our school
progresses.
Actually, the majority of our
students are gonna fit into this
tranche.
Instead of the junior college.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Those are
all my questions.
Thank you, Senator.
So you know, there are questions
or comments to what is the will
of the committee?
Senate Bill 280. Mr. Chair, I
move pass.
Senator Ramos and a 2nd center
Figueroa.
Yes.
Yes.
we have a new pass unanimous
vote. Congratulations, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much
and don't forget that you will
be receiving a packet for
students in your areas to get a
no scholarship that does pay for
tuition at New Mexico Military
Institute. It's a wonderful.
Opportunity for our young people
of the state. Thank you very
much.
Thank you and thank you all for
uh managing without me. I was
over in rules with a bill over
there. Uh, I don't see Senator
Munoz.
In the room, uh, whenever he
comes back in or whatever, we'll
certainly put that bill, those
bills back up, um.
So we'll head on down the list
is uh Senator Tobiasson and
Armijo.
OK, uh, Senator Stephanics, I
think, or Miho and Stephanics I
know are both over in rules
right now.
Temples.
OK, um,
As those are all coming in,
yeah, we can move clear down. I
guess my name's on the list
here. Uh, so Senator, if you'll
take over and we'll do 343.
And as those others come in,
we'll we'll try and get that.
For those in the room and those
online, we are now going to
Senate bill 343.
Teacher salary rate changes uh
by Senator Souls.
And whenever you're ready,
Senator, good to go.
Thank you. Uh, this bill is
really a very short technical
fix of a year or so ago, we
increased the salaries for
students in the career technical
educate or not students, for
teachers in the career technical
education area because uh for
them and their expertise within
a working field, it doesn't make
sense for them to follow the
same uh.
Like years of service, but to
get a master's degree and other
things to move up to level 3. we
thought it was clear, however,
one district, my district, Las
Cruces, as interpreted that they
don't have to give the salary
increase up to the level 3.
This makes it clear that yes,
the intent of the legislature
was that those career technical.
Education, teachers are to get
the salary increase of a level
3.
and that it can't be interpreted
otherwise. That's what this
does.
All right. Thank you, Senator.
Are there any supporters of
Senate Bill 343 in the room. You
raise your hand.
Do we have any opposition in the
room?
Any supporters online?
Alright, if I could have a
couple of people come up.
support.
I might have one online, uh, who
is one of the teachers actually
affected.
By um if you.
If he gets on, he's probably
watching.
Understood, Senator.
And you have 2 minutes.
Greetings.
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee. Uh, my name is
Mike Dario. I'm the vice
president uh program and
learning at the Lao Foundation.
We are the largest foundation in
New Mexico focused on education.
We support this bill, um, for
the, um, reasons that the uh
sponsor um introduced as we
ventured to improve and build
upon CD offerings in our state.
It's critical we make sal salary
attractive to potential.
two potential CTE leaders and
educators. This bill cleans up
language, resets the minimums,
and is a signal that the state
is ready to recognize CTE
teachers for the value they
bring to every district, school
and community.
I know that this is uh a
consistent issue in recruitment,
um, for our rural communities,
especially when we're talking
CTE teachers, so I appreciate
what this bill does in cleaning
up the language and and
supporting um our rural
communities and doing that. We
are to do pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi, Mr. Chairman and committee
members. My name is Dominique
Dennis. I'm a member of DECA. I
have at Monzano High School, I'm
currently a junior, um, CTE
classes are usually taught by
teachers that have extensive
experience, this includes
teachers that have been in
business, they could have worked
at Sandia Labs or some other.
Sort of
Credible
work.
These teachers are not new to.
Hard work, they're not new to
anything that someone that had
to go through a master's program
is, and I believe that they are
all deserving of a salary that
is worth their time. Having CTE
classes also increases
graduation rates, um, as
students that take a CTE class
throughout high school end up
graduating more often than not
and having those types of
classes would increase overall
graduation rates in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Angela Chavez,
um.
I have taken CTE classes and I
have found out that they are
very beneficial and the
resources that they provide
specifically the teachers, they
have helped me kind of focus and
shift what I'm trying to go to
in a career, and I think they're
very beneficial and I think that
the teachers should get paid
more for what they are doing.
And I think that that's
something.
Thank you.
Do you have any supporters
online? No nothing? All right,
and no opposition in the room or
online?
So I will go to the committee.
Do you have any questions or
comments from the committee.
I'll move it do pass chair.
All right, we have a due pass
from Senator Figueroa and a
second from Senator Nava.
We can take the role.
Yes.
Yes.
Center of a Du pass.
Aid in favor and one excuse.
Congratulations.
Send it are there any of the
other
People back in in the room for
the other bills.
I'll be happy to step down.
So for those in the room, uh,
we're gonna let the chairman
take you back over, but we're
gonna move on to Senate Bill
300, Senator Tobiasson.
Welcome to Senate.
And I'll just keep cheering if
that's OK.
the floor.
Thank you so much, and I loved
hearing all those yeses, so
let's keep that going this
Monday morning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
Senate Bill 300 is the $10
million appropriation for the
adult literacy program. So
investing this money in New New
Mexico's adult literacy program
under higher education is a
critical step towards breaking
the cycle of poverty, increasing
workforce readiness and
strengthening our economy with
nearly 20% of New Mexicans
struggling with basic literacy,
the current funding of $750,000
annually is vastly insufficient
to meet the demand for.
quality instruction, digital
literacy training and workforce
aligned education.
Increased funding will expand
access to literacy programs,
particularly in rural and
underserved communities,
enabling adults to to to secure
better jobs, support their
children's education and
participate more fully in civic
life.
By equipping mourning Mexicans
with the skills they need to
succeed. This investment will
reduce dependency on social
services, drive economic growth
and create a more skilled
workforce to meet the needs of
local employers.
Literacy is the foundation of
opportunity in this $10 million
appropriation will transform
lives, strengthen communities
and move New Mexico forward
towards a more prosperous
future.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator,
with that, do we have any
supporters in the room for
Senate Bill 300.
One hand raised, if you could
start moving to the front.
Um, and folks who raise their
hand can line up for public
comment. Do we have any
opposition?
And that we don't.
You have 2 minutes.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Shots
registered lobbyist for CNM
Community College.
We stand in support of this
legislation, and we thank the
this $10 million investment will
expand access to adult literacy
programs helping more New
Mexicans gain essential skills
for college, careers and
community success. As a leading
provider of adult education in
New Mexico, CNM knows very well
how strong literacy skills drive
higher wages, economic growth,
and reduced reliance on social
services. This funding will
significantly impact.
To many of our underserved
populations, ensuring greater
access to educational
opportunity across the state.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Do we have any supporters or
If we could have Jamie Trujil.
Yes, good morning. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Jamie
Trujillo. I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
Adults Education Association. We
represent 18 literacy programs
serving 1400 students annually,
a senator Tobiasson mentioned
current funding levels are far
too low, $750,000 spread across
18 programs means that these
programs currently struggle to
make it the entire year with
limited funding and are unable
to expand services. New Mexico
has the lowest levels of adult.
Literacy in the country with 29%
of adults lacking basic reading
proficiency, and unfortunately
less than 1% of this need is
currently being met. Adult
literacy levels are correlated
with childhood literacy levels,
specifically the literacy levels
of the mother, investing in
adult literacy is also an
investment in child literacy.
There are some significant
literacy desserts in the state.
Currently, there are no funded
adult literacy programs in Las
Cruces or Roswell, and there are
large rural areas.
without program programs. In
fact, last fiscal year only 18
of 33 counties were served, and
this bill can alleviate some of
the greatest needs for our
literacy programs. Right now
there are minimal resources for
program capacity building and no
resources for establishing new
programs. Additionally, we do
not have funds for a truly
robust literacy PD system. The
majority of direct services are
provided by unpaid volunteers
with varied backgrounds and
varied adult literacy, basic uh
knowledge.
So there is a need for an
increase in this PD and Senate
Bill 300 can help address all of
these needs. So I greatly
appreciate your support of this
essential bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, senator that wasn't it,
there's no opposition, but I
just want to give you an
opportunity on your
presentation.
Um, thank you, Mr. Co-chair.
It's kind of confusing, you
don't have titles, but um thank
you, Mr. Co-chair, but I will
echo what the witness just said,
which is, I was alarmed to learn
that we are number one now in
the nation for adult illiteracy
and with $750,000 being put
towards these programs and we
aren't serving the general
population, um, and the business
coaching me, I look at it, I
work with business owners around
the state every day and they're
constantly telling me we don't
have a readied workforce.
Well, how can we ever have a
readied workforce in New Mexico,
if we have such a large
population of adults that
can't read. And to me it's a
quality of life issue as well.
How do we help these families
move.
Forward, move out of some of the
situations that they've been
living in potentially for
generations, if we're not
focused and, you know, investing
in them. So any questions or
comments from the committee?
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator Tobias and, uh,
thanks for bringing this
forward.
Can you tell me how you're going
to measure the success of this
program.
Yeah, great question. Thank you,
Mr. Co-chair, um, Senator
Thornton, the higher ed
department has a rather.
Focused, um, program already in
place. They, they just don't
have the funding the entire
year, so.
the infrastructure.
So I know that they would be
giving um.
Thank you for that. Uh, do you
know how many adults are
expected to enroll through this
program with the
if you wanna you wanna introduce
your expert and have them come
up and answer that.
This is Amber Gallop. She is uh
part of the higher ed program
and well, you tell them exactly
what you.
Go, go ahead and have a seat.
Uh, hello, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, so, uh,
senator.
Uh, so in our, um, adult
literacy program right now with
the $750,000 we serve um about
3600.
people a year, and the way we
measure that is through um goals
met.
schools set and met, um, we,
because uh literacy.
Uh, because literacy is um
difficult to measure at the
lower levels. Uh, we stay away
sometimes from standardized
tests and instead focus on what
the literacy goals of the person
is, how they're progressing and
how they meet those goals, uh,
in our adult education program,
uh, which uh has uh additional
funding we serve about uh we
serve uh well over 12,000 people
a year. So we think with this
additional funding we'll be able
to uh greatly increase the
number of people served in the
state.
like, um, I think one of the um
the folks who spoke mentioned,
we serve less than 1% of the
need in New Mexico in the adult
literacy system. I think that
with uh further funding, um,
it's potential that we could um
become on par with uh the adult
education.
Thank you for that. That's all I
have next year.
Senator Sennorio.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I appreciate y'all
bringing this bill forward.
Whenever we're talking about
access to adult literacy
programs. Is this spread
throughout the state.
co-chairs, Senator Azel, um,
yes, it is, it is around the
state, but as the witness said,
it's not in every district
because of the financial
constraints, um, currently where
we have these programs around
the state, they're doing their
best to meet these people in
their communities.
So while they have access to
this program at UNM and CNN.
Your average person who needs
this isn't going to university,
so they have, um, teachers in
libraries and community center,
etc. and they do have the
The desire or the want and the
plan to expand in other ways to
reach people where they are, but
again, there's no funding to do
it.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
Senator Tobiasson.
I understand that. I also noted
in the fisk in the FIR that this
is a non-recurring expense. Can
you tell me why, why you just
went for this one year
infiltration.
the
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator Azel.
The one time is to build out the
structure, there's no way in in
one fiscal year that they're
going to ramp up fast enough to
spend $10 million of that
appropriation, so it's just to
ramp it up to find the employees
to find the additional partners
in the communities to lay that
foundation. So, as we go, if
there's a need down the road.
We'll be able to revisit it, but
it, it's gonna take quite a bit
to ramp up this infrastructure,
if you think about it, going
from 750,000, right? Um, they,
they need to know that that
money is there for the long
term. That's gonna last more
than a year. And Mr. Chairman
Senator Tobiasson.
Also in the FIR stating that
adult education.
Uh
What you were proposing here.
is a 30% increase over FY 25
operating and also $1 million in
federal funding for the program.
Is that going to be adequate
enough to get the job done on
what we're trying to get here,
the literacy part of it for.
Or
For the entire state, I guess
the availability for the Mr.
Chair, Senator Azel, um, pardon
the pun, but that would be the
million dollar question.
It's, it's an ongoing need,
right? But I think going from
serving 1% of the population to
having this kind of in.
fusion of support to build out a
broad-reaching program in every
district around the state in
every county, um.
It's, it's enough to really
start making a true dent in
people's lives, um, and if I
could refer to doctor.
He can come on up. She might as
well want to stay up, just go
ahead and have a. I wanted to
stay up here.
Uh, it's, uh, it's true that,
oh, I'm sorry, um, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, Senator I, um, I think that
uh we have um the majority, uh,
almost all of the funding right
now, uh, is used for
instructional purposes. And for
rent and keeping the lights on
and things like that, most in
the adult literacy system, most
of our instructors are
volunteers. So I think, um, uh
were this uh bill to pass, we
would be able to use it.
To build out um the
infrastructure increased the
number of programs and increase
the reach of programs, um, as we
go forward.
Mr. Chairman
sinister to buy in your expert
witness, I appreciate your
answer on that because it does
how is this going to affect it?
Have any numbers been run,
Mister Chairman, and Senator
Tobiasson, and I don't know if
y'all have the numbers or not.
Where's
Where's the greatest percentage
of your students that are taking
these classes, y'all have any
that,
Senator, uh, you, are you asking
uh where we have the majority of
our adult literacy students?
Yes, ma'am's exactly what I'm
asking, Mr. Chairman. Um,
currently, uh, we have our, um,
students, uh, focused, well,
they're they're an 18, excuse
me, 19 counties across the
state, uh, currently the
majority of them are in
Bernalillo, uh, Sandoval and
Santa Fe, um.
Um
With us, slightly smaller groups
in uh Valencia.
And um in uh Eddy County. So,
uh, and then, of course, the
other um counties mentioned have
smaller numbers due to the
smaller size of the, of the
programs. OK.
And Mr. Chairman, I do want to
point out and I'm gonna, I brag.
Travis County.
How many years ago,
Representative Avon Wilson was
very instrumental in getting
this going down in Chavis County
and it was through a volunteer.
Effort and it was also helped by
Eastern New Mexico University
Roswell, and the reason they are
not at the top of the list right
now is I think the literacy
program has done great wonders
down there in that that area.
And the need was there. I got to
address the class.
5 or 6 years ago and.
They were very thoughtful in the
questions they asked me, some of
them were in Spanish. I was able
to understand what they were. I
wasn't able to speak it back
because sometimes I do get my
Spanish words mixed. I did have
a translator there.
But this program has worked
wonders and there was lots.
Input and.
activity there.
Because these people do want to
be able to get the better paying
jobs they want to be.
Everything that this program has
done and I do.
Have to send accolades up to a
representative Wilson for
getting this done.
So I hope that the counties that
are participating the 19 other
counties.
Understand the importance of
this and.
volunteerism and what we are
going to be injecting into it if
this passes, we'll do nothing
but help our state. So thank you
very much for bringing this bill
forward, Mr. Chairman, that's
all. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator for bringing this
very important bill forward.
Um
I would first like to touch on
the measurement component. I
think that is.
Very
Uh, important because I think
this hopefully this program will
continue to grow even further,
and I'll explain why.
But, uh, are we seeing or are
you measuring the, the
The high school uh degree
equivalent. I can't remember ED.
Yeah, GED number of people go on
and get their GED, um, also
changes in jobs levels and jobs.
I know that's confidential
information, but somehow
demonstrating that there is uh
what I'm gonna go in.
So I just after that, uh, you
don't have to comment on it, but
I just offer it as some things
that you might measure so that
you can support this, and I
think in the future.
Um
The other comment I'd like to
make. I think this bill has a
major ripple effect and actually
it pays for itself.
I mean if people are able to
get.
A higher level of uh jobs
because they have higher
efficiency in reading skills,
that's going to create more
income tax, which is gonna come
back and kind of replace the
money that you're spending and
hopefully even generate more the
um
Uh, I, I think of it kind of as
a a behavioral health bill. I
mean, literally, if there's,
there's more literacy in the
family, there's fewer ACEs
likely in the family, uh, higher
aspiring, and I think it impacts
the probably the behavioral
health of the family, and what
we're dealing with in these
three major bills that we passed
on Friday is in fact uh treating
the symptoms of, of a
production.
families that are so high and
the state, but I think this
bill, uh, helps with that. And
then finally, just apparent
reading.
Um
You know, it's gonna affect the
kids and that they will read
more.
put their cell phone down and
actually read a book.
So thank you for bringing this
bill. I think it's very
important. I think it pays for
itself, and I hope it continues
to grow in the future for all
the reasons I decided.
Um, any comments on it.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Hickey. Um, I just think
it's vital for the vitality.
Health and prosperity of
everyone.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Nova.
Thank you, Mr. Shark. Hello,
Senator. Thank you very much for
bringing this forward. Um, I do
have a, a few questions, um, in
terms of the geographical reach
of the current program. I
believe you all said, uh, 19
counties are affected, so thus
far and Bernalillo Sandoval and
Santa Fe are the largest ones,
um, so my question is, are the
services in person remotely or
online, or all of them.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, our
services are actually online,
uh, in person and hybrid. In the
adult literacy system, we tend
to use, um, a one on one or
small group tutoring model,
which varies a little bit from
our adult education system,
which is more of like a
classroom based model. So in the
adult literacy system with our
tutoring, um, you know, it is
often most impactful to do that
one on one in person, uh, but
recognizing, um, sort of the
especially in some of our rural
counties, the geographic, you
know, um.
distance uh between people, we
have instituted uh online and
hybrid. I would note that, um.
Uh, you know, one thing that um
the adult education division,
uh, might do if this bill were
to pass is to improve the
infrastructure for providing
these services online because
there is a demand and we often
have waiting lists. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you, expert,
um, and also which partners are
currently, um, involved in
delivering the actual services.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator Nava,
uh.
When you say which partners, do
you mean um.
Institutions, right? So, um,
these programs, like I say,
they're spread throughout the
state, most of them are based in
a community programs, uh, you
know, uh, there's sometimes
they're sponsored by the county,
sometimes they're sponsored by a
library. It really depends on
the area. There are a few that
are also based in, uh, even in
branch campuses and community
colleges alongside the adult
education program, but the
majority are separate from that.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I don't see anyone
else on the list. I'm sorry,
Senator Figueroa
in you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm just wanted to say, Mr.
Chair, this is simultaneously,
not nearly enough.
And way too much.
Um
If, if the current budget is
750,000 and this would up it to
5 million a year, it's 5 times
what we're currently spending,
um, and if we're only reaching
3% of the need, that's still
only 15% of the need.
Of folks who need literacy in
our state.
So in that sense, Mr. Chair.
This is not enough.
It's a good step, but it's not
enough.
On the other hand, it is far too
much quadrupling what you do in
one year.
Doesn't seem logistically
feasible, so my recommendation
as this moves forward is to
consider adding the year 2028.
They give you a 3 year spread to
spend this and collect the data,
so you can come back and say,
look at what we can accomplish.
Let's keep funding this, but
finding
$5 million worth of volunteers
and program expansion in one
year is too fast.
So spread it out a little bit
would be my recommendation.
That's all, Mr. Chair.
You, Senator, and I don't
Senator Ramis.
Mr. Chair, I, I totally agree,
um, Senator, uh, would you
consider a friendly amendment to
add?
Mr. Chair, Senator Ramos, yes, I
would. Thank you for this.
Alright, we have motion for a
friendly amendment to push it.
We have the line just to
Line 18, change the end to a
comma.
And to insert the word and.
2028 after but.
I don't know if we need a comma
after 2027. Somebody helped
there.
Mr. Chair, Senator Figueroa, I
think it depends on whether
you're a Gen Xer or not.
Mr. Mr. Chair, the analyst came
up with a great suggestion, just
change it to 2026 through 2028.
Senator
Ramosa, are you OK with that?
Yes, I am she made the motion,
OK. So we have an amendment.
We have a second on the
amendment.
Line 20 as well.
That's 2027.
Good with the amendment?
We have a second on the
amendment.
from 2 senator Souls. Do we have
any opposition?
have any support in the room.
All right, is this, uh, this is,
and this is a friendly amendment
from
Any questions or comments from
the committee on the amendment.
Do we have any
All right, the amendment passes
where.
Senator.
We have a second from Senator
Ramos.
Mary, if you could take the
role.
On Senate Bill 300 amended.
Yes.
Yes.
So Senator, you have a due pass
on Senate Bill 300 amended.
Congratulations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and the
people of New Mexico, thank you.
Thank you, Senator Munoz.
Uh, it's actually your choice,
sir.
OK, so we'll do SB 268 1st and
then SB 266.
6
the
Mr. Cha, thank you. Senate Bill
266 appropriates.
To UNM and NMSU for athletics.
Uh
that's 16 268. OK.
OK
Bill 268 appropriates money to
UNM and NMSU for the athletics
programs, uh, it says it will go
in fact 90 days.
Uh, there's a caveat 2.5 million
to each university.
The caveat that uh NimS you hire
an athletic director with uh.
5 years of experience with NIL.
We know that the current is
was a fiscal agent and wasn't a
deputy athletic director and so
we're looking to resolve the
issue.
You watched the Logans I met
everybody.
watch that with excitement that
was a.
a good game yesterday. Two teams
well.
Well posed against each other
and, you know, we had an in
you
set a record for going to 3 bowl
games over a 5-year period,
athletics is suffering in in.
In all aspects, whether there's
nutrition, mental health.
Um
Recruiting, retaining coaches.
Um, and so we, we're here to
co-sponsor my ass to add on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Honorable members, the
The uh, the world of college
athletics has moved beneath our
feet in the, in the recent past.
Uh, players for the first time
ever allowed to market
themselves through NIL.
Uh, ESPN just signed a $7.8
billion contract with college
football playoffs and the large
o conferences.
Convers realignment is shifting
every single year.
And players are allowed to
transfer without losing a year
eligibility, I think the Aggies
lost some 50+ players this past
year.
The Lobos lost maybe 40.
This is $3 million on top of
regular investments.
Uh, that would have a definite
return on investment. This is
certainly quantifiable to give
both athletic programs, uh, 200
$2.5 million in extra liquidity
uh would help.
Student retention, uh, as well
as the health and well-being of
the students.
The, I think it's time for state
government to be more actively
involved in investing.
In college athletics, not just
for the students, but.
There's a bunch of recent
studies, Mr. Chairman, dealing
with uh not only ticket sales
and apparel, but also
applications to the university.
The, the research opportunities
for that university, if if it's
a.
If it becomes more prominent
nationally as well as an
identity amongst.
A community
Small towns benefit the most
economically from uh Division
One college football success,
and I think Las Cruces and
Albuquerque uh could benefit
tremendously from the economic
opportunities.
Of us competing on a national
stage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You.
So Senator, there are 2
amendments here, these both from
you.
Which one are we dealing with?
960.1, OK?
And the other one is where's
959.1 as well.
So which one are we dealing?
OK.
Yes
Is your mic on, senator? I'm
sorry.
I, I didn't meet with the
athletic director for the female
side and this has to be equal as
we move forward because
Uh, female athletes also need
the help too and.
OK, um,
Now as I looked through it.
The one
The 60.1, this looks like it
strikes all of New Mexico State
University out of this, out of
the.
The, the number 2 on the on the
I'm sorry, I, I read 0.59, which
strikes athletics so point
senator, which one are we? Let's
do.
59.1.
59.1, OK
athletics and put student.
OK, so on line 13.
But student athletes.
19 student athletes 25.
And then online 20.
5.
And again, Senator, if you'll
explain what is the effect of
this?
Well, that that would treat
everybody equally that way all
athletes are treated the same,
not just.
Sure.
OK, so we're on the amendment
out in the audience, anyone in
support of the amendment.
And my understanding is I looked
at it changes athletics to
student athletes, so it is
funding the student athletes
directly rather than the
university. Is that?
The, the impact
Correct.
OK.
In the audience, those in
support.
Oh, no, I'm, thank you. I
appreciate your help with the
process. Sometimes you get a
little ahead of yourself up here
and forget, Mr. Chairman, I'd
like to move Amendment 230959.1.
OK. Before discussion purposes,
now we're ready. So,
Anyone in support
Did you come stand in support of
the amendment?
You don't have to.
You just raise your hand and say
you're in sport, that's cool.
OK, anyone in opposition?
OK, is this support of the
amendment or the support of the
bill.
I'll hold on to to those, um,
so.
Questions from the committee
about the amendment.
De Figueroa.
Just clarification, Mr. Chair,
on your question, I think
student athletes, so does this
mean like.
Scholarships like tutoring
things to go to athletes as
opposed to.
I don't know, uh equipment,
yeah.
What would it go to?
Mister Chan, Senator, anything
in that that could be food
nutrition, it could be
equipment, it could be anything.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Whenever you were talking about
student athletes, I know that
you do have to have the female
aspect of it in there otherwise
you're gonna be in violation.
So does this apply to all
athletics, that's sanctions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Taze, no, Title IX requirements
go without saying, but we all,
but we, but, but it's great to
see it.
And so, yes, a male and female
athletes have to be treated the
same under the law.
With regards to access to uh
state resources.
OK, I'm glad to hear you come
out and say this. Title 9. I
know that that was passed many
years ago.
Mr. Chairman and Senator and
senator.
But my the latter part of my
question was, does this, will
this money go to all.
different sanctioned events that
the college does offer as far as
athletics go.
Mr. Chairman Senator, it's not
gonna be written in the, in the
line item.
So each department will manage
it independent of each other,
but that is the intent to go
toward the students and towards
student livelihood.
As Senator whennos mentioned,
uh, student athletic welfare,
nutrition, training services,
mental health services,
educational opportunities,
things like that.
So this could, Mr. Chairman and.
Senator Myas desisted could go
to football, basketball,
volleyball, softball, baseball,
swimming.
Rodeo, uh, I'm trying to think
of anything badminton, I guess
if that's offered. Uh, is that
the case? Mr.
Chairman Senator precisely.
Thank you very much.
and rodeo is not under athletics
in any university.
Mr. Chairman, I don't think
that's quite right because there
are scholarships that are
available for students to go to
college on a rodeo scholarship,
so they, it does count as an um
What is it called, uh, uh, it is
a credit that they do receive,
so.
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So we're talking about the
amendment now, and I'm just
trying to understand sort of
where this is where what we're
actually doing here is, is this
part part of athletics now and
that with, with this funding
With this a mimics. It says
specifically student athletes,
with this money directly go to
they encourage them to come to
New Mexico.
Uh, in other words, is, are we
buying athletes is what I'm
really getting at.
Mr. Chan center, this money is
not intended to money, right?
And I currently is run through
foundations, foundations raise
money to keep student athletes.
What you're gonna see is uh the
basketball coach Pitino's.
contractors up.
We know he's gonna get courted,
right?
We know they don't have the
money, but if we fill in where
we're short on students,
trainers, or
or food nutrition where they're.
The lagging then the university
may have the resources to do
that.
We've seen happen in MSU and an
outgoing president in the next
bill.
They signed a contract with
athletic director for an
increase.
Uh, as he was walking out the
door, he signed that contract.
And increase that athletic
directors uh.
Hey
Without any real resources, NMSu
is $11 million.
Um
In debt and their athletics.
And you, uh, maybe about.
6 or 8 years ago.
House Bill 2, Senator Smith.
Uh, we wrote off the debt for
NMSU and UNM.
And you and him accepted the
House bill.
Out of debt, but NMSU did not.
And so as we come back and we
try to balance some of these
athletics we have to backfill, I
mean, athletics is.
They're attracting to the state
in in.
One, you know, one couple of
years and my shoes winning and
and now UNM is winning. We
treated them both equal, both
times, right?
Whatever they got, they got in.
And so as we move forward, we
know that in order for us to
retain and coaches, that's,
that's a different story, but
when you alleviate the pressures
in athletics, uh, then they have
the ability to do. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
That's all my questions for now.
questions
And again, on the amendment
here.
Changing it from athletics to
student athletes.
Currently, the things that you
envisioned that this is going to
pay for for student athletes.
Where is that paid for now?
Um, that's either paid through
state funding through ticket
sales, um.
Whatever other resources they
gather through athletics.
And so that's how that's
currently paid.
And so, you know, that's already
you said through state
resources.
How is this different putting it
here and how does this not
Have this paper those to
supplant that other money can be
used for other things within
athletics. How is it different?
Well,
When we take state money and
we're appropriate to say we're
doing it for the basketball
team, just whatever the athletic
budget is, right? Football,
baseball, volleyball, they have
a limited amount of resources.
They got to pay the coaches,
they got to pay that. When they
fall short in those areas, then
they're going to foundations,
right? And they're going out to
try to raise money for athletics
and saying, oh, we need, we need
more food nutrition for our
athletes, right? They're not
getting the proper food before a
football game or a baseball game
or whatever game they're going
to play, they
Carving up, they're getting the
right nutrition before they do
that. They have to stay on a
steady regimen throughout there.
It's a football player, you're
on, you're on nutrition program
your whole life while you're in
athletics.
And so that's one part, part of
it.
But the mental health issue has
grown over. Senator Moore's uh
last year I think gave all his
grown money to UNM, one
university for mental health.
Over the 2 years, so when we
implant or subplant money then
it allows the university to take
care of the athletes better.
Uh, in every way, shape or form
they do, but then they're not
out raising money just for the
athletes, then they can start
talking about raising money for
coaches, uh, for other things
that they need to do, and IL is
going to be a big deal. I'll
give you the exact story from
NMSU. They had a chance to keep
Pavia.
And NIL they offered him 75,000
and
The next day they retracted that
to 45,000.
Well
Coach had laughed and offered
him more money to go to a
different school and now I think
in NIL money he's going to make
2.5 million.
There's no way we're going to
compete with that amount of
dollars in in New Mexico because
there's those foundations raise
that NIL money. It's hard to get
those big donors that that you
have to have to raise that in
other states are doing that.
In Ohio.
The national champion football
team. They had $20 million in
Senator, yeah, I understand all
of that. That really isn't where
my question is, is by changing
this from athletics to student
athletes, is that more clearly
just supplanting the money over
to student athletes that frees
up athletic departments to spend
the money they had been spending
on student athletes other
places.
No, I don't think he plan some
money at all.
Senator, the, the money that
they're currently spending on
student athletes, on nutrition,
on grades on all of those
things, where is that money
currently coming from?
I don't know all their
resources, but part of that is
state money. I think we, I don't
know the dollar amount we fund
each university to in the.
In athletics, and after to dig
into their budgets. So Senator,
you just said it, state money
that they're currently using. So
if we put more state money here
to cover that, doesn't that free
up athletic departments to use
the money they have been
spending elsewhere, or is there
a mechanism to ensure that this
is on top of what they're
spending and not supplanting.
Well for anySU, that's a
different story because they're,
they're, they're in debt, so
they, they have to come in and
I'm not talking about individual
universities. I'm talking about
in general, it affects both.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
Senator Souls. No, I see the
point you're making in terms of
creative accounting and things
of that nature. That's not the
intent, and we certainly can uh
can go through the books between
now and next year to see if in
fact they do that, but that's
not what we want to see happen.
We want this on top of any
current expenditures for the
student athletes. But yes,
you're correct, they could
theoretically could free up.
Money's elsewhere, uh, but.
But I would ask this committee
to consider.
We live in this mentality of,
of, of the pie not growing. We
live in this mentality, in my
opinion, of scarce resources.
College athletics has the
ability to grow its revenue
stream tremendously.
With health of the athlete and
success of the program, so we
anticipate this money going to
the athletes, which will then
grow each respective.
Uh, university athletic budget
over time due to the success
that that we, we think they're
about to have.
So
Senator, I kind of get back
again, you know, in the build,
is there some mechanism to hold
harmless or to not, uh, was it
sustain the current effort and
this must be on top, or is, is
that just up to the goodwill of
the university to ensure that,
or is there something I didn't
see it in the bill of where you
have to sustain the current
effort.
Without supplant Mr. Chairman
Senator Soz, it is not in the
bill. You're correct, but
through uh through
accountability and transparency,
we will know if that happens
and, and they will be
accountable for that. But it's
not written in the bill,
correct.
Well, I, I get back to and how
yeah, where is the enforcement
mechanism if this is used as a
plant instead of to supplement.
There will not be uh Mr.
Chairman Senator Sols on
enforcement necessarily, but
they will be accountable to us
each and every year, but what we
anticipate is an increase in
overall revenue to the programs,
for example,
During uh 20 years ago, you and
I at football, believe it or
not, averaged 36,000 people a
game.
The average 36,000 people for
about a 4 year stretch.
If you and I were to average
30,000 people a game and go to a
bowl game every other year,
their athletic budget would
increase uh in the tens of
millions.
Senator, I understand the
overall economics we're talking
about the particular amendment
here is, you know, couldn't the
money just go to athletics for
them to spend.
On the students, why does it
have to say student athletes
Chairman, if you, if the intend
is not to supplant and that's
why we're asking this committee
to change the words from
athletics to student athletes to
ensure that
That does not happen to the
extent that we don't want it to
happen. I think the word student
athletes is a much better bill
than athletics.
OK, we're kind of starting to go
round and round because
Yeah, I
And I'll, I'll drop it there,
but I don't understand the
change or the need, you know, if
we trust our athletic
departments to spend the money
on students. Why do we need to,
to change the words to tell them
that if the plan isn't use this
on students and you can use the
the other money somewhere else.
So, but I'll, I'll drop it at
that.
Mr. Chairman, I do if you allow
me to ask this.
Because I have read the bill and
I've read the bill and then I've
made the changes with the.
Amendment here and then I'm
still reading whenever I look at
the uh analysis, let's see who
did this one.
University of New Mexico did
this analysis, and on the 2nd
page of it under Bill Summary,
do y'all have the copy of that,
the Senator, is this still on
the amendment instead of the
bill? Well, it ties into the
amendment, I think Mr. Chairman.
Because I understand that
connection.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
because under fiscal
implications, it's very clear
right here why it was changed
from.
As the athletics to student
athletes because it is covered
there under fiscal implications
covering nutrition athletic
training services, mental health
services, etc. and educational
opportunity. OK, so we've got
that part of it covered.
But then it says.
Up in the bill summary, all of
this is contingent.
Uh, on ESU hiring an athletic
director with at least 5 years
of name, image and likeness. Can
you tell me why?
I, I'm not seeing that anywhere
in the bill or in the amendment
or anywhere else. Tell me why
that particular sentence is in
there.
And, and Senator, I, I don't
think that's part of the
amendment and we'll get, we'll
get to that when we get to the
building if that's OK. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Anything else on the amendment?
We have a motion
59, I think.
We have a motion for the
amendment. Is there a second?
The second
If you'll call the roll, please.
bone.
Firoa.
Hickey? Yes.
Nova Cinderramos, Senator
Thornton.
Pope. Yes. No.
But Senator, you now have a bill
once amended.
OK, you want to move to the 2nd.
No, we're not gonna do that.
You're not gonna do the 2nd
Amendment.
OK.
Uh, we are back on the bill
then.
Um, and on the bill, if we've
gone out to the audience, those
in support I don't think we have
anything else on the bill,
Senator?
I mentioned this in my opening
statements that we know that in
you that NIL did not exist?
Yeah, it is OK.
I got allergies or something, so
I may just talk in a lower
motion but we when we drafted
the bill, we know that that NMSU
did not have an athletic
director then.
And so we're looking in forward
and seeing what was happening
with NMSU and that's why that
language was added.
OK, and I don't, we did not go
out to the audience, I don't
think. OK, in the audience,
first with a show of hands,
those in support of this bill.
Those in opposition, would you
like to come up and and speak.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Clayton Abbey and the
Mexico State University. We
certainly are thankful to our
sponsors, Chair Munoz, Senator
Maestas, uh, both have obviously
been extremely supportive of the
athletics programs that both New
Mexico State University and
University of New Mexico, we see
that continued support here and
we're grateful. Thank you.
Thank you. Again, anyone in
opposition?
an opposition online, and we
have uh 3 online, so Terry Cole.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole, and I'm
president CEO of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
College athletics are a key
front door to our university,
city and state. And right now,
at UNM, we need to enhance the
resources available to the
department to compete with other
MWC teams and win. Currently, we
have the 2nd lowest athletics
budget in the MWC and yet,
We are near the top in both
championships earned and the
percentage of our athletics
budget that is directly
generated by the athletic
department. From an economic
development perspective,
especially in a city without an
NFL or an NBA team, it is
imperative that we cement
ourselves as a college sports
university, a college sports
city and a college sports state.
We need Albuquerque to become
synonymous with the low book.
In the same way we see that in
places like Chapel Hill,
Tuscaloosa, and Morgantown. The
economic return is real, and as
the university in the broader
community up their contributions
to athletics. We need our
partners at the state to do the
same. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We
urge support for the bill this
morning.
Thank you and Mackenzie Bishop.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, my name is McKenzie
Bishop. I'm a business owner and
founder here in Albuquerque as
well as a member of the Lobo
Club and the NIL Collective
board. We've increased private
fundraising by over 50% since
2020 with the leadership from
our private collective, we've
been able to compete at the
highest level. This is all in
spite of having the 10th highest
budget out of 11 Mountain West
schools for athletics. Further
UNM athletics provides millions
of financial support back to
main campus that few schools
have to, as well as an
eight-figure economic.
impact every single year, but
it's not enough. We got passed
on by the Pac-12 because of a
lack of investment and in a
dramatically changing college
sports landscape, we will get
left behind, and I'm afraid we
already have.
This is not a nice to have. This
is a must-have. Failure to
invest will doom our state's one
of our state's proudest brands
and honestly both of our state's
proudest brands to the bottom of
yet another list. Let's invest
in success in a program actually
achieving exceptional results.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
And next, Jordan Benegas.
Chairman Souls
Members of the committee
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. My
name is Jordan Benegas, and I
represent A Mountain Sports, the
official name images likeness
collective for New Mexico State
University athletes. I want to
thank Senator Munoz for his
leadership on this issue. Many
of you may recall it just over a
year ago, our Aggies competed in
front of over 30,000 New
Mexicans at the New Mexico Bowl
with over 1.2 million watching
on ESPN. UNM economists
estimate.
Mr. Benegas, I think we lost
you.
OK.
Go ahead.
OK.
Uh, this is a no-brainer.
I think my internet is going in
and out. Sorry, folks.
And those wondering if NI if New
Mexico State can compete in this
ever changing landscape, only
need to look at the evidence.
Since NIL was introduced less
than 4 years ago, the Aggies
have had a 10-win season in
football, appeared in two bowl
games, ran up the score on a
school named Auburn University
and won an NCA tournament game.
Then on the women's side,
softball star Desiree Spearman
right here from the borderland
was recently ranked one of the
top 100 players in the entire
country. While Molly Keiser is
the 7th leading scorer in all of
Division One women's basketball,
and has an incredible
story of her and her family
fleeing Liberia to come here to
play at New Mexico State.
What we are most proud of in our
collective is that this is more
than just a paycheck for Desiree
and for Molly. We serve the
whole person in providing them
real world experiences and
supporting them with things like
financial literacy, brand
management consulting, and we
hope to build this relationship
with you, the legislature, to
continue to feature Aggie's on
New Mexico Tru campaigns and
public service announcements.
With the infusion of leadership
at New Mexico State, uh, we hope
to look for more support from
you. Thank you. Thank you.
Are there, is there anyone in
opposition?
The room. OK. If not, we'll go
to questions from the committee.
On the bill
Any questions?
pokers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
senators for bringing this bill
forward. Um, and I'm sorry I had
to step out earlier. Um,
This funding
Is this gonna be funding for
infrastructure hiring.
quality of life.
Um, I just want to know what
confirm again what this money is
gonna be used for.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
No, the amendment, I remember
the exact reason we did the
amendment because there was an
FIR or uh report that said they
were gonna use it for athletic
director pay.
And so we needed to clarify that
this was going to be for student
athletes and not.
Understood, but once again, uh
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Can you explain again what this
money is going to be used for
and, and I'd also like to know,
is this going to be used to
actually pay NIO athletes.
Mr. Chan and her, no, it's not
appropriated that way. It's
appropriated to athletes, right?
And and UNM's fiscal
implementation and synopsis of
what they're going to do with
the money, you know, cost
related team travel tenant,
student athlete, welfare,
nutrition, athletic training and
mental health services and
educational opportunities.
That's what Yan is defining what
they're going to use the money
for.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
senators. It's just, there's
been a lot of discussions about
NIL and everything else and
what's going on in other schools
and
And I get that.
Um, but
I'm just confused on why we were
going down that that rabbit
hole.
Um
Of
Ohio State and all these big
programs and
It's really an issue everywhere.
Everyone's competing with each
other. It's excuse the pun,
it's, it's an arms race, right?
Folks are committing and getting
offered 5 million for NIL at
Texas and Ohio State says we can
offer you 10.
And I'm saying that to say that.
Yes, we need to be competitive,
and I want us to be competitive.
But we're never gonna
Uh
I want to ensure that the money
is going to take care of our
athletes, our facilities.
I think that's where we can
probably compete. So I just want
to confirm that that's what
we're doing and this isn't.
To me, I'm all supportive of NIL
but I'm not supportive of
Tax dollars helping fund that
because we're not going to be
able to other schools. So can
you confirm that with me?
Mm
Mr. Chair and Senator, in my
conversations with the UNM
Athletic director.
He, he's planning on using it
for the student need of money,
and they've always been short
athletics have always been short
of, of money and it grows and
grows, um.
I use NMSU's example of them
still being in debt, I don't
remember if it was 7 million or
11 million behind in athletics,
they're running a deficit. They
owe the university that amount
of money because they can't fund
athletics to that level and and
so we have to get
That level of
students there. We hired a new
football coach at at UNM. I did
meet with him.
He'll bring his players along
and and he'll figure out a way
to fund NIL through through
foundations and other resources,
but
His number one deal is to, you
know, I got to have the right.
Food and my kids, I got to make
sure they're mainly sound
they're going to school, that
they're passing and making the
complete athlete because
one thing that does ring true
with all of them is they all
want them done with their
athletics. That's their end
goal. I mean, athletics helps,
helps them and that's the reason
they're there at the school,
but, but they all want those
players to leave with a degree
in the end.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Pope No, great, great,
uh, great analysis.
But I would, I would have a
slightly different take on it.
Arms race in my
opinion was just
Money for nuclear weapons after
you can blow up the earth.
Three times over and all that
money just went to defense
contractors and the nuclear
weapons stayed in the ground.
Although this is.
Similar to that in terms of
this, this need to compete. This
money goes toward economic
development. Diego Pavia
received 2 point, you know, half
a million this last year, he's
going to receive 2.5 million
next year.
Vanderbilt University and the
Nashville economy benefited over
$100 million from their success
in beating Alabama and selling
out the crowd, so we don't need
to beat Ohio State.
We just need to beat Utah State,
Nevada and Nevada, Vegas and the
San Jose State we can compete,
uh, and we need to instill that.
In ourselves that we can compete
and it will be a revenue
generator. If we, if we help New
Mexico and New Mexico State
athletic programs, you know,
attract students and make their
students healthy and well.
We can then uh compete and
create revenue.
Uh, that will then make us more
competitive. So it's you have to
spend a little money to to make
a little money.
Understood, Mister Chair and
Senator, but once again, we're
talking about AI.
I, I don't think you can lead
into that without having the NAL
conversation at any point in
time if they're winning games,
more people are in the stands
that generates more income,
right?
And, and so NIL is the beast
that's come among us to retain
and recruit athletes to win
games in every university wants
to win the national championship
in they're gonna buy them at any
cost now. We're not gonna be
able to do that. We know we
don't have the donors in New
Mexico to compete with that. But
at least we need to support our
student athletes. You just heard
the guy from
I don't remember where he was
from, talk about the two women,
right, the leading score for
basketball.
the softball player and so we
have athletes are very
competitive in the market, you
know, and I totally understand
that Diego Pavia, you know,
graduated from my district in
Vista.
Went to Nemi
Um, he's playing at Vanderbilt
now. I'm going to Vanderbilt,
so.
And well about that. They love
him out there in Nashville has
that, that base uh.
No pay for that.
Um, I
I, my goal and what I want to
see here is, and I'm glad for
the bill with just supporting
athletic.
Separate from football,
basketball. We have world-class
athletes here in New Mexico.
Talk about our distance from
people that are Olympic
athletes.
And when you look at the
facilities compared to other
schools, so.
Need to, we need to fund it.
I guess my other question would
be.
We're talking about NMSU. We're
talking about UNM. What about
some of our other higher
education or support and funding
for their athletics.
Well, they're not in the same,
they're not in the same
divisions, right? in Highlands
get funded completely different
because in so western.
Because they don't have all the
same sports. Uh, I don't think
they're feeling.
In in other situations, but
we'll have those conversations
with them. Uh, I haven't heard
from him on this bill at all.
So I don't know exactly for
Highlands.
And that's correct. They're not
division one and some FBS are
probably in the, you know.
Lower levels
Um, but I, I just want to make
sure that we're we're looking
for all facilities and the
quality of life. This is real.
You're right, we have lost
recruits to.
NIL
Also opportunities, you know,
people are talking about the
fact that because of NIL folks
go to schools and if they don't
start a year, folks shorts.
So I just think there's several
factors we have to deal with.
But I think as long as this is
for me, a quality of life.
Taking care of our athletes,
making sure their facilities are
there someone get here that
helps them stay here.
And then also just as a
community.
supporting our schools, right?
Cause a lot of this is really
coming from
The foundations, the ticket
sales and the support so we can
pay.
I know.
I think that's the bigger issue,
but
Once again, I just want to
ensure that
We're not subsidizing.
Uh, and I know that's, that's
just my concern.
This is just going to athletic
programs.
And support for students.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That is
the intention.
Thank you, Senator Deel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
Along the same lines that
Senator Pope brought up.
The concern I think I understood
what he was talking about. We
want to make sure it's gonna go
to nutrition athletic training
services, mental health services
and educational opportunities.
Will there be any sort of an
audit done to make sure that
those funds are going where
they're supposed to be going and
not to hiring.
In a
Can you, can you
Show me where that might be
found
Senator, you won't find this in
that bill.
As you don't, I don't want to
appropriate money and saying it
has to go, so much goes to women
athletics, so much goes to to
men's athletics, so much goes to
mental health, so much goes to
nutrition. That's not my job.
That's the job of the
universities. They can come back
and account for us and say,
out of this 2.5 million, we
spent.
Blank, blank, blank to get to
2.5 million on these things.
That's their job.
They know the intent. I think
the student athletic clarified
that.
And so that it is going to the
student athlete.
Well, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Renos.
There might be a little bit of a
problem there because this is
taxpayer money and I think that
they do want.
Some reassurance that if they if
we're gonna pass this bill.
That that's what this money is
used for, even though the
universities might be aware of
it, there's no guarantee that
that's what the money will be
used for. I guess I need a
little more clarification on
behalf of the taxpayers of the
state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman center
result. No great point. The
language will not be contained
in the bill. However, I look
forward to that information next
October, November, December,
these budgets are public
information. We could probably
get more detailed information
requested uh to the
universities, but I look forward
to going over those budgets and
seeing if this in fact had an
impact.
Uh, not only to the benefit of
the students but also
facilitated more revenue to the
athletic departments. I think
that this 2.5 by the taxpayers
will uh.
Will be, will be tenfold.
I still have some qualms here
and.
Like I said, Senator Pope
brought up a very good point
right there.
I do understand that these two
schools are both Division 1
schools. I, I do get that.
Um
But whenever you're looking at
Of course I'm an Aggie.
I did compete in gymnastics and
it was for male and female, we
did compete out of state.
Uh
But I was also there whenever
Lou Hansen was there took the
Aggies on to all the
championships he did, so that's.
Telling the crowd my age, OK?
So I remember I was born last
century, OK? Remember that?
But we also look at schools like
New Mexico Military Institute.
They won a national title last
year.
That some of their, I don't know
one of the.
Really, really good athletes
that came out of the Mexico
Military Institute was Roger
Staubach, and I think maybe some
of y'all, not you younger kids,
but some of us old folks out
there do remember Roger
Staubach, so in the future.
Would there be a possibility
that these schools will be
coming to us asking the same
question.
They want some more money to
support the nutritional, let me
see if I can read them, um.
Athletic training service mental
health service and educational
opportunities.
Mr. Chair, uh, and Senator, they
may come, I will, I remember a
conversation where the Highlands
wants an athletic track.
Uh, for their, their athletes
and so they may come to us. I
haven't heard their them comment
or come to me and say, hey, why
are we not in the bill? Why are
we not getting funny? I have not
heard that from the.
other colleges.
OK, well, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, I
think that.
If this bill does pass, I think
we may see that happen.
Thank you all for your for your
responses. That's all, Mr.
Chair. Thank you and we're gonna
go to Senator Hickey, but first,
um,
We, for anybody watching, we are
going to do the Senate Bill 266,
so we're, we will stay here to
finish.
That bill before going down to
the floor, any of the others on
the list today will get rolled
over to Wednesday.
So if any and it looks like
we're probably gonna be at 8:30
start on Wednesday as well.
Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward.
Um
The, the, the impact of this
bill certainly will, as it's
designed to help.
facilities, the welfare of, of
the individuals and, and, you
know, that's gonna be important
in terms of, of where they go.
But the, the ripple effect of
this is that kind of goes under
the
Concept of branding. The
branding of the university of
New Mexico as a player.
Uh, I think it's critical to
people who decide to come to the
school from out of state, from
getting foundation support from
out of state and from
Uh, uh.
Making, particularly at at UNM,
Albuquerque is, is the head of
the chamber said, um, it, it
helps attract businesses. I just
they, you know, we don't have
time to talk about the impact of
branding and it's huge. It is
absolutely huge and it's ripple
effect and so many other areas,
but, uh, I
I think we want to remember that
as we vote on this bill today.
And um.
The and and you and was it noted
that we have the 2nd lowest
support within our conference
and
You know, I'm
You know, the, the
The world is full of comparison.
People call it the death of joy.
Um, and the but people do look
at that and they'll look at that
in terms of where they're going
to choose to go to the school
and, and can we have the, you
know, the incredible athletes
and yesterday's game, I had an
opportunity to attend it. It's
absolutely phenomenal. The
emotional charge that that gives
to the people who were there,
the people of New Mexico. It
just, it has that secondary
effect that's going to bring
more money, better students,
etc.
the state.
So, again, being a businessman,
I'm very much into branding in
my past, but I think branding in
New Mexico and the sports could
use some help. So thank you for
bringing this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Other questions,
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm feeling better, uh, having
had this discussion because I
was concerned about this going
specifically to name, image and
likeness to get to buy athletes.
Um
And I probably would feel even
more secure if it was explicitly
saying that it would not go to
name image and likeness.
To athletes that could go to all
these other things that you've
mentioned.
Uh, so the fact that that is not
excluded is a concern, and
that's the only concern because
they could use it, possibly, or
name image and likeness, uh,
given the fact that we're
allocating so much money to
them.
So that's my only concern, and I
understand Senator Pope's, uh,
If it goes to all these other
things that you had already
mentioned, I'm perfectly OK with
that. Uh, I think it's important
for the city of New Mexico to we
have premier.
State universities here in, in
New Mexico and that uh.
Branding ourselves better is
something that I think we all
want to see achieved.
Um
Just one other question with
regards to
Assuming attendance were to go
up, how does that money feed
back into helping the facilities
and assuming, you know, I'm
assuming you're saying the
economic benefit of, of being
able to attract better athletes
then allows more crowds that
gives more incentive, more
funding coming back to the
university.
Is that funding then wrapped
back into facility improvement
and things like that. I'm not
quite sure how all that funding
works or to go to other aspects
of the universe.
Thank you Mr. Chairman Senator
Thornton, the, the economics of
All his athletics is, is huge.
It's a billion dollar industry,
particularly Division One
football and and men's
basketball, but all the money.
Made by the athletic department
in terms of ticket sales,
apparel, concessions.
Chevy revenue revenue for going
to a and say a tournament or a
bowl game, revenue sharing from
conference.
Uh, uh, participants going to
NCAA tournaments and bowl games,
all that money comes back to the
athletic department, um.
And then it spent as, as the
chairman mentioned is spent by
the leadership of the university
with regards to NIL Merman,
Senator Thornton, that, that is
mostly through private donations
through private nonprofits.
Um, the Supreme Court has ruled.
Uh, in a $2.8 billion case that
that that colleges are able to
do revenue sharing, you know,
why should an athlete bring tens
of millions of dollars to a
university and not be able to
sell his t-shirt with his name
on it type stuff, um, but that
hopefully will, uh, we'll have
those problems hopefully in the
near future, but this is a
conservative investment of $5
million to help our athletic
departments um.
Uh, you know, serve the students
and hopefully uh get better and,
and get that revenue that we
just spoke of.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chair.
Other questions from the
committee.
Get um, how much is currently
being spent on mental health,
nutrition, academics at the two
universities.
Mr. Chairman, I, I don't have
those numbers.
Right
either school.
Uh, Senator, how are we going to
get that? Because if we're going
to see whether this money is
being supplanted or being
supplemented, don't you need to
know where we are now on how
much and who's going to do that.
Well, Mr. Chair of the Board of
Regents would, would control the
athletics department and when
the athletics department turns
in their budget, they'd be under
control where the the regions
have to approve that and so
we'll
We hope that it's in the right
place, but that these athletic
directors, they know what
they're doing. They, they know
where they're short.
Um, every athletic director will
tell you we're short in
nutrition, right? We have to
feed them 3 times a day. Got to
make sure they're getting the
right calories. They know that
the mental health issue has
grown over that, uh, head injury
traumas have grown and so
they're gonna do what they need
to do in their jobs and and
don't know the the will of the
legislature and, and I don't see
them running the wry and
spending the money where they
shouldn't.
Senator, earlier you made a
comment that the
The state support for athletics
is, has been inadequate. Is that
accurate? I mean, did I hear you
that correct?
Mr. Charing Center, yes, we just
look at a budget to be $11
million.07 dollars or $11
million on out of balance,
right?
That tells you they either
overspent or they don't have
enough money to to maintain
their athletics programs.
Senator, do you feel that
We adequately fund research at
our universities.
Well, we're getting there. I
mean, it depends on what
research we're doing in the last
4 years are reach your search
numbers have come way up.
Uh, and we started that path
and, and I don't know the total
number off of my head that we're
spending in research at the
universities, but from water to
to the other programming that we
we've come up. I don't want to
say.
And Senator, do you think we
spend an adequate amount on
academics at our universities,
or do we underspend that?
Well, I'm, I'm not a president
of the university, so I couldn't
tell you that. I mean, with free
college tuition, we're we're
spending a whole lot sending the
kids there for free.
Well, I guess kind of my point
and in New Mexico.
Per capita
We are the lowest in research
funding state-level research
funding of our universities. I
don't see a bill coming to to
fix that, yet we're gonna fix
athletics. Uh, and I think most
of the universities would
indicate that we underfund the
academic side of our
universities, uh, our faculty
are some of the lowest paid in
the region.
I don't see a bill coming to fix
that, yet we seem very concerned
about athletic funding, um, and
how we're going to, to do that
for economic growth, and I would
certainly argue that.
A or academic funding and
research funding are probably
larger economic drivers overall
than athletic funding, yet we
don't seem to to be as concerned
about funding those pieces, um.
I want to go back to on the
bill.
Why starting on online 25 on the
first page it says Content for
the NMSU funding contingent upon
Mexico State hiring an athletic
director with at least 5 years
of name, image, and logo or um
image and likeness policy
experience.
Why is that in there for New
Mexico State and not for UNM?
Well, I mentioned that in the
beginning that that uh they
didn't have an athletic director
in there and you and them had
just hired their athletic
director and it's my mistake
that it was 5 years and not 3
years.
Of NIL because that's how long
it's been around.
Well, and, but Senator, you
know, it seems to
To push New Mexico State and not
UNM and is it the role of us
making laws to determine what
the experience level of an, of
the
The athletic director is.
Well, I, I think there's been a
lot of turmoil NMSU.
Starting with what happened with
the basketball team.
Uh, and what what happened in
Albuquerque and so you want
athletic directors that are good
and knowledgeable. We know we
lost the athletes. Um, we know
we lost Diego Pavia because they
made their NIL offer and then
reduced it. Otherwise he would
have been still it in MSU, but
They didn't make that decision
and so
Um, but, but senator, is it our
role to second guess the
universities and the athletic
director and indicate that
funding is contingent upon a
criteria on one university and
not the other for the experience
of the athletic director? Well,
I think you just this committee
and some members of this
committee maybe when you asked
me how we can control where the
money gets spent.
Um, and that's not my role.
Um
My role is to make sure that if
we're going to fund athletics,
then we're going to fund it in
the right place and they have
the right people in place.
Um, we are 2nd in the nation, I
think the secretary.
Confirm this for me, uh, in
higher ed.
Uh, support the institutions and
were the worst in graduation.
2nd worst in graduation.
So, but again, I'm, I'm looking
here specifically that as the
sponsor of this bill, you
thought it was appropriate to
put in something about how New
Mexico State has to hire their
athletic director that is not in
general law but is specific in
this one to towards New Mexico
State.
You know, and that
Clearly, the NIL has been very
new and so it's requiring
somebody to have something that
is unattainable and was
unattainable when it was put in
and drafted. Why? It was my
mistake.
Well, Senator, you know,
That was more of a personal dig
at New Mexico State, and it's
inappropriate to put those
things into a bill because you
don't like who New Mexico State
is looking at or hiring as an
athletic director, and I take
offense at that, and it would
have made the same comments if
it was in there about UNM. It's
inappropriate to do that because
these things are real to people
at those universities, and this
hurts their ability to hire
people when they see legislation
of that sort, Mr. Chairman thank
you I'd like to excuse me, I'm
still speaking. I didn't
recognize you.
Um, and so I would like to make
an amendment.
That we strike that part so that
the second section reads the
same as the top section for New
Mexico State University.
I don't have a problem with
that.
I'll second.
That makes sense to everybody on
the committee. Do you
understand?
I
Senator
Mr. Chairman, are you sure you
want to strike that because
whenever you strike that if
which line are you starting on?
Um
Let me make sure I get it right
here 2026.
From uh online 25 contingent on.
And then, uh, goes to the end of
line two with that period on
page 2.
OK
Make sure it reads the same that
is in the first section.
I believe it reads the same at
that point.
Please if somebody reads it
differently, let me know. That's
correct.
That's
OK, any discussion on the
amendment.
I move that amendment.
2
And second, in a discussion on
the amendment.
any opposition to the amendment.
OK, then the motion carries, and
we, your bill is twice amended.
OK, back on the regular bill,
any other comments, questions?
If not, we're open for a motion.
German, I moved that uh.
We give a due pass to Senate
Bill 268 as twice amended.
Thank you.
Move
or 2.
I'll second it.
Or Senator Hickey seconded.
You'll call the roll, please.
So
Yes, explained my vote.
Yes,
you have a you pass.
Hope's gonna
Senator Pope.
So, I still have some of the
same concerns. I voted out.
But I'm still gonna be
Uh, watching those concerns on
the floor so the vote could
change. Um, I know.
D1 sports. We keep mentioning
NIL, but I also want to make
sure that that quality of life
and a lot of the support systems
are there at our other schools
as well, cause they need help.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, Senator, uh,
Senate Bill 266.
Your title.
I agreement, approval and
review.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, Senate Bill
266 outlines our higher
education and accountability
will it reviews the qualifying
agreements for the state
educational institutions and
community colleges by by the
Board of Finance.
It allows the president and vice
president's chancellors, vice
chancellors, provosts and vice
presidents. Life's provost and
athletic.
Directors. The contracts are
subject to review if the terms
exceed 5 years.
If the compensation is 10 times
the total compensation that
lowest paid regular full-time
employee at the institution.
The Board of Finance was these
contracts, the contract cannot
impair the financial standing or
limiting of the institution's
ability to invest in students.
Unwanted terms in excessive
severance compensations or
financial benefits will be
reviewed, identify financial
imprudent terms and deemed
anomalous or from similar
agreements.
Uh, it also reviews indemnity
clauses and the releases of
liability for the state.
It
Increases the fiduciary
responsibilities in the civil
actions that can be brought
under a duty of care, a duty of
good faith, a duty of uninvited
loyalty.
It can bring several cases in
action for the breach of these
fiduciary duties against the the
regents to enjoy and compel
performance and impound public
funds and seeks equitable
relief.
Senate Bill 266 does not.
Not prohibit
State educ educational
institutions or community
colleges from the candidate of
their choice. It merely provides
a review process for prudent
spending of public funds.
that'll introduce my expert
witness, uh Billy Jimenez.
Uh, from the
Department of Justice.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Billy Minnis,
Deputy Attorney General for the
New Mexico Department of
Justice. Um, just wanna echo
some of the points that that
Senator Munoz made. This is a
very important piece of
legislation and just to provide
you all with some context. Um, I
think you've all seen in the
news the issues that we've seen
at Western New Mexico
University, um with some
spending issues, um, lack of
financial prudence in that
particular case, what gave rise
to this legislation was the idea
that while Joseph Shepherd
the WNMU president was under
investigation from the state
auditor and and remains so to
this to this day, um, you know,
the Board of Regents for Western
New Mexico took the opportunity
to negotiate a severance
agreement which gave uh Doctor
Shepherd $1.9 million in
severance compensation, uh, full
tenure track professorship and a
sabbatical. I believe of 8
months. Um, and so on the heels
of some of those findings out of
that investigation and quite
frankly, the lawsuit that's
still ongoing.
There was a need to address some
of these higher education con
contract issues uh in, in law.
And so with that, I'm happy to
stand for questions.
Anything else, Senator, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
board, what we don't always see
is the underlying contracts
either. There may be a provost
that may have vehicles.
Uh, other comp insurance,
healthcare that continues on
some of these other comps that
we only see a dollar value of
the contract of this president
or this provost is getting paid
this and the sunshine Portal.
Um, what you don't see is the
underlying comp packages that
that also bring up the number um
that are not.
Really in purview of, of every
person in this China portal.
That will stand for questions.
Thank you, out to the audience,
those in support.
Those in opposition.
OK, um, let me check online
first. They want to support. No
one didn't support one in
opposition. So those in
opposition, if you would please,
you have up to 2 minutes.
Good day, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Jacob Smith
Sandoval with the Governor to
Change Project. I must urge you
all to vote against SB 266 until
amended to include oversight
into the process as only the
Attorney General's office, uh,
doesn't seem to hold people
account hold institutions
accountable individually or
evenly across our state. Um, I
know this from experiences I
have reported multiple
infractions of illicit activity
carried out by the University of
New Mexico several months ago to
the Attorney General's office.
The Attorney General's office
has elect to investigate it or
that has ended up in exposing
all staff, student and faculty
to illicit activities. This lack
of due regard of law by the
Attorney General's office shows
that they are unable to put
aside biases to ensure the
safety and security of all
higher education.
This is all from higher
education leadership, and it is
harmful to our state. Therefore,
I must request that it is
amended to ensure all rights no
matter the institution or bias
are protected as I am tired of
hearing snitches get stitches
and end up in ditches when you
mess with the UNM council.
Thank you for your time. And
y'all have a great day.
Thank you, Vanessa.
Chairman Souls, members of
Senate Education Committee,
Vanessa Hawker, I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, we stand in opposition
of this bill due to the
potential accreditation actions
that it may have on our
institutions. It threatens
institutions' ability to obtain
institutional accreditation as
the board will have out outside
influence placed on it in the
hiring of the president as
Senate Bill 266.
Requires the adoption requires
the board to adopt any changes
that the state board of Finance
or the Attorney General's office
requires of it, or if the uh
attorney general or state board
of finance rejects the contract,
the board must either
renegotiate or move on to
another candidate. If an
institution does not have
institutional accreditation, it
cannot receive federal funds.
If an institution cannot receive
Fed funds, not only can they not
receive grant funds from this
federal government, they cannot
receive any federal financial
aid. Our students would be
ineligible for Pell grants.
Additionally, if an institution
does not have institutional
accreditation. Our students are
graduates cannot sit for
licensure exams. All New Mexico
higher ed institutions are
accredited by the higher
learning.
commission and not having undue
influence is one of the
requirements for accreditation
by HLC. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Linda Segel, I'm
a longtime elected board member
of the Santa Fe Community
College, and I have to say that
we were all quite shocked at
the, the settlement agreement
and think that if this bill just
addressed review of of of
settlement agreements like that,
it would certainly be the
advantageous for the colleges
and universities as, as Vanessa
mentioned, this can
have a, a, a severe adverse
impact on our accreditation and
we um.
To hire a president requires so
much thought about what the kind
of person that we need, where is
their experience from, are they
gonna fit in with our cultures,
and that's not something that
the board of finance is going to
have any in any knowledge of and
the fact that we make offers for
presidents for their salaries
and their and their benefits,
their education benefits, their
car benefits, all those.
kinds of things we do that based
on our knowledge as the
fiduciary, um,
Board members are responsibility
in our fiduciary responsibility
as board members is to make sure
within that we're within our
budget and that we are getting
the best person for the job and
the board of finance cannot
determine that. Thank you.
Thank you.
Please go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
My name is James Chavis. I
represent District 2 for Central
and New Mexico Community
College.
And um I'm here on behalf of the
CNN board to stand in opposition
to Senate Bill 266. Um, we are
elected, um, as board members
and have a fiduciary statutory
duty um to oversee the proper
fiscal running of our
institutions, so we already have
that.
Fiscal, uh, fiscal duty.
There are, there are many things
that are flawed in this bill,
and they're well laid out for
you and the and the and the
legislative analysis. I wanted
to focus on one thing in
particular, and my colleague uh
uh um.
Touched on it. The first thing I
did as a as a board member was
we we hired a new president.
And what struck me about the
process was we had some
excellent qualified.
Qualified candidates.
Well, what struck me about it is
we weren't, they were not only
competing against themselves. We
were competing as an
institution.
To get and attract most quality
uh uh people.
We are not going to have that
ability. If we have to tell a
candidate you have 30 days and
guess what, this contract may
not be, may not be upheld by the
Attorney General or the or the
board of finance. So I strongly
urge you not to support Senate
Bill 266. Thank you.
Thank you
Mark, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee Mark
Savera with the New Mexico
Council of University
presidents. I'm here saying in
opposition to the bill. Um, I
also just want to reinforce what
Vanessa from the NICC mentioned
about how this could jeopardize
the institution's accreditation,
which would result in the
institutions of higher education
losing their Title II funding,
which is financial aid, for
example, it can hinder the
recruitment process and the
process of going to the
different boards. I also wanna
put by the Mexican, the um
Department of.
education, accreditation
colleges, university, you know,
they are an independent
recognized by the corporation
recognized by the United States
Department of Education that
accredits colleges and
universities. And they take this
very seriously.
And finally when it comes,
there's a Deloitte Insight
action with article that talks
about basically that in kids
institutions are finding it more
than that universities face
recruiting and retention
challenges as as it exists at
this time. So with that, Mr.
Chairman, based on those, those
points. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else in the
room in, in opposition.
Online, we have one in
opposition, Terry Cole, please.
Good morning again, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Terry Cole, president and
CEO of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. I'm here
today in opposition to SB 266.
We understand that a certain
incident at one of our
universities has caused great
concern for us too. However,
with all due respect to the good
senators sponsoring the bill. SB
26.
6 places excessive burden on
innocent parties. Our colleges
and universities need the
flexibility to pursue the best
talent available. It matters to
our economic development in the
state. The state constitution
charges the governing boards of
our higher ed institutions
through the responsibility to
govern. They need to be allowed
to do their jobs without the
inherent delays and frankly, the
micromanaging that the board of
Finance
is asked to do. We question why
an appointed state board of
finance would be better suited
to handle the oversight of every
single one of our key university
hires, then appointed regents.
We ask you today with all due
respect to please vote no on
this bill. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Is that all?
Opposition, OK. Senator back to
you, any comments before we go
to questions from the committee.
I'll tell you, I may get myself
in a little bit of trouble at
home.
I'll tell you something that
happened to my wife who was
working at a charter school that
was at UNM.
And she was sexually harassed by
the director.
Filed a complaint.
The complaint was awarded, we
never took you and him to court
for any fiscal.
That director is still employed
at UNM, not as the director or
president.
But there's another position
he's moved off, he's not even in
the state, he's still teaching
at UNM.
These things still happen. You
can, the guy that hunted Bigfoot
at UNM is still employed at UNM.
Student resources.
And something that they've never
even found the phone. We found
dinosaurs but we never found
Bigfoot and it's still employed
at UNM.
What happens? I mean, we're
talking about one incident, but
they continue to happen and
continue to happen and they're
not all public, and not all.
In the front page of the paper.
The reason the board of finances
is there because they approved
the university's budget.
They know what the universities
can afford with their budget.
We're not trying to hinder them
in any way.
or create undue influence to
lose any accreditation.
What we're saying is, give us a
process that's clear.
We understand what their
contract is and what their
contract is going to end with
and that we don't end up with
these.
Out the door, signature deals. I
have not confirmed this, but I
have heard that.
The state auditors still
looking, but there's a million
dollar contract for lobbying
coming out of Western New Mexico
at the tail end of that.
Um
We saw that the intimate
sheathletic director at the end
of the presidency, get a
contract in the tail end,
walking out the door and so we
have to.
Get some fiscal control but not
hinder the universities and not
hinder them in hiring.
University.
There's some amendments that
probably do need to happen to
this bill. I won't disagree with
anybody on that, um, but we'll
have to figure out what those
are going to look like and maybe
you guys can help us with that
with that, Mr. Che will stand
for questions.
Taking questions from the
committee.
Senator Thornton
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm, I'm trying to get my head
wrapped around this. It sounds
like uh a lot of uh additional
administration and I see a lot
of folks opposing this bill, and
I, I guess what I need is some
explanation from someone who
opposes this spill as to
Uh, they're claiming that this
could impact or threaten
accreditation. I, I need to
understand.
How that could happen. Is there
anyone?
Who thinks can explain how this
could affect accreditation.
Welcome, Secretary.
Thank you.
Hello, Stephanie Rodriguez,
secretary of the Higher
Education department. So, the
Higher Learning Commission
accrediteds all accredits, all
higher education institutions in
the country. Um, within that,
there are rules, policies, and
guidelines that every
institution must follow. And in
those guidelines, every single
accredited university has to
have an independent governing
board.
And that is within the policies.
So, Mr. Chair, so what you're
saying is, by having this
additional oversight.
Is that
Going against those policies.
Mr. Chair, if you read the
policy, there is potential
impact to the higher education
institutions, if they are not uh
independent governing door
governing boards that get to
make those independent decisions
for hire and fire of the
presidents and chancellors.
I can, Mr. Chair, I can
actually, it might be easier if
I read the actual policy. Would
you prefer that? That would
help. Yes.
Do you have it?
You want to read that, Billy?
Mr. Chair, Senator Thornton, uh,
it's policy 2C of the revised
criteria for accreditation
without markup, um, CRRT.
Point B, 10, 0.010.
Um, it states board governance,
governance and discharging its
fiduciary duties, the
institutions, governing board is
free from undue external
influence and empowered to act
in the best interests of the
institution, including the
students it serves.
That's, that's helpful. So now I
understand how this potential.
You could impact accreditation
for a university. Thank you very
much. That helps clarify that
for me.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Interesting bill
The um
Uh, I understand the reaction
that we're all having in the
state to what happened at
Western University.
Um
And it goes into the annals of
maybe.
Incredible scams, but my sense
is, is that is one instance in
which
We're looking at otherwise,
holding all the other
universities, community
colleges, multiple levels of
senior levels of uh provost,
vice provosts, athletic
director, and any other person
performing similar executive
functions to have a review.
Um
I
This, uh, having recently come
off the uh hospital
consolidation which carried out
as a good concept, but then
turned into a phenomenal
overreach and is really.
going to be destructive to the
state because capital just isn't
gonna come here if that bill
ever gets anywhere.
The um
This, this bill to me
overreaches what are uh just as
the
Overreaching the the boards and
organizations and healthcare.
This is overreaching.
Uh, in education.
And I know, uh, having been a
candidate, um,
During my career in various
situations.
If
If, if the recruiter can't make
a deal most of the time, right
then and there.
It isn't a, oh, but guess what?
And then it goes into a delayed
process for 2 to 3 months to get
all these different entities to
buy in.
Why would that candidate wanna
wanna come here and then
secondly,
We start to get a reputation.
That
Um
You, you don't really, it isn't
a one and done. It's a, it's a
multiple and who knows who can
weigh in and slow it up. So I
think that we're really hurting
ourselves and being able to
attract.
And uh and and if we want to
make a higher retain.
That candidate. So it's mostly
on that that I'm, I'm finding
this something that is
counterproductive really to the
quality of education in the
state and I would have a hard
time supporting it. Let's just a
simple accreditation issues.
I've
I'm a recovering academic from
the University of New Mexico,
um, and other such places and
Um
Uh, and, and have had health
plans and businesses accredited,
and when you, when you can't get
accredited.
And you can't open, you can't.
Can't get money, you can't get
other stuff. So I think that's a
real
potential flaw of the bill as
well.
So I now that I've been able to
state my opinion, I welcome the
The opposing views to that.
The bill presenters. Thank you.
Certainly, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Hickey, um, the
intention of the bill isn't to
Tank and obviously there, there,
there are delays experienced
with this bill and approving the
contracts because a 30 day
period by which to approve the,
the contracts, but the the
intention is not to hold up the
process or, or, or slow it down
so we lose candidates. I, I
mean, I would say that these are
some of the highest paid
positions in state government in
New Mexico and so.
There does seem to be a need to
have some oversight. So there's
a little bit of checks and
balances to make sure that, that
when we hire and commit to
somebody long term that it's a
prudent financial me. um, and
just real quick to touch on the
accreditation issue, I just want
to get back to that real fast
and
This is all assuming that it's
an accreditation issue based on
the fact that it's not within
the best interest of the
university. I think that the
alternate could be true to the
extent that you think it is in
the best interests of the
university to make sure that
some of the highest contracts in
the state are reviewed. I don't
think that runs afoul of the
accreditation, Mr. Chairman,
just to
Push back on that little push
back.
Um,
That, that's an opinion.
Um, I, I think I'm seeing more
concrete language about the
accreditation.
Secondly, I would say and and
and I think this state in so
many areas has this trouble.
try to hire
High caliber individuals in
state positions the length of
time that it takes.
They're going to go elsewhere.
And I mean, we, we, we, we seem
to fail to understand.
concept
that
We compete, and we were having
this, this difficulty in hiring
physicians and other health
providers in the state. There is
competition, and right now we
are losing out for various
things in healthcare and can't
bring people into the states, so
I worry again that we're going
to lose the high quality
candidates when you put them
through this process, I do think
that we need to hold the boards
accountable if we found find
things where they they go ride
and and
could pull them out and put the
press on them and, and
everything else, but I don't, I
think this guardrail will be
counterproductive.
To the quality of education,
higher education in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
in her boat
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
One of the questions already
been answered I was going to ask
the secretary to answer and
confirm on the accreditation.
Like we all realize that that
there is an issue.
Probably need
I'm all for that, Mr. Sheriff
Senator, I'm all for that in the
roundhouse I'm all for that in
our chamber. I've.
try to do some of that myself,
so I'm not against that.
I'm just concerned about the
mechanism.
I have some of the same concerns
as Senator Hickey.
But he's talking about.
It's kind of putting that
additional barrier.
Well that's gonna impact folks
that are coming in and taking
some of these positions.
Um, really concerned about the
accreditation, um, and I know
you're not doing this to impact
the accredit.
Believe, believe what you
believe to be true, um, but I'm
just concerned about the funding
and folks and student loans and
people going to school and that
could be a huge.
I believe there's an issue. I
want to see some ways that we
can.
You know, have more
transparency, hold folks
accountable in positions. I just
don't believe that this bill.
Um, is able to do that without
um unintended consequences that
could be.
I won't be able to support the
bill.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. Other questions?
another one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing the
bill forward. I have a technical
question, as it appears that
Senate Bill 266 removes
authority from both appointed
and elected boards, um, in terms
of employment and compensation
for an institutional president.
So my question is, how do you
foresee regent authority.
Mr. Chainnava, um, region
authority again, still.
The region still retain the
ability to select who they want
to select. Um, this is merely
just an opportunity for those
contracts to be reviewed, highly
compensated individuals,
compensation agreements,
incentives.
As as the center mentioned car
agreements, um, things that are
could be seen as imprudent, but
in terms of the Regent's overall
ability and authority to manage
the institution, that would
remain.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, can I
add to that just real quick, you
know, we're, we're looking at
the the the regions at Western
New Mexico and now I don't know
how they're going to get regions
because those regions are now
eligible to be sued.
For the prior region's actions,
right?
And so at some point in time,
you have to
Figure out how we're going to
handle this. I mean, this is.
they need to be tuned up a
little bit, yeah, and fix
accreditation issues, uh, fix
some other issues inside the
bill.
But there has to be some type of
accountability. Mesa lands, uh,
which still exists today, which
should not exist, was run into
the ground by a person over
there and they didn't even have
a student account.
And we're getting state funding
and and it's such a small school
that there was no accountability
for anything that happened over
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you. Um, um, kind of a
quick question, uh, senator and
and Mr. Jimenez, you just
indicated that the finance
committee would only be
reviewing this.
If there were a huge contract,
could they say no and stop the
contract in spite of what the
board or the regent said.
Mr. Chair, yes, that's correct.
There's an opportunity for both
review and then
Approval, rejection, and
modification of that contract.
And so it's not as you indicated
before, just review, they would
have oversight over what the
region said.
And that's what I cannot support
and I think that violates uh the
very things that was very clear
in the um
The piece that you read as far
as accreditation that that is
not an independent region and
board that has somebody not just
reviewing but oversight. All of
those contracts become public
records.
You know, and so the review is
always there if somebody is
concerned about it for the
auditor and others to start
watching, but it is not just
review, it is oversight and the
ability to stop those. This
bill, in my opinion, has already
caused huge damage and harm to
higher education who are
particularly those universities
that are looking to hire new
leaders, and people are going to
shy away from New Mexico when
they know that they're
negotiating contracts with are
not the ones that are really
negotiating contracts with when
there's all these extra reviews.
processes that actually have
oversight. So,
Thank you.
Uh, the will of the committee,
please.
I'll make the motion. I moved
the table.
You're, if you'll then require a
second, but thank you. You'll
read the
The roll on the table.
Yes.
Yes, this bill is tabled in the
Education Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. uh, just very quickly, and
I'll read it in more depth for
and people watching online, but
this Saturday, uh, we are very
fortunate to have a viewing of
what's called, it's, I think
it's a feature length count
counted out math is power. It's
about the importance of math and
math education and why we've
fallen behind and what we can do
about it is from what I can
gather, I'll make announcements
on the floor also, but encourage
people if you don't have other
things on Friday afternoon from
2 to 4.
in this room will be uh viewing
of counted out, it is supported
by this committee because it's
our room. uh Lano Lano
Foundation, German Consulting
and Northern New Mexico Steam
coalition. Thank you, we are
adjourned.
