Very good the.
Good morning everyone thank you
for being patient welcome to the
Senate education on March
fifteenth the the the ads of
March right in that if you.
We've got a full agenda the
first thing I want to let people
know are you working with the
ranking member of senator
Neville we've identified three
bills to do on consent and we
can get those out of the way
quickly send those
representatives on the way so
they don't have to wait in our
community and things up this
morning out for the committee
those are House Bill B. thirty
one which is the school district
twenty twenty two transportation
all our list Representative
Romero it is house bill one
eighty eight is amended the
secondary computer science
teacher license bill and house
bill one eighty nine community
governance attorney he need them
that Valerie's
is there anyone on the committee
that has that is in opposition
to those being done as a
consensus.
Senator Padilla Mr chairman not
not in opposition I'm gonna be
helping representative Sarinana
so I would move do pass on H. B.
one eighty eight as amended.
Okay we'll start with H. B. one
eighty eight as amended is for a
second for that I thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you bye Senator pope
Marianna if you'll call the roll
on H. B. one eighty eight as
amended.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
He stepped off understand okay
thank you Senator Hickey.
Need help he's in health House
help yes Senator Kernan yes
Senate Bill yes Senator Padilla
yes Senator pandemic.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes.
Can you pass on house bill one
eighty eight as amended will
three thirty one school district
twenty twenty two transportation
hold harmless.
Moving to pass right to pass.
Thank you I think that was
Senator Pinto.
The rope with.
Apologize.
You'll call the roll please.
I'm sorry Sir.
We're on.
One eight one eight three thirty
one.
We started one eighty eight yes
I.
I think finally figured that out
we're trying to go too quickly
for you let me down if we get
out okay Senator Brandt.
Senator Kim Hickey Senator
Kernan yes Senator Neville yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Yes Senator souls yes okay we
have a due pass on that we have
a few thousand health bills
three thirty one and now house
bill one eighty nine community
governance.
Ernie PGM that salary yes that
are Representative Garcia is yes
do we have a motion for that as
part of our content do pass Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chair at seconded
by Senator pope very and if
you'll call the roll on house
bill one eighty nine.
Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pulp yes Senator
souls.
Yes we have to pass on that.
We're just rolling along the.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna run back
and forth I know Senator Hickey
is doing the same to the same
committee.
Ellen Senator pope and I are
both back and forth on other
ones too so we just kind of need
to make sure to watch that we
are are keeping a quorum here in
in education
with that and we've had lots of
just look at before we went live
but chairman Lundstrom house
bill six eighty four this year
distribution welcome back no
there's been lots of work done
on this if you lead us through
that with the help than of the
LFC staff and what the changes
are what things that we do with
the amendment that we have the
right all right well thank you
senator thank you Mr chairman
and committee for hearing us
again this is house bill six
before I start Mr chairman I'd
like to extend a special thank
you to Senator Stewart in
helping us go through each one
of the sections and I believe
that we've got great concurrence
here I'd also like to thank all
of those folks Senator on this.
M. meeting this morning that
have and just major advocates in
support of of moving this
important piece of legislation
Mr Chairman if we could could we
please show the chart I think
that's the easiest way to
demonstrate what we've done and
and how the things have changed.
Mr chairman in Merion if you
will give Joseph Simon the
ability to share his screen.
Share now.
Already thank you Joseph I think
this is this is probably the
easiest way to understand what
we've done between house bill
six and Senate bill forty one
twice amended
and what the proposed Senate
education amendment to house
bill six would be we've also
asked the staff and they've done
an excellent job in identifying
by page number so you'll be able
to see exactly where these
components are but under item
one we remove the funding
formula credits from the SCG
calculation in both bills and in
the amendment it does the same.
Secondly an additional revenue
for school districts and charter
schools with the impact aid
forced reserve payments are half
mill levy revenue restrictions
what we're saying here and in
our proposed amendment to your
committee is additional revenue
is not restricted but school
districts and charter schools
will prioritize funds for the
Indian Education Act capital
outlay and purposes allowed for
at risk program units.
Third is the capital outlay
spending from unrestricted
sources would be considered in
calculation of state and local
match for capital outlay
projects.
Posted madman is yes using a
five year rolling average faced
in it beginning of FY twenty
five.
Revenue from Senate bill nine
and house bill thirty three and
expenditures for teacher housing
will not be in would be
excluded.
So that yes CEO say will drive
rules defining capital expenses
from unrestricted revenue after
consulting with school districts
had and other stakeholders.
Number four accountability
reporting mechanisms annual
educational plan a new spending
and outcomes report and with the
statewide online financial
reporting system I really like
all the reporting issues that
Senator brought up.
Next is what is reported a
narrative explaining how school
districts or charter schools
will use federal and local
revenue actually uses uses of
that revenue our programs and
services improved outcomes for
students budgeted as CJ in the
but in the three categories.
and.
The state from and lied to this
table by school site and local
education agency.
And then report to the
legislature analysis and
identification of effective
programs provided to the Elie
estate and LFC by November
fifteenth and then lastly
creates a new tribal
consultation requirement and and
that was now in our proposed
amendment so Mr chairman and
committee this gives you a I
have very high level overview I
think it captures everything
that that we've done as I say it
was a very good collaboration
and we would stand for questions
Mr chairman and committee.
We can take the chart down now
please.
There we go thank you.
Thank you madam chairman I guess
right right now I like to open
it up for public comment do we
have anyone in opposition.
The house bill six.
We did not have any members of
the public register in advance
to speak in opposition.
Is there anyone in this room
room that is an opposition and.
Please raise your hand.
All right see none do we have
anyone in support of house bill
six for public comment.
Senator yes we had a few people
who registered it in advance to
speak.
We will begin with Kenneth
Bobroff.
The.
Mark Fletcher.
Thank you Mr chairman Senate
Education Committee members I'm
Marc Fleisher registered
lobbyist for Gallup McKinley
county school district in the
city of Gallup both strongly
support H. B. six so what
expressed thanks for the average
over the years for the Sanchez
and others who have fought to
three traded that day to the
local school districts in
addition to the Gallup McKinley
school districts I've been
authorized by Texas emails from
tribal communities to express
their support in case you're not
able to speak today including
the Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president.
Love Laguna Act Comentarios into
the problems also for H. B. six
and encourage you to support the
passage of eighty six as well
thank you for the opportunity to
speak and I won't go over the
bill because I think the Sanchez
an excellent job thank you very
much.
Now we will go to those raising
their hands if you wish to speak
in support of house bill six
please raise your hand at this
time we will begin with J.
sentiment.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee J. son John is
registered lobbyists for the
Navajo Nation office the
president as a vice president
Leiser we come before you in
support of house bill six we
want to think Representative
moved Lundstrom for bringing
this legislation forward.
We also want to think of Senate
pro tem Stewart for her hard
work on this.
House bill six removes a seventy
five percent credit taken in
public school funding formula
for impact aid.
Of the local half mil property
tax levy also the Navajo Nation
along with the tribes in New
Mexico have been advocating for
this change for a long time said
school districts with high
native American student
population will get the full
benefit of federal impact aid.
We ask.
What we agree with the need for
accountability and the companion
house bill six does that and
reporting requirements.
Thank you for your time this
morning we urge you to pass
house bill six thank you.
Thank you very much that we have
done this program.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee Dennis
Roch speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico school
superintendents association we
applaud the work of chairman a
chairman Lundstrom and Senator
Stewart we believe that this is
the this ammendment before you
captures the best of both of the
bills house bill six instead of
forty one want to address the
equity issues around capital for
districts who are unable to
raise their own local dollars
because of the the the location
of property in the tax base but
also to make sure that the
dollar state unrestricted so
that schools can use them to
target the students that are
most in need of support so our
kudos to you into the committee
and we stand in strong support
of this amended.
Thank you very much that we have
more enrollment any.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I just Mr Roach I
applaud Senator Stewart and
Representative Lundstrom for the
hard work as well as all those
work over the last few days to
meld these two bills together it
is a combination of the two
bills we provide very agreeable
soon the public school district
I a representative in the public
school district as director of
finance and we are support of
this bill and urged the senators
on the committee to pass this
bill and with on thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have a governor pandemic.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is
governor Pentila with the pueblo
Zuni.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today in the I am here to
support
the house bill six the H. B. six
you know it's with other bills
that.
introduced every year every
legislative session we continue
to advocate and lobby for to the
state to pass this legislation
and to provide our students the
funds necessary.
Find the quality education that
they deserve and are entitled
to.
Simple you know our students can
not be denied every year.
You know the state needs to fix
the impact aid equalization
guarantee.
The session you know I I I've
been before legislators sessions
and it's like we we say the same
things every year but you know
our children continue to be
denied.
And so I urge you all of you to
for the sake of our children our
students are your need to pass
most bills six look what thank
you.
Thank you very much next up we
have John Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good morning John
Thompson registered lobbyists
for central consolidated school
district and that Mr Chairman we
we ask you to support this piece
of legislation this is been many
years in the making and and for
the reasons just stated it
specifically our governor
pandemic we would ask you to
support this bill and and I'd
like to think chairman Lundstrom
and speaker Egolf and all those
who have been involved in this
effort over the years for their
hard work and for their time and
energy they put forward thank
you so much.
Thank you finally we have the
doctor Hanks.
Hi John Hanks Gallup McKinley
county schools thank you so much
Representative Lundstrom as well
as Senator Stewart for working
so hard on this legislation it's
vitally important for the
students that we serve and we
highly encourage you to pass
this piece of legislation.
We have an.
Thank you chairman.
This is Joe again with the New
Mexico school boards association
our membership.
Supports both both the pieces of
legislation and we stated that
in the past
we we support a hold harmless
provision for many reductions in
district operating budgets as a
result of the US department of
education's decision we think of
Representative Lundstrom and
Senator Stewart.
For coming together on this bill
and we're we're pleased to stand
in support thank you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
wants to speak in support is
reserve.
Good morning.
This is Kevin Mitchell.
The only count.
got my name is Kevin Mitchell
the government can County
schools good morning Senate
chair and Committee members
And now I am in full support and
the passage of H. B. six and.
It's a long time coming
Where the impact aid to be able
to reach its program to actually
generate the money to the
federal government.
I would like to thank
Representative Patty Lundstrom
and Senator Stewart all the work
that they have put into this.
I really appreciate it and I
hope that
it passed today to dissent I am
in full support thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have just as COVID all.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee just less
computer Albuquerque public
schools we think chairwoman
monster for bringing this issue
forward in working with Senator
Stewart leading flexibility for
local districts to allocate
funds thank you so much.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you and my apologies I I
believe we still need to vote on
the amendment so if we can get a
our.
Removed from from the committee.
The amendment.
Also can Mr.
Thank you very and we take a
role but.
Yes Senator Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
Senator pope we have lost our
quorum without Senator Brandt
Representative.
Okay so.
It.
Mr chair who else is that not on
site search Brandt there I think
everybody's going Senator
Padilla and Senator souls well
let's let's see if we can call
one of those back for a few
minutes.
I will step next door and talk
to Center souls for a moment.
I'll be right back.
And I will text as well.
Work so Senator Neville is this
what happens the last week.
Those bus jumping around the
difference is is
You could be running to three
computers I was doing that a
couple days ago I had to
complete.
Yes that's the benefit of the
virtual world right at the
normal you happy running it to
different rooms right
physically.
The other yeah you're physically
gone so.
It's hard to get forms in.
Usually we pretty well ended up
committees by now.
This is running a little long to
purchase more maybe so zoom
situation.
I'm back over education and I'll
when I get back over there I'll
head back over and we'll just
play this little game so we have
a quorum back when that now that
I'm back in the room.
Senator Pinto.
We.
What are we are we still voting.
Okay so we do now have a quorum
so Senator we're voting on the
adoption of the amendment to
house bill six yeah okay we have
a lot yes.
We.
It all right now it's okay
Senator Pinto your perfect okay
all right thank you how do will
call now.
Okay Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Yes.
About.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes we have an amended
bill.
So Mr Chairman out with the pass
on the bill if there's no
discussion.
It was what are technical
difficulty with the bill that
needs to be addressed.
Yes Senator Pinto did you want
to bring that up and I think
it's on.
Page three of them well now that
was on the amendment so I'm
sorry go ahead and open.
Mr chair we just adopted the
first amendment but I don't
believe we are who are the the
reason I'm very.
I was out of the room so you.
We didn't do any other
amendments.
Okay so would you like to the.
To move to that amendment to fix
the numbering on the the bill
now.
We.
Last page on page thirty of the
amendment it number seven states
remember sections to correspond
with the amendments so if I
think this handle set.
Yes I think it does.
That typically we were read
number right there where it
happened but I think you're
right though never mind back to
Senator Kernan we have a is that
alright Senator Pinto I don't
want to cut you off.
Thank.
Dissipating by phone you don't
get to see the hard copy.
Some of the technology
difficulties we deal with we
have a motion for a due passi
Senator Kernan.
Mr chair.
Thank you bye post Marianna if
you'll call the roll on house
bill six.
Senator Brandt what.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes.
Well yes Senator Pinto.
I'm yes I do okay yes on cinder
penta Senator Padilla yes gone
out Senator Padilla you're but
you're back high I'm sorry
Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes okay we
have a due pass on house bill
six is amended.
Graduation chairman and and
thank you for all the work on
uninsured it's always nice when
we think we everybody's happy
that we got something better
than we started so thank you for
being here and on the floor I
think from here where does this
go to finance first.
Now Mr chairman for I think it
does and I want to thank you in
particular and all the committee
I think when we get all our
hands together on things like
this you always come up with a
better product so thank you
everyone.
Yes ma'am thank you and thank
you for being an Senate
education with us.
I know so Representative Romero
is over Cherry his committee so
we'll try to get him over here
where we and for house bill one
eighty four we do on house bill
two nineteen by literacy
development framework passports
Representative Garrett and
Trujillo is Representative
Garrett that that's.
She's probably still over in
house education Mr chair or
representative of the how bio.
Two eighty seven the is
Representative Johnson with
access to culturally appropriate
services.
Morning yes I am here.
Wonderful let's go to the gym
your bill house bill two eighty
seven as a matter access to
culturally appropriate services.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I do have
that a couple of expert
witnesses on stand by.
They are to reset Galle mass and
Nancy Rodriguez.
I don't know they were in the.
The audience.
In the meantime a house bill two
eighty seven is a bill that will
create a task force for the
purpose of conducting an asset
mapping and gal Gadot at gap
analysis to determine.
The status of public school
students and their access to
culturally appropriate social
services throughout the state.
ship of the task force will
consist of twenty one members
who are as stakeholders in
community communities
Representative as social
services in rural areas schools
and tribal communities.
The need for behavioral health
and social services at this time
for our use is critically
important.
Now that we have gone through
some of the darkest days of the
Covid pandemic.
Many of our children have
experienced the loss of not just
one parent but both parents many
of our children have lost not
just one grandparent but both
grandparents they've lost family
members state lost friends in
their communities it lost
teachers so this bill well and
his staff in the behavioral
health and social service areas.
By finding out if we are
providing culturally relevant
and appropriate.
Services to our children and
families with that Mr chair I
stand for questions.
Representative Johnson we will
now go to public comment we'll
start with any opposition.
Did not have any members of the
public register in advance to
speak in opposition.
Thank you we're we're on house
bill two eighty seven do we have
anyone in the zoom room right
now that is an opposition a
possible to accept.
Seeing none we will move to
supporters of house bill two
eighty seven.
Register can speak and support
we will begin with data go over.
mail Leiberman.
A lease deal.
The Lara.
Dr Karen Sanchez Griego.
Hello.
Chairman Berman.
My list so we will go to those
who are here with us today if
you wish to speak in support of
house bill two eighty seven
please raise your hand we will
begin with Charlotte modeling
now.
Good morning Mr chairman of the
committee my name is trying
going on I work with Juliana
coop I'm here on behalf of the
New Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs and we ask you
to stand with us in support
house bill two eighty seven
today thank you all so much.
Thank you very much and I just
saw merry par Sanchez.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you sponsors for
bringing this bill forward I'm
my name is merry par Sanchez I'm
the president of NEA New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you very much and we will
dial.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and then we will
time representing New Mexico
voices of children in support H.
B. two eighty seven access to
social workers and counselors
can mitigate the impact of
adverse childhood experiences
which can be harmful to lifelong
health and can make it more
challenging for students to
graduate in light of the COVID
nineteen pandemic student access
to culturally appropriate health
behavioral mental health and
social services support will be
more that will be it more
critical than ever before for
child well being as many more
experienced trauma and hardship
over the past year for these
reasons we support H. B. two
eighty seven asked the committee
to vote in support of it today
thank you.
Thank you very much finally I
saw that chairman Berman has
entered presume Sharon you had
signed up.
Yes thank you I'm thank you good
morning Mr chair committee
members I'm sharing vermin I met
New Mexico first and as a staff
member and also register of
this.
We convened as health town hall
last year which was held
remotely over a period of five
weeks involved over five hundred
people and one thing that
threaded throughout the
discussion.
Of through all the groups that
was I was addressing many of the
consensus based recommendations
was an emphasis on cultural and
linguistically appropriate
services.
The work this task force to be
charged with addresses many
points raised by New Mexicans in
our town hall the data and
analysis for clarify gaps in
understanding about what our
students need in our many
diverse communities in the
state.
Urged the sponsors to also
consider requiring membership of
at least two students on the
task force the perspectives
would be invaluable thanks very
much and we respectfully
encourage you to vote in favor
of house bill two eighty seven.
Thank you very much that the
public comment at this time.
Thank you to all Kara it's
always nice to have that run so
smoothly
we are now to the bill and as we
start I would like to propose an
amendment to the bill the
concern here is that the.
The high winds of up only about
six months or so to get started
on this are awfully short and we
got lots of concern whether that
can be done and so and hopefully
of Representative you'll see
this as a friendly amendment the
amendment all the pieces what
needs to change are all on page
nine.
I'll give everybody a moment to
get over to page nine.
And on line eight.
It would be strike twenty twenty
one and insert twenty twenty
two.
One thirteen right twenty twenty
one and insert line for twenty
twenty two.
On sixteen strike twenty twenty
two input in twenty twenty three
and on nineteen strike twenty
twenty two and put in twenty
twenty three all that does is
extend out a little bit for this
group to get their work done so
that if they can get it done
earlier right but it doesn't put
him into a time crunch where
they don't necessarily get the
best product John and so I would
propose that as an amendment to
house bill two eighty seven as
already once amended
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
committee members at that is a
friendly amendment and I do also
want to know that this project
will be funded by a junior
monies that we have allocated
among several of us
Representative so that was the
first amendment
that took place we took out that
procreation.
Piece of of the bill so yes that
is a friendly amendment Mr
chair.
Thank you is there any
discussion from the committee on
the amendment.
Yes I see your hand up.
The amendment.
Okay.
The amendment have a motion that
again anyone discussion on the
amendment at the just extend the
times out by a years time for
completion.
Their second on the amendment.
It I think that was Senator
Hickey.
And senator I apologize I know
you were gonna do this amended
but we can see in the room that
point so I had to grapple with
that I apologize no problem
that's just for all state so it
this morning.
Yes thank you Marianna if you'll
call the roll on the amendment.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes in center souls yes we have
an amended bill your now twice
amended representative of
discussions on the bill Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative I didn't
really have a I think I'm
actually goodnight you caught
that thing that senator if you
caught I wanted to I just wonder
if that was going to be enough
time Representative to get that
worked out so I'm glad that you
saw it as a friendly amendment
and thank you for that and then
also the question on the
appropriation but it sounds like
you've taken care of that
through your junior monies is
that what you said.
Yes yes senator Mr chair and
senator yes we initially had an
appropriations request and then
I get together with a couple of
a few of my colleagues and so we
do have the money a hundred
fifty thousand of funds in the
junior money that will we will
be allocated to this project.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative that just like
wraps up with a nice little bow
on top thank you that's all I
have.
Thank you for the other
questions from the committee.
I'm moving to France as I said
it Senator Pinto just raise your
hand circle.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
Can you why in the committee
because we do have a couple new
members about
how behavior health operates
within I. H. S..
Mr chair Senator would you
repeat that question.
could you lie in the Committee
about how I. H. S. is
incorporated I mean I just
behavior health is incorporated
into I. H. S..
The Indian health service I'm
sorry.
that behavioral health programs
of the state is incorporated
into Indian Health Service yes
how are they related to each
other in some Senator
communication between those two
agencies.
Yes I believe as they are they
they are invited to the seat at
the table
because we Representative and we
have constituents and the same
communities in the same families
the same school districts we all
work with the social service
programs whether it be CYFD the
school district Indian Health
Service County hospitals.
And so on Mr chair and senator.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee one of the things with
them behavioral health and we
talk about culturally relevant
and I was hoping you it up
touched on this Representative
is how we have the medicine man
incorporated into the I. H. S..
Mr chair Senator yes that is
correct.
And they are funded through the
federal government.
The medicine.
The Indian health service
responded that yes the medicine
man.
I I believe so I think they have
different funding sources some
are paid through nonprofit some
are paid through the Navajo
nation and other tribes and
pueblos and some are paid
through pass through funding for
the federal government they're
different behavioral health
services.
Thank you Mr Representative that
Mr chairman members of the
committee amendment the little
bit so I had some students and
high school level who we're
seeking not seeking I guess they
were having issues behavioral
issues within the school and one
of the counselors and I'm
talking about down the can the
county school district
decided to well I don't think
she decided I think they start
to have group meetings and one
of the things that came up was
about having
not so much having a ceremony
but yes
kind of talking about their
culture and their background and
how they're
you know stir spirituality in
that sense and they were having
these group meetings and then
they were disbanded the council
became under fire from the
districts saying you know that
was it something that they could
do these barriers are dead.
That we think that our children
from doing but also and
Representative the reason I ask
about the medicine man was that
the you know after your report
is done that you know more
funding is needed that there are
ways we can try to advocate for
more funding in that sense if
there are gaps because we do
have.
I know there is issues with some
of our hi your I would choose
the organizational leadership as
far as having someone in those
positions that will advocate for
for this but culturally relevant
behavioral health and making
sure that we.
Incorporate those entities
together so that there's
collaboration but thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Thank.
Thank you Senator Pinto any
other questions from the
committee.
Not seeing any of what was your
the committee please.
Moving to pass.
Senator Padilla seconded by
Senator Pinto and if you will
call the roll please.
As a matter.
Your branch.
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan.
Thank Senator Nobel yes.
Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
pope yes Senator souls yes we
have Representative you have a
you passed out of Senate
education thank you Mr chair and
thank you committee members have
a great day.
Thank you of and we will now go
to.
Committee where are we are we're
bouncing around today house bill
two nineteen as amended by
literacy development framework
ask our as we're doing that
transition let me just an update
public because we're bouncing
around a little bit you've got
to do pass on house bill six the
state equalization guarantee
distribution House Bill three
thirty one is that you pass on
school district transportation
hold harmless
we have not gotten to one eighty
four as amended yet house bill
one eighty eight secondary
computer science license of the
two passed house bill two sixty
six is amended special education
teacher licenses is a do pass
are we just passed house bill
two eighty seven as amended
access culturally appropriate
services to do passed house bill
one eighty nine community
governments attorney PGM
accelerated the two passed so we
are now on house bill two
nineteen as amended by literacy
development framework task force
Representative Garrett Hey get
away.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
are my two I have to experts who
will also speak Dr Johnson and
Dr Berlin debate gate after I
introduce.
house bill two nineteen as twice
amended
is the by literacy development
framework task force and it
would create a working group of
local language and literacy
experts who would work with PED
to develop a by literacy and
oral language development
framework it identifies and
develops a by literacy framework
that would align with the
already required English
language development and the
state adopted K. twelve Spanish
language standards and the
importance of the oral language
development is that many more
indigenous languages are not
written and so it is vital to
have this
amendment the first amendment
just as reporting to the
legislative finance committee
the second amendment removes the
appropriation we have gained two
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars from junior money and
with that I would like to invite
doctors.
the bottom Johnson from New
Mexico State University to speak
and then doctor Berlin to Begay
from the central consolidated
school district ensure brought
to speak.
Yes good morning everyone
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee and so
what I want to thank you so much
for the opportunity to share
with you the importance of house
bill two nineteen students
participating in bilingual
multicultural education in New
Mexico have the opportunity to
become multilingual by literate
and will take cultural in our
public schools as a member of
the bilingual multicultural
education Advisory Council about
what we want our
responsibilities is an
advisement to the PED related to
professional development the
needs in our state's bilingual
multicultural education programs
on it due to that we didn't
statewide survey of two hundred
ninety eight educators
specifically bilingual educators
that responded to this so one of
the things that they were very
a need of what our were and
literacy in two languages or by
literacy therefore our
subcommittee created a an
advisement that was a by
literacy or language development
advisement that align to the
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum which
addresses the needs of our for
students to be taught more
holistically in our bilingual
multicultural education programs
and as Representative Garrett
said is that this house bill two
ninety would create a working
group of local experts and
literacy experts to work
together to develop this
framework in conjunction with
other PED and this is why this
for work is very important so
that all our New Mexico students
have access to culturally and
linguistically relevant
instructions so thank you so
much for your attention this
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman now doctor
Berlin to Begay.
Good morning chair people and
chair members I'm Berlin to be
gay and I like to speak more on
the oral language development
hard as my colleague introduced
the very reason why we have this
house bill going now is that our
subcommittee developed by
loosing oral language
development framework to align
this work to culture and
linguistically responsive
curriculum but on the or
language development part I like
to focus on that because it's
important to know and support
not to categorize indigenous
oral language development with
two days COVID bilingual
multicultural education
methodologies and approaches
because indigenous or language
itself the development doesn't
fit into western COVID concepts
and the standards of two days
bilingual multicultural
education as well so we simply
cannot continue the current way
of order of fitting square pegs
into round holes because
indigenous oral language
development needs and methods
involve a unique wholistic view
top for the current purpose of
survival of our cultural
identity so with the oral
language development it's an
approach with a different
purpose involving
decolonization indigenous oral
language development actually is
going to reinforce these vital
cultural values thank you for
your time chair people this
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and with
that we stand for questions.
You representative Gary we will
now go to public comment and
start with opposition to house
bill two nineteen amended.
We did not have any members of
the public register in advance
to propose House Bill to
nineteen as amended.
Thank you do we have anyone in
the zoom room in opposition.
Seen on let's move on to.
Folks that want to speak out in
support of house bill two
nineteen.
Wish to speak in support first
up we have a list of members who
do not appear to be in the same
room so I will just read out
their names we have Robert
Patrick a Tricia human and lay
them Meryl Leiberman a with a
deal Dr Karen Sanchez Griego and
now we will go to those who wish
to speak in support and are here
with us in this room if you wish
to speak in support of house
bill two nineteen as amended
please raise your hand.
And we will also begin with
Joseph as COVID all.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee just service
computer Albuquerque public
schools we think Representative
care for bringing this bill
forward we didn't but right
meets with members who have been
on this commission are the
surprise of the council for some
time and appreciate their work
and the continued work on
supporting our students and in
culturally relevant practices
thank you.
Thank you very much David
Rogers.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is David
Rogers and I'm executive
director for dual language
education in New Mexico and I
find the guidance that this bill
would allow the task force put
forward is very timely as we see
this kind of guidance and very
much necessity right now for our
bilingual multicultural
education teachers as well as
our native language instructors
were in charge or language
development so we stand and
support and we ask you to please
keep this in the past thank you.
Thank
you.
Thank you chairman open members
of the committee Jogi N.
executive director of the New
Mexico school boards association
of the association supports
legislation that will continue
to fund culturally and
linguistically responsive
training curriculum materials
and develop methods of reporting
so that our students benefit
this bill is consistent with
that we stand and support and
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward.
Thank you we have let Tania
market your data.
Hello my name is Tanya Meyer
that the I am from I am a
product of.
New Mexico highlands university
as well as University of New
Mexico and I and I was also
bilingual educator in
Albuquerque at a lot of Gonzalez
elementary school and I'm coming
to you as a former classroom
teacher on continuing my
education to achieve my
doctorate I have worked it out
Mister Rogers well as doctors
sunny doctor Johnson as a mentor
and I the reason why I'm here to
support this bill is because my
child is also was the product of
a by literacy program started
since pre K. also I was a
teacher in the program are I've
seen so much fruitful so much
has come from my students being
a native language native Spanish
speakers as well as heritage
language speakers this weather
is the movie is by cultural task
force will really put us and by
literacy task force will put is
continuing to really follow the
the goals of our state of
helping our students become by
literate and as well as being
understanding of our culturally
and linguistically diverse
students that are in our that
are in our communities from our
native Spanish speakers toward
me are trying to do indigenous
speakers I really appreciate you
allowing me to speak and I am
full support for house bill two
nineteen thank you.
Thank you next that we have and
we will that all.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and Emily will
doubt Representative New Mexico
voices for children and support
and HB two nineteen I literacy
and oral language development
should be encouraged and treated
as an asset in New Mexico by
requiring PED to develop a long
term plan to improve sustainment
support frameworks for by
literacy and oral language
development this bill takes an
important step in creating a
culturally and linguistically
responsive education for our
students we just a committee to
join us in supporting this
legislation today thank you.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you we are on house bill
two nineteen amended now I will
give the committee an
opportunity they have any
questions or comments on this
bill.
Senator Pinto.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
being this bill Ford and I think
it's just more of a comment
about teaching language.
It's a very different thing.
If if the Navajo and if all
those that spoke Navajo we're
teachers we wouldn't be in this
situation so does take special
people and I think if the
working group it's going to
really target the best practices
and the successful programs that
are moving forward I applaud it
and thank you very much.
Senator Pinto.
Thirty.
I'm cert there are no other
comments I will move it to pass.
To have a second yeah a second
Senator Pinto seconds Marianne
if we can take the role.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey.
Okay well past him for a moment
Senator Kernan.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope.
Yes.
And back to Senator Hickey.
Can you.
Senator Hickey.
I will try to call them usually
or in the office next door to me
but I think areas where Senator
Hickey.
My apologies yes.
We have a deep passer.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and committee we deeply
appreciate this thank you.
You.
All right we will now House Bill
to nineteen amended has passed
and just want to make a
correction House Bill to sixty
six was not passed we still need
to go to that do we have
Representative Figueroa in their
mice are jumping in and out.
She is yes chairman I am here
thank you so we will now move on
to house bill two sixty six
amended special education
teacher licenses you have the
floor Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee house bill two sixty
six is a teacher recruitment and
retention bill he came out of
information shared in interim
committee of about the
preparation of the teachers of
New Mexico that for the past
five years.
Creasing Lee new teacher
licenses are being completed by
folks through our alternative
pathway licensure system more
than sixty percent at this point
and that trend is expected to
continue upwards for the next
several years.
With that in mind this bill
takes a look at the alternative
pathway licensure and tries to
strengthen that teacher
preparation piece is the
majority of our new teachers are
coming through this program we
need to make sure that they are
as well prepared as they can be.
Because this is Education
Committee I'm gonna skip over
the information about they can
seize in the state and the need
for teachers I am sure you are
all well aware of that
information.
But I will say.
The New Mexico desert of well
prepared teachers.
It is often are most vulnerable
students across the state the
most at risk.
That receive are least prepared
teachers and teachers through
the alternative licensure
system.
RTC this deserve the opportunity
to practice before they are
thrown into a classroom as the
teacher of record.
They deserve the opportunity to
learn before they are coping
with student behaviors and
lesson planning and all of these
aspects of the art is teaching.
Never had a chance to practice.
And our school districts deserve
stability.
You're the Education Committee
in the Senate you are aware that
teachers turn is very expensive
it can cost twenty thousand
dollars or more to in district
every time they have to replace
a teacher is expensive.
So our students are teaching
candidates and our districts.
We need the stability in this
extra preparation.
This bill as a fifteen week
supervised practice element.
To the alternative pathway
licensure for special education
teachers it gives them the
opportunity to be in the
classroom with a master teacher
and watch how it's done.
Practice with feedback with that
teacher in the real gradually
releasing responsibility so that
teacher candidates.
Can take over the class.
Now I want to be absolutely
clear.
This does not replace the need
for teacher mentoring districts
all across the state of New
Mexico have bent over backwards
to try and mentor teachers in
the alternative licensure system
because we know they need
support.
But there's mentoring after the
school day mentor might observe
a lesson are part of a lesson.
Generally speaking they talk to
the alternative licensure
candidates about what happened
afterward there's no opportunity
to observe the master teacher
work through that concept.
Is it.
Mentoring programs need to
continue.
But supervised practice will
help prepared teachers.
Now why is the bill directed
only as special education
the alternative pathway
licensure.
Mr chairman and committee this
for several reasons.
One is our second highest need
in terms of teacher vacancies
across the state.
To it's an incredibly complex
teaching endorsement the range
of students abilities cognitive
and physical is tremendous.
The law around special education
is extensive so what a special
education teacher has to know
and be able to do.
Is second.
I'm sorry is it's a group in the
Yazzie Martinez case so we know
we need to get these teachers
attention.
And lastly is gonna serve as a
pilot.
All the teachers in all subject
areas across the state are going
to increasingly be prepared L.
turn it is licensure pathways.
We're going to have to look at
all of them.
But special and can be the pilot
to work out the Kinks how do we
make this work.
Alternative pathway licensure
serves a purpose in districts
that are desperate for an
immediate need to fill a
vacancy.
Some might describe adding
fifteen weeks of teaching
practices barrier.
I would describe it as an
opportunity an opportunity to
practice and I think.
A great many challenges for
alternative licensure given the
choice.
I would choose the pathway that
allows them to practice.
The bill has a year delay date.
That will give.
Four years of our teacher
education system the opportunity
to figure out how to make this
work in every district of all
different sizes across the state
we've got regional education
cooperatives we have instituted
a higher education we have
school districts themselves and
we have the PED.
They're all work together and
figure out all the different
ways that we can find this
practice teaching opportunity to
alternative licensure students.
Now.
I'm not willing to pass a bill.
Legislation that is going to
work in all the different
varieties of school districts
that we have in New Mexico.
So when talking about this built
in beginning is creation I
reached out to support
superintendent bay area in lake
Arthur lake drive has one
hundred and ten students total
K. twelve.
That's one of the smallest
districts we have in the state.
Talk to her about how would this
work in lake Arthur how could
you do it.
Without adding tremendous
expense without making it
logistically impossible.
In the course of our
conversation we came up with
five different ways this could
be done.
In lake Arthur.
I reached out to Dr
superintendent Sam's in
estancia.
Five hundred fifty students K.
twelve.
We.
With this work in estancia.
Again came up with several
options.
So committee I want to assure
you.
We can do this we can find this
practice opportunity to
alternative licensure candidates
and provide.
Stronger appropriation for the
teachers.
In our educational system so we
don't lose them in the first
three years of teaching.
Mr chair committee I will stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative we will
now go to public comment do we
have anyone in opposition.
And then we did not have anybody
signed up to speak in opposition
to this bill.
Thank you is there anyone in
opposition in the zoom room.
Seeing none we will move on to
supporters of house bill two
sixty six amended.
In.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I strongly support
House Bill to sixty six as
amended I.
Can't say enough about the
sponsor.
reaching out and asking higher
add us superintendents and
asking practitioners to ensure
that this would be a positive
change and would be applicables
to all districts around the
state I'm.
Alternative licensure has become
the main route for specially
second career people to get into
teaching but what I have found
in of working with teachers
across the Albuquerque public
schools is without adequate
preparation they tend to dip in
and then leave teaching very
quickly especially in the area
of special ed it's so complex
it's so important for all of our
practitioners to understand not
just the pedagogy of teaching
special education students with
varying needs but to understand
deeply how to define and work
with all the different
categories of students that are
under the umbrella of special ed
this would help us take
alternative licensure to a new
level because alternative
doesn't have to mean sub
standard alternative can mean hi
standard preparation and this
would be a great step toward
that thank you very much.
Thank you very much we will now
go to the public who is here
with us in the room or if you
wish to speak in support of
house bill two sixty six as
amended please raise your hand
now.
And that completes public
comment at this time.
Thank you we will now move to
any comments or questions from
the committee.
Seeing none Mr chairman over the
past thank you Center Padilla
but
panto as a question yes I do
have some questions.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward.
You know I mean I
am not an expert I don't know if
it's a question for you are PED
has there ever been a pilot with
because I think this is
important especially for rural
schools in that you might be the
only teacher that is there in
that content into our for that
grade level in which you don't
really have the ability to do
with limited staff to kind of
have to people are doing this
because when you talk about
printers you talk about two
people being in the classroom at
the same time right
Representative okay sticking
your head yes.
and we need to and I'm glad you
clarified mentoring verses
apprenticeship because we do
have those limits
it is especially if you're
trying to create
Some urge to to fill this
special area and I think it does
take a very special person to do
special education
has there ever been a pilot into
which are requirement of which
every teacher had to be in a
specialized had to shadow a
special education teacher
regardless of whether
they were going to teach special
education you know being a
special education teacher
because when I was going into
teaching this was the we talk
about licensure and going
through this whole process
even at the college level it
seems like there was not a
connection there with the
requirements of that were needed
to obtain licensure and then you
put another you know level of
licensure new label do this
alternative do this and you're
basically running around trying
to do to get testing trying to
get your background check all
these requirements
that was ever a pilot that
created
kindly put that out there for
teachers automatically to say
okay you know this is you're
going to be a teacher but
there's also this with the
students you know and letting
them know that there was
criteria that had to be met do
you know if there was ever a
like a pilot like that.
Mr chair and senator
what you're describing sounds a
little more like the traditional
pathway like a teacher.
A college student who's thinking
about becoming a teacher or who
just declared they're going to
be a teacher and they are going
through a process and different
institutions of higher
education.
Has set there are observation
that column on summation I think
you called it shadowing
they have different requirements
so which institutions of higher
and require some observation
shadowing of a special education
teacher I could not say but I
can say with respect to
alternative licensure.
The alternative licensure path
has.
There is no observation of
anyone at all in the alternative
licensure pass.
An individual who has a college
degree in whatever subject.
It says they want to be a
teacher and in the alternative
licensure plaque yes they are
placed in a classroom with
students as a teacher.
No observation with now student
teaching they take classes at
night on the weekend that trying
to catch them up and teach them
how do lesson plans how to
evaluate what students do or do
not understand how to do a
variety of things and I'm just
so they might and one of their
classes here about special
education needs are about
differentiating differentiating
Education for special ed
students but that is.
Outside the classroom.
So not only do they not have the
opportunity to observe they have
to figure out how to take what
they're hearing about in the
classroom and how to implement
it with students which is
difficult may be asked to
practice part
so short answer to your question
is not part of any alternative
path and it may be part of some
traditional pass.
The.
Representative and the reason I.
Because this that statistically
I mice mmhm with my experience
personal experience is.
That anything that was.
Incorporate like you said
specially it's just in a book at
when I was on my pathway to the
seeking teaching was that it was
just through but whatever was in
the classroom I did not
specifically even tell I did my
student teaching will go into a
classroom but even in that
classroom the mentor was just
you know of about teaching not
too much about all this special
education process that had to
occur and which you know the
IEPs and the timing of that in
getting back to the teachers you
know it was an obstacle.
But those teachers that with the
traditional pathway and then
date see the saw the need for
special education teachers seem
to have lasted longer and did a
better job then kind of going an
alternate path it seems but you
were saying earlier is that does
that go into special education
end up dropping out because it's
overwhelming.
And the you know it is a high a
It even being it in that going
to college courses those other
students that were in the class
with me that had been in
specialist seem like they were
dropping out and wanted to just
be a regular teacher because
the needs of because of all the
stuff that they withdrew they
didn't want to be in that area.
So I'm not sure.
You know that doing an
alternative licensure is really
the right route to go to build
that.
Need we have verses finding
another way to create that
interests.
But even now with the pandemic
and especially in the rural
schools I feel that we do need
some flexibility in which a
regular teacher can be a special
education teacher that they're
not just caught under one job
and duty but that the
interconnect or they can
supplement
the special education program
within their school and not just
because under the purview of
just being a regular classroom
teacher and kind of being pushed
aside in that sense because we
do.
I've been in schools where we
could you practically would not
know the child was in special
education tell the end of the
school year.
There because of the lack of the
staff
but yet you probably would have
had time because your screen was
so small
to to help the special education
department so I'm kind of about.
You know supporting this in
that.
Creating another web versus
streamlining that process so
it's easier for teachers to get
in there and having dispatches
bench off so that they can have
these opportunities to enhance
their own resume if they choose
not to stay at that school that
there is some flexibility for
them to move into these other
rounds and dip their toes in and
maybe stay stay in education and
not just leave the whole
profession altogether thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Senator Pinto do we have any
other questions or comments from
the committee.
So I would like to ask what the
will of the committee is a
Senator souls with your hand up.
Thank you Mr chair just very
quick comments and most of you
have heard over the years that I
often.
Rail against very frustrated by
alternative programs with the
with the classrooms while they
are still taking the pedagogy
courses however we've got
serious problems in special
education this certainly extends
up the mentorship portion of
those alternative programs I
think it is much better than the
current system where there are
not mentorship programs with it
and I think through the interim
on the next couple of years as
we start looking at teacher
preparation programs that we can
really look at how we're going
to do alternative licensing or
licensing for people who already
have a degree in another field
to decide they want to be a
teacher but this certainly is
much better and so I'm going to
support it for that reason at
this point.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair so.
What is the will of the
committee.
A motion for the past.
Do we have a second.
All right thank you merry and if
we could take the role.
I yes Sir who was the second
souls.
Okay.
You're very quiet Sir.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senator Nobel yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes Senator souls yes.
We have to pass.
Congradulations Representative
we do you have a do pass on
house bill two sixty six a
month.
Thank you Mr chairman committee.
Whether pope if you'd like to
continue I'll just sit back the
the and I think the next one the
only one we have left is and it
is one eighty four Mr tragus.
So we have
Representative Romero.
Mr chair looks like you're in we
are ready for house bill one
eighty four minutes.
Great thank you Mr chairman so
house bill one eighty four I do
have an amendment
which is pretty significant in a
bit of an overhaul.
Bit of an overhaul I should say
and I'll explain what I need to
the committee in a moment right
but if I I believe for the
committee members that was
emailed out and I believe and I
received a hard copy so many of
you may have that as well so
Mister chair I would go ahead
and and
Hold on one second let me if I
can get from the committee a
motion to of.
Move this ammendment for
discussion.
Motion to move the amendment for
discussion so.
Amendment one.
HB one eight four.
Thank you.
And I'm Mr chair chairman are
you can proceed.
Thank you.
Great thank you Mr chairman so
the original house bill one
eighty four had passed out of
the house unanimously and it is
and have been to
include equivalent hours so
allowing school districts
instead of me instead of adding
days for ELT P. and K. five plus
is to add on the amount of our
or the amount of days into our
so basically in betting time and
school day for those programs
that something that we've heard
many stakeholders say that they
have wanted since the inception
of these programs and that that
was originally house bill one
eighty four what you have before
you committee in the amendment
is a pilot project on to in bed
equivalent hours into a pilot
project so I've been meeting
over the course of the week with
Sir Stuart and others to to kind
of talk through some of the
issues and really work on and L.
E. S. C. to work on on this
pilot project so allowing school
districts to embed in their day
things such as enrichment
opportunities for students so
districts that don't necessarily
want to include or add the days
into their calendar would be
able to use this opportunity to
extend their school day at again
to include things like
enrichment activities they can
in bed professional development
within their on contracted date
or or even to allow for not just
professional development of
collaboration with in their
school day and within their
contracted hours I think is
incredibly important
they've been doing a version of
this in Albuquerque public
schools with the MRI model
and the schools have seen great
teacher retention they've seen
student test scores improve the
scene students stay with.
The in their schools and these
are just some of the preliminary
results since they were almost
subject to close a couple of
years ago by the previous
administration they have since
by implementing
Something like I could one hours
into their calendar have been
able to really turn around those
schools and one of those is in
the district I represent my
elementary school from when I
was a kid my sisters went there
my mom was a twenty year teacher
at most this elementary school
where they did this this was a
big community project that is is
starting to really turn that
screen around from me as a
former student it's a very very
happy to see so in doing this
but we have for your
consideration this pilot project
to do just that at the state
level
So on their various provisions
in the bill to ensure that you
know we're getting schools that
are you to implementing hours up
there so we're not going to yes
if the school already has a
certain amount of hours they
will not be they will not
qualify for this program as of
yet they have to be new
participants and all of this is
to to collect that valuable
information and that valuable
data so that we can move forward
in a thoughtful way as the
legislature so the reporting is
to well I should say that on
some of the requirements are
obviously there formative and
and and some of them assessments
so that we all as legislature in
our interim process can start
looking at some of these
outcomes and then start looking
at the participation who and
from where are they
participating in what are those
comes for for our students so
this would all go to legislative
finance committee our
legislative education study
committee
and certainly the public
education department so what you
have here again committee is a
pilot for a quick one hour so we
went with twenty four to
including it within K. five plus
an extended learning to a pilot
project but with that Mr
chairman I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chair do we have
any questions from the committee
on the amendment.
I see none I I just a couple
questions so we this this is a
pilot it and I guess the other
question is what this amendment
or in it and might be referred
to in the bill does a given
schools the option to you you
mentioned extending the hours
instead of the days do they also
have the option for example
during like holiday breaks or
something to maybe use that time
as well
Mr chairman I don't think
anything precludes doing that as
long as it's ours and that it
can be I'm not just embedded in
the school day but also within
the week so if you want to have
extended on the first day is
coming to my mind is Friday you
want to add a couple hours to
Friday for sort of programming
then yes but as long as you're
meeting the the minimum
requirements in terms of hours I
don't think anything in the
pilot precludes that.
Thank you Mr chair
looks like I'm not Senator
Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you for bringing this court
Representative.
So when we talk about additional
and then I heard you state
district wide and then you talk
about school our schools really
able to be flexible verses what
the district has adopted.
So some Mr chairman and then
Senator Pinto so this would be a
school wide effort so if the
school wanted to be included in
this program they would probably
go through their district in
order to to participate in doing
this and can help with the
application process but I think
this bill is particularly aimed
at that sort of flexibility and
that's what we've heard in terms
of the quit line hours debating
K. five plus extended learning
is that this provides greater
flexibility for for schools in
the and the districts to to tap
into that funding but also to
provide the programming that
they feel their students can
benefit from.
And the reason I say that is
Representative Mr Chairman
representative committee members
is.
Our district is you know the
district office is located way
over there and then we have the
school so far away in which
there is a different
atmosphere our culture in the
sense even Geographic physical
issues come up as far as if
there's a rain storm and we know
that our roads are you know we
don't have that many paper roads
that the children should be
released early so that the
states we can get home but the
only way to have something like
to implement it is that the
district allows it.
So you know when I talk about
that flexibility and in that
sense.
In some areas being on the
reservation when the reservation
has a high quality.
What could drive day or
something and the it government
offices are all our and the
calendar does not correlate with
you know the school calendar
there does issues as far as
getting as children we'll see a
high rate of absences
in the days because you don't
just have one child you'll have
several children not just at the
elementary the middle school and
high school so if the child is a
rather are sisters in high
school they end up staying home
because the elementary you know
as you they need somebody to
watch the child or the parents
are at work.
So I think it's important we
tried it factor in that
flexibility I don't know I don't
want to say the district
Should be considered but it
seems like we the some of the
smaller schools have up hill
battle when they're trying to.
Implement something like this to
take advantage of it
are for their students to help
meet their needs and battle some
of these issues and I I'm not
sure what the right answer is to
to that situation but I it is an
issue in in the area that I
represent thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and Mr chairman if I
may respond because I think
Senator Pinto brings up a really
good point about this is that I
think the schools would be able
to maintain their calendar but
then also extend their days as
they see fit so I think in in
your example if you have the
district that's really spread
out in the school wants to
participate on they have their
calendar set and that they can
choose the hours and where they
want to place it so I think that
sort of flexibility is in there
and then as far as the
elementary schools as well I
mean this is geared toward
elementary school so by
extending the day like the
example I gave with the school
that I went to at least this
when they went to this program
it also helped out the parents
and helps out like my high
school years that are in school
because now all of a sudden they
don't have to pick up little
brother or sister until a later
time that's more convenient for
for the families to be able to
to pick up their student as
well.
Mr chair and Representative.
Where I am at the bus situation
transportation really has to be
considered especially when we're
trying to correlate these hours
because that we.
It's always issues with funding
and having one bus come do a
double run whenever a programs
implemented.
It it's not an easy fix and
let's also like there's some
flexibility in that sense or if
they are going to have
elementary you don't have to do
something like this it has to
correlate with the middle school
and high school because there's
just no way I don't think the
district's gonna listing with
two smaller buses.
And which you'll need more bus
drivers so it's a domino effect
that occurs not just in my
public schools but also at the
B. I. E. school within the area
because that's a K. eight school
and you will find that parents
twelve our guardians will.
It just really becomes an issue
I am not really sure a lot of
collaboration need to exist and
which it sometimes doesn't
because of distance but to maybe
it'll change with the broadband
infrastructure but that seems
like it's a matter of time to
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the.
Our chairman don't see any other
questions here one more question
for me so how long is this pilot
program and the cement.
Mr chairman this is a two year
pilot.
Thank you so I can get a motion
from the committee on the
amendment.
The motion to drive.
In a motion to adopt the
amendment yeah I guess that
motion also in second thank you
very and if we get take the
role.
Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Renewable yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes Senator souls yes.
We have an amended bill.
All right so term are you have
an amended bill one second
amended bill second amendment on
house bill one eighty four we
will now go to public comment
we'll start with opposition to
house bill eighty four twice
and.
If you wish to speak in
opposition to house bill one
eighty four twice then please
bring your hand now.
We will now go to those wishing
to speak in favor if you wish to
speak.
Favor of house bill one eighty
four twenty amended please base
your.
Chris o'donnell.
Is the chairman of the committee
Chris falls on on the register
lobbyist for Los crucis public
schools and run to public
schools we support house bill
one eighty four as amended this
bill will allow schools to be
able to maintain the calendar
but also the local control in
the flexibility which is
extremely important for us we
appreciate that the sponsor
bring this up we have been just
working with the sponsors have
been asking for this throughout
the session so thank you very
much and please support this
piece of legislation thank you.
Next up we have Dennis Roach.
Morning Mr chairman Dennis Roch
again speaking for the New
Mexico school superintendents
association our platform this
year calls for local decision
making in the design of
instructional calendar
specifically and this bill
but precisely provides that
allows districts to add hours
where needed to meet the needs
of your local community and
students and families that are
being served we applaud the
sponsor for this change and look
forward to supporting the bill
entirely thanks so much.
Next up we have Ellen burns B..
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much my
name is Alan Bernstein president
Albuquerque teachers federation
what we have found in the three
schools using additional hours
in their day is that they're
able to find enrichment.
As a result of the enrichment
the students do better and are
more engaged the communities are
more engaged and it's a perfect
partner with the community
school model the idea that we
can flexibly address kids
learning needs by applying hours
instead of just days is really
helpful to all staff and all
students and I stand in strong
support thank you.
Thank you next step we have
Jovian.
Thank you chairman poll numbers
of the committee.
My name is Jody and on the
executive director of the New
Mexico school boards association
and one of our top priorities
this year from our members was
to find X. the flexibility in
extended learning programs so we
support legislation that would
offer this flexibility we
supported the original bill as
it as it was introduced on the
house side and we think the
sponsor for his persistence with
this and carrying it forward
into a pilot program that we
know will be successful and
improve so that we can implement
this on a more statewide basis
so again we think the sponsor
for bringing this forward and we
stand in full support of this
amended bill.
Next step we have just as COVID
all.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we think cut chairman
Romero for bringing this bill
forward in the amendment this is
one of the priorities for
Albuquerque public schools and
we have learned that schools do
benefit from adding the extra
days
but our high poverty schools
especially need flexibility to
implement these programs by also
adding extra hours to the day
this legislation makes it
possible for us to expand
meaningful instructional time
each day a longer day allows the
schools to embed daily
professional development to
modify and adapt to student
dates we thank you for your
consideration.
We have merry par Sanchez.
I thank you Mr chairman hello
members of the committee my name
is merry par Sanchez and I am
the president of NEA New Mexico
and we stand in strong support
this amended legislation my
members from across the state of
New Mexico have unequivocally
stated to me in no uncertain
terms that this is the language
that they would like to see in a
bill they do want flexibility
local control but also at the
end of the day
when districts can design their
own programs that students that
the targeted populations of
students that need to to
participate whether they in a
new Richmond whether it be a
class to learn other languages
whatever that that is more she
Google when it happens during
the day either before school
during lunch after school so we
again ask for your support and
we think the
Of.
Chairman role metal for bringing
forward this ammendment thank
you and bill.
Thank you finally we have
Matthew Paul.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
with public charter schools of
New Mexico we support this bill
because it provides for local
control in extended school years
we believe that educators know
their students and should should
be able to determine the best
path to help them recover from
this last school year on the we
believe this bill should work in
concert with Senate Bill Forder
forty toward a larger effort
with continue to adjustments
towards troops calendar reform
so we think the chair and
sponsor and urge you to support
bills well thank you.
Thank you and with that we are
done with public comment thirty
one eighty four as amended.
Thank you now I will give an
opportunity for any of the
committee members.
I don't see any hands up.
All right no questions from the
committee I just I just have a
few I just want to thank you
chairman Romero for talking with
folks and and I in you know
really making this the amendment
making this a pilot I know there
were some concerns concerns from
some folks on this some of the
concerns of Senator Pinto
brought up of of you know
providing that flexibility but
also making sure you know what
the impacts are to our students
as well I'm so I think that's
really important one of the
questions I have I I've always
heard and I defer to educators
like you about.
Extended learning and how that
really helps our students do we
have any information or data I
guess showing us extending the
day or extending hours how that
affects learning in our schools.
Right thank you thank you Mr
chairman for bringing that
question and I think it's an
important one so throughout the
legislative education study
committee on Dr Jeannie Oakes
said presented and put together
can develop a roadmap of well a
picture in a snapshot of of
where New Mexico is and where we
could be going on and there is a
big emphasis on enrichment
having invented the things I.
talked about embedded
professional development having
teachers be able to collaborate
more readily and more often with
one another in order to to
improve their their curriculum
and I think we see this in terms
of of high performing schools so
we need to add the interim over
the past few years no time to
lose and that's those that for
example embedded curriculum
designed by teachers is is one
of those elements that that is
important to student outcomes
and then you've heard from
several several of the people
that that spoke in support as
well as being able to provide
enrichment opportunities in the
school day for students is is
incredibly critical that they
can get a more hands on outside
of the book outside of the in
class even learning in these
different fields I think is is
particularly strong in something
else that that doctor oaks post
points to and in our study and
look into New Mexico education
so I think those are all strong
points to look at and hopefully
with the implementation of this
pilot school districts will
really start to be able to
implement those programs and
then we as a legislature can
certainly study them and see the
efficacy of of those projects as
they fit into our defer schools
around the state.
Well thank you chairman I and I
look forward to
You know seeing the results of
this pilot program I really do.
that being said is there what is
the will of the committee.
A motion for the past.
All right we have a motion from
Senator Pinto and the second
from Senator Hickey a merry and
if we could take the role.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
In the bill yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes Senator pope
yes Senator soul yes.
We have a two passed.
Amended.
Graduations are chairman Romero
you have the pets great thank
you Senate Education Committee
Mr chairman and thank you for
House Bill three thirty one
earlier as well thank you all so
much.
Mr chair was that the last one
on our list for today I've kind
of been in and out that is that
that was the last one Mr chair
so we are done with that the
agenda for today.
Thank you and for the committees
update as I've gotten the sheet
with all of the bills we have
completed our work at this point
the only thing that is still
sitting on my potential calendar
is a memorial that Kenyan a
couple of days ago we are not
going to hold a meeting on
Wednesday just for that memorial
if other bills come in between
now and Wednesday needing to get
ready in from the house look for
an education meeting on
Wednesday we probably will not
start until nine thirty or ten
if it is only one or two bills
are provided we've got enough
time to get those that this is
that time here what we all need
to get some sleep.
But I will come around and let
each of you know personally if
there are additional things that
we need to deal with and kind of
the same thing as far as of
Friday need to get something
comes in that's kind of that hi
I need to get through and things
like that but it will probably
not the at eight thirty meeting
it will probably be more likely
nine thirty meeting were so
depending on how many and what
they are I thank you that makes
Senator Padilla very happy I
think so and that I thought that
the another so.
Health from the committee we may
be starting floor sessions at
nine or nine thirty Mr Chairman
as as the week goes on that's
more typical anyway I don't no
rural health things worked and
that's the way it used to be so
yes so everybody big flexible
that we may need to have a
meeting for just one or two
bills or something of that sort
but at this point we don't have
anything else on our calendar
Then we will.
Senator Neville is going to have
them have a caucus at eight to
ten so we don't have your.
So Mister chairman eight to
eleven to ten fifty nine.
There we go of some you know and
if this does turn out to be our
last meeting it as a committee
if you all will please help me
in thanking our incredible staff
we started with more mark hello
reading are you in the shift of
power up both of them very able
we did things run very very
smoothly yes thank them enough
for what they did so so thank
you very and who is behind the
scenes on everything and again
there is that go our our
committee worked so wonderfully
on the the major side are to
analyst Holly and Steven thank
you so much for your hard work
all the time and everything is
going on with that
I know of centered the bill
would you like to the thank you
analyst over on your side.
I don't know their own but I
certainly do appreciate all of
their work and their getting
everything in our drop boxes and
so forth it's been a great help
for us to follow up on these
bills and get a little education
on education because it is thank
you Mr.
Thank you there also have a list
of from the major office
yeah the they provide the
general analysis and we always
have people like John center for
PED's who provides the expert
testimony and and the details
that we need from had
up there still Kara on with us
We also think of our regulars
always of Rachel from the LFC
who is always on providing
technical information and
incredible staff we've got
people like Joe again from the
school board association Dennis
Roch and stand around the
superintendents association many
other groups that that just help
make this committee run smoothly
and that all of you was my
committee the I. break I've got
the best committee we get in
here we get the work and we get
along with each other and yeah
we don't mess around on a lot of
the bills that we take the time
on the bills but we need to take
the time and so I just thank you
all of the committee and not for
the great work that we do so
thank you all right thank you Mr
chair the chair thank you Mr
chairman Mr chair if I might
Martin Hickey here I just want
to commend you as an excellent
outstanding committee chair
the.
Participate in the other
committees obviously and learn a
lot but as a new senator I have
learned so much about a topic
that I didn't know much about
and it's been refreshing and
wonderful but it would have
happened if you hadn't had such
great leadership and ability to
focus be concise and move us a
lot and brand just your
significant expertise in
questions and and I've learned a
lot I just I want to personally
thank you I also want to thank
Dr pope who is up coming up to
be an excellent Committee chair
one day himself as the
associate chair and it's been a
pleasure with all of my fellow
senators as I see you here the
the the bill
and so so I'm I'm getting
carried away but I'm getting
carried away because it was a
wonderful experience thank you
and also I need to thank my
wonderful vice chair Senator
folks who so ably just you know
we when when my picture goes off
and does his Cherry and vice
versa does a great job so and so
just seeing within the
transition thank you senator for
for all your leadership and
coming up so quickly as B. and
integrate Senator on this
committee thank what I just want
to give a shout out to you Mr
chair I really appreciate you
are giving me the opportunity
mentoring me in this position
and just helping me
understand these bills and
understand these issues so I
appreciate it that doesn't
happen all the time and and I
really appreciate it thank you
thank you.
And thank you Marianna.
Any other comments.
Otherwise we will stand
adjourned until maybe Wednesday
or sometime and we'll figure all
that out and let you go and get
a calendar out if necessary okay
thank you all we are adjourned
thank you Mr.
