So
First off house bill one fifty
one.
Good morning Mr chair
I am hearing this bill on the
Senate floor I'm not a co
sponsor because it came over
before I could sign on but I
think it's a really great idea
when I was asked to carry it on
the floor what it is is is
clarifying when the standards
for and defining what reasonable
insurance is assurance is when
you're dealing with employees at
educational institutions has you
may know universities rely a lot
on non tenured faculty and they
put they have but we have you
teaching duties less of a
research of responsibility and
we need to make sure that
everybody involved the
university and the employees
understand when they're eligible
for unemployment insurance and
I'm very happy that I have she
used here who was involved there
is an amendment to the bill and
to be honest I was not involved
with the amendment so I have him
here too if you were all of the
amendment having with him okay
well then that makes it a lot
easier Mr chair if you would
It I have this ammendment and I
would ask for the committee to
consider the amendment.
Thank you of and the amendment
and again I want to when I think
working with you on that when I
read through this and
particularly the last paragraph
that starts on page seven at the
bottom I read about five times
and it still was
incomprehensible to me.
and so rolled over for one time
you work then with my staff to
to make the changes and stuff on
it and the amendment and we
passed out the amendment yes
this.
They have the amendment yes they
do and I think it clarifies and
makes the language.
More readable out some of the
language came from the federal
guidelines but that doesn't mean
it was well written language I
think it makes a lot more sense
and we actually struck that
whole last paragraph that sounds
like gibberish.
the totality of the
circumstances paragraph yes.
Then again they may want to give
people want to hear the totality
Senator tally the circumstances
it's highly probable that
there's a job available for the
claimant in the following
academic.
Sure discussions.
Sorry I was I was.
You are get enough sleep a right
to go to this morning.
Thank you senator thank okay.
But if you read through that
paragraph available for the
claimant in the following
academic year term with a job
offer contains a contingency
primary weight should be given
to the contingent nature of the
offer the employment in the
fidelity of the circumstances
much of that it's highly.
You.
That's very federal you in the
Mr chair yeah and so the
amendment changes the title so
that more accurately reflects
what this actually does
employment compensation defining
reasonable assurance for
employees and educational
institutions.
And then on page seven line
twelve.
Goes through strikes in the
same.
And insert to Lou of step stance
we the same or as a higher
money sixteen strikes non tenure
track faculty.
I'm seven semicolon ads and and
then takes off that terrible
last paragraph.
So essentially the amendment
just modifies the language it
makes it more clear thank you
for being here secretary
workforce solutions who also was
part of the process of working
through the amendment.
That it works better.
That any questions about the
amendment.
Motion to adopt the amendment.
And seconded by pope you'll call
the roll on the amendment.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan.
Senator my S.
F. said hell Center Penco yes
Senator poke yes Senator yes can
we have your amended now I'll
hand it over if you would you
talked a little bit about it but
she knew might wakes Moines why
this matters were four madam
secretary I'd like to.
It over to.
Want to speak first I'm very
very proud to have served to
read and I are who is the
director of or is it she also
check okay so the secretary.
Of workforce solutions.
And also say new York's is with
me they've been very involved
with this bill from the
beginning and will serve on my
has my experts on the floor.
when we bring this bill if if we
get that far I shouldn't be so
presumptuous.
Mr chair members of the
committee at this is not I work
for solutions bill but because
as the new title makes clear
this really just clarifies
existing law we've been happy to
support at both Representative
Trujillo and Senator Sedillo
Lopez so under existing law the
general rule is that if you work
for an educational institution
you are not eligible for
unemployment benefits in the
period between successive terms
or years if there if there is a
contract we're reasonable
assurance that the employee will
provide those services in the
next term so in in real simple
words if you taught as an
adjunct in the spring and you
have a contract to to return in
the fall you did not get
unemployment during the summer
break kind of makes sense with
everything we know about
educators.
And now under existing law the
law as it already is the
exception to that rule is that
when a contractor reasonable
assurance is broken and the
person does not get the
opportunity to work in that next
semester then.
The instructor is entitled to
get those unemployment benefits
retroactive back to the
beginning of the summer the the
break between terms and the
reason that is is because an
instructor who teaches in the
spring and then their promise
that they can teach in the fall
they probably wanna use their
summer to prepare for those
courses are to do other things
and if that job that falls
through the concept under
federal law is that the
instructor should not be blamed
for finding other for not
finding other work in the summer
the law already provides that
the test for this situation is
whether there is a contract for
reasonable assurance for future
work so the bill again is not
changing that it's just
clarifying what that reasonable
assurances so when there's not a
contract what constitutes
reasonable insurance the test
for reasonable assurance in this
bill is more clear than the old
definition and you're now
familiar through the amendment
of the different parts of that
but the bill is in our opinion
gives clarity to both colleges
and other educational
institutions as well as faculty
and instructors if colleges are
clear with their expectations
for non tenure track faculty or
if other educational
institutions are clear with
their expectations they should
not expand their liability but a
college may decide that it is
worth the risk of rate limited
unemployment benefits to keep
some of those faculty available
for the fall and if the college
makes insurance to keep those
instructors on the hook then it
non tenure faculty who plan
their lives around that
insurance will not be penalized
if the college does not assign
them courses and with that I'll
turn it over to Mr use to
explain the intricacies.
Carousels are members of the
committee eight I think what
you've done is is set up exactly
I mean we are essentially
clarifying the term reasonable
assurance yes thank you the
clarifications were as directed
by the United States department
of labor and we went through and
I appreciate the amendments and
clarifications to identify the
standards in terms of what
constitutes reasonable assurance
I I think one important point to
add I've spoken to sponsor who
has spoken to the colleges and
universities here in New Mexico
and they are as I understand it
almost you.
Find for adjunct professors
there is a problem right now
because the educational system
has changed.
In your track for professors is
now the exception rather than
the rule in with the law needs
to keep in step with the way our
universities are hiring people
to teachers students this bill
does exactly that by clarifying
and providing department of
workforce solutions with the
current interpretation and
guidelines under which employees
in this.
The the US senator.
Thank you I just think that
clarity in the law is always a
positive thing and we're we are
available to stand for questions
thank you out of the audience
those in support of House Bill.
What are the house bill one
fifty one.
Thank you anyone in opposition.
If you feel compelled that you
want to say something.
Representative drive two minutes
but if you don't have to if you
don't want to.
please come up to the
microphone.
This is this yep hold the
button.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee John which is with the
New Mexico federation of labor
we stand in strong support of
this measure as it was going to
the house and we think the
sponsor for signing on here in
the Senate this is really just
about fairness making sure that
you know workers who have paid
into the system deserve to get
benefits from the system have
that ability and for those
reasons we stand in strong
support as I said thank you.
Thank you anyone else.
We have one online follow us.
Swain sweet provided.
Good morning Mr chair theme
representatives my name is Paula
accordance fallen on the adjunct
vice president president for you
a UNM thank you all for your
support of higher education in
New Mexico and I especially
thank the sponsors of this bill
recognizing the unique
challenges of Elgin faculty who
are crucial in teaching our
first year first generation
college students like me many
New Mexico address teachers
primary as a primary profession
taking on other jobs just to
make ends meet yet we fall
victim to unfair and
irresponsible university
administrative practices
sometimes which cause
unemployment precarity house
bill one five one provides a
path to heal that precarity
offer stability and allows Jones
to continue their important work
in our state thank you so much
for your support thank you.
is no one in opposition.
Questions from the committee.
Senate Bill.
Just curiosity doesn't don't
universities pay unemployment.
To the unintended for these
employees alright excuse me do
they pay into the insurance to
pay for the insurance for the
EdgeX I believe most of them do
Mr chair and senator Neville
most universities and colleges
are on the reimbursement form of
paying into the unemployment
insurance fund so they pay for
their actual clips that's assume
it is a I just had a business
for a long time and we always
had to pay all of unemployment
not assume that you'd have to
pay it also taught as an agent
for about six years and is on a
semester by semester basis never
thought much about it but I
guess that a fired me halfway
through the semester I would
expectant point but when I went
from term to term I really did
that.
I I I I'm not opposed to the
building just this is kind of a
specialty type position and I
did it because I needed extra
money starting a business and
that kind of thing and it worked
out pretty well but to.
ended and Mr chair Senator
that's appropriate it you know
that you didn't think about it
because it probably was a year
to year basis but there are many
adjuncts who of who have an
expectation of continuing
indefinitely and those are the
ones that are actually eligible
with the university doesn't
follow through on on the
expectation and that's what this
is trying to to clarify
we have many adjuncts at the law
school and I think it was really
clear which ones were hired for
their specialty on an ad hoc
basis and which ones were
teaching regular courses that
would be expected to be there
year after year.
Very good thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman just that
this is that the situation I'm
not familiar with so so if an
action is hard for a first and
second semester Indian.
Not sure if the class will make
in the fall of the next year so
are you saying that.
if they if during the summer are
dates to that file for
unemployment during the summer
months are is it just related to
if they're not hard in the fall
I believe the answer is no but I
will turn it over to legal
expert on.
Mr chair Senator in a normal
situation the law already.
The looking for a professor who
is working in the spring and
will be working in well that's
not the typical situation and
that is not.
The bill of HB one one does.
Still confused Mr chair so if
you have edge affected working
Following in spring of of the
school year and then there are
they're not assured of getting a
job in the next fall semester do
they go ahead and file
unemployment beginning in that
summer.
Mr chair Senator Kernan so if
they are just teaching sort of
each semester and there's no
termination or or lay off that
occurs at the end of that's at
the end of the semester they
would not be eligible for
unemployment benefits worth they
voluntarily quit they would not
be eligible so Mister chair this
doesn't change that it just
means if someone says to them at
the end of the spring semester
we think we're going to need to
work plan on being back but
there's no written contract it's
just just it's stated here some
sort of insurance by someone in
authority that that counts as
and then there's the class that
make and they can't hire that
person that that would be with
that would fall for and
unemployment Mr chair Senator
Kernan that's exactly right okay
so Mister chair hello hello this
is bill change I mean it seems
that that's already that's not
in place now Mr chair the reason
this bill is being brought is to
clarify that so that is federal
law but our our lot of the state
law which
workforce solution follows and
the university follows with
unclear which leads to people
not understanding whether they
were eligible or the university
is not clear about whether they
had to pay and so this is
providing clear more clarity for
everyone involved thank you Mr
chairman so
How does it clear Rifai
What that insurance looks like
tell me in the bill where is it.
Removes the.
One point eight seven I guess
the high have you I was going to
go through the factors but I I
should defer to the person who
works with this every day out
there today.
Jesse under current insurance
right now the statute at the the
phrase that it turns on is the
phrase a re response okay what
the bill does is consistent with
federal guidelines defines what
reasonable assurance me okay is
it is a pretty ambiguous
determine if someone has
reasonable assurance and this
sets up what was originally a
six part passed through
amendment was senator so's we
now have I believe a five part
yes it just determines the
whether that the quality or the
nature of the reasonable
assurance for example whether
the offer of employment is an
actual offer of employment that
is written oral or implied in
that is in subsection eight page
seven and be the offer of the in
the offer of employment was made
by an individual with actual
authority to offer the
employment so that it gives
guidelines to the department of
workforce solutions so that when
they see a fact pattern and they
can identify for example did the
person who made the offer have
the actual ability to make the
offer and it simply clarifies
what was this ambiguous term
reasonable assurance that right
this is what reasonable
assurances do you have an office
used with that offer maybe with
somebody with the authority to
make that offer was it in the
same employment a similar
employment position because we
need to know relative to what
that person was doing are they
doing the same thing and in it
goes through those standards and
provides department of workforce
solutions with just some some
guide rails in terms of
what's gonna happen is also
probably more importantly
provides consistency and clarity
for the adjunct professors so
that they know what they have to
have in terms of reasonable
assurances to to qualify or not
qualify for unemployment and so
it just provides clarity for
both parties so they know
whether or not someone will be
eligible have an idea of whether
or not they'll be eligible going
forward I thank you Mr chair.
and and and I do think it's
better but I also believe I
don't know how you did a fight
or to find an individual action
with already but that the the
human resources department and
why does it not say that in here
and actually that's a question I
know very well for example at
the U. at the law school be
offered had to be made by the
dean so if the faculty member
told told imagined you'll be
here next year no worries that
probably wouldn't be enough
because the fact of faculty
member doesn't have that
authority so that is sufficient
to probably have to come from
the dean or perhaps an associate
dean if they were authorized if
that will challenge Mr chair
with workforce solutions how
would you view how would you
determine whether that person
had actually catch with thirty
or not Mr chair Senator Kernan
we usually have you know
hearings where people can
introduce factual evidence so it
may be testimony it might be a
policy or procedure that the
university might introduce or it
might be some other form of
written authorization because it
is a little different in each
employer we didn't want it we
don't adopt a blanket yes we
always look at the totality of
service Mr chair and Senator if
a particular university had in
their policy in defined that you
would just secretary have to
follow that correct.
Absolutely Mr chair Senator
separate okay well I know that
gives me a little bit of comfort
because in our analysis we we
see that there was support from
the university presidents but
then we also saw some opposition
from one of the universities and
considered it an unfunded
mandate without appropriation
but it kind of falls in between
that the university has the
authority to set rules or policy
that would be respected by the
by the department of I think
that would be in their best
interest to make sure that they
define you actually can make
that call on hiring someone so I
guess I'm more comfortable with
it now that I understand this
thank you very much thank you.
Thank you senator Senator okay.
Mr Chairman who passed for the
past second second by Senator
Neville if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my
Estes.
Senator Neville is Senator
Pinto.
Senator pa yes Senator soul yes
when you have a pass as many as
a mentor members of the
committee.
Again thank you for for working
with us I think it's a cleaner
more understandable and the
title more matches what it
actually does.
Make it easier judicial
Representative Lara.
House Bill to twenty six
instructional materials and
procurement code.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Hi.
Mr yeah.
Mr chair members of the
committee house bill two twenty
six.
Intends to allow or promote more
and more specifically except
school districts from the
procurement code when the use
operational funds to purchase
instructional materials
the school districts already
receive an X. amount of of funds
from the state to purchase
instructional materials these
these these funds are already
accepted by the procurement code
sometimes with the school
districts the to put additional
money into purchasing of the
additional materials and for all
students to have the materials
in their classrooms an example
of that was this this that this
last adoption at my school
district the school district had
to use an additional three
hundred thousand dollars to
purchase to make sure that we
had all of the materials for all
the questions that we needed and
so this bill would exempt those
operational dollars from Dick
for the permit code and Mr chair
members the committee I would
like to have my it might expert
introduce himself.
Good morning and thank yes good
morning Mister chair and members
of the committee I'm great
frosted with the public
education department hi this is
a really important bill we want
to make sure that folks don't
have audit findings typically
folks do as Representative Lara
said supplement their
instructional materials bonding
with other sources I used to
work in federal programs and we
would frequently see requests
forward to use federal funding
to purchase instructional
materials and we want to make
sure that
That not only do folks not have
they don't have to go with the
lowest bid to get the cheapest
instructional materials but they
get the instructional materials
the best benefit there
their schools and their
communities and and also they
don't receive audit findings for
for purchasing appropriate
instructional materials Mr chair
members the committee I would
like to make one note is that
any and all the structure
materials are purchased by the
school districts have been
approved and vetted through the
PED process and with that Mr we
several questions okay
out of the audience those in
support of house bill two twenty
six.
Anyone in opposition.
The couple of you like to come
up in and speak.
Mr chairman members of the
committee marshes registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
coalition and the educated
education leaders and we do
stand in support of this we
think this clarification within
the procurement closed for these
instructional materials is a
positive one thank you thank you
my love.
Billy may.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee lily more TV's
representing the New Mexico
school board association and the
New Mexico score Association
supports sufficient funding
levels for instructional
materials digital textbook and
improve distribution oversight
we've supported this for many
years time is essential when
supplies are needed materials I
need for our students and this
legislation removes cumbersome
requirements that create
inefficiencies in the process
the streamlined the process and
provides for flexibilities for
teachers to get the materials
that they need for their
students we thank the sponsor
for bringing this forward and we
wholeheartedly support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Steve.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
Steve ceilings with that in New
Mexico government relations
director can we stand support of
this bill I'll be brief we just
want to amplify the voices his
support of this bill we think
the the representative would
take Representative Lara for
bring forth this bill and we
respectfully ask that you
consider a to pass thank you
thank you thirty one.
Anyone know what in opposition
if not questions from the
committee.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chair so the last thing that you
said Representative was that
instructional materials.
That are purchased it already
been vetted by the PED I don't
know I thought that districts
have the authority to buy you
some money to buy anything that
wanted is that not true.
The agency that Mr chair Senator
Kernan the districts do have the
option to purchase supplemental
materials that that are not on
the approved on the approved
list so but those are limited
because the funding is intended
for core materials so any any
any if there's up a program or
certain up set of books or
certain like for example Mr
chair Center I had the the
horticulture teacher from my
cell for one of my high school's
requested a a book specifically
that wasn't that was part of the
Texas force association and at
that that book in particular Mr
chair Senator wasn't part of the
drive to wasn't a PED vetted
book but wishes were allowed a
certain percentage of our budget
to purchase supplemental
materials I was able to purchase
that that the that before his
costs thank you Mr chair what is
that percentage than so you're
saying the court instructional
materials are vetted but there
is a what what is that split.
I believe it's sixty forty but
the I I I'll need to check on
that Senator Mr chair let me
like she might have an answer
for us.
That's all right Senator sure.
The come up to the Mike so
people can hear.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Kernan there's actually two
funds to ways that you can
purchase instruction materials
of the district right now all
the way that most districts
actually spend their funding is
through the SCG dollars a
receive so in twenty nineteen
the legislature made a pretty
significant shift and moved most
of the funding for instructional
materials through the SCG I
think right now it's at about
forty three million dollars.
And in that way they can
actually use it on anything
that's right anyway.
before that and still they're
spending in terms of instruction
material fund that was
categorical and in that way
there was a fifty fifty split I
thank you Mr chairman that
really clarifies for me and and
that's kind of what I was
thinking that that they they did
have that okay thank you that's
all I have thank you other
questions.
Mr chairman with the best
solution for a do pass second by
Senator Kernan you'll call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Excuse me Senator Hickey Senator
Kernan.
Senator my S..
Senator bill is Senator Pinto
yes Senator pope yes Senator
soul yes.
Do you have a do pass thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Is Representative Lente they.
Okay.
Welcome Representative.
Sorry I don't recognize all the
house members right off so I
apologize please so good and
thank you for making
please welcome the Senate
education thank you for house
joint memorial three.
Growth.
Yes yes thank you for having me
here good morning Representative
would run that.
New in that house to and we're
here to present that house
memorial three that is set to
celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of updating one of
the patient we also with me is
Representative important for the
community you probably know him
so in order for me to be here
also we came here we win that
Silivri but also we want to make
sure that the reading one of the
question is we're supposed to be
bilingual education is every so
for me to be here not only
hitting three nobody in the
whole country for me yes show me
how the students in education
can actually I am go on and the
state school and pursue a better
location when they feel that
they have seen in the classroom
and when they feel that they are
part of the curriculum so
continuing not something sure.
When Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm a very are to come
and help of Representative Rowe
with her first building from
Senate education and so with
that I was involved a little bit
and and putting together this
memorial if of for just
historical purposes only that
are are needed nineteen seventy
three of New Mexico became the
first state that the the created
a bilingual education and of
course we've of moved it and
change it so many years along
the way the one what we do is
we'd celebrate by doing this is
the fiftieth anniversary this is
a rather strong memorial as you
read it and the reason for that
is because we have done so much
in the last fifty years with the
memorial is more about of not
only celebrated but
contemplating the future where
we need to be fifty years from
now with regards to that really
specifically a there's with
without a doubt on the second
whereas we don't know how the
word as as work but whereas I
would only just take part of it
is that we celebrate diverse
languages representative on the
nineteen probables and demand up
budget for mentioned Q. would
the nation's so by saying that
I'm taking into consideration
all that is we've done with
bilingual education not only
with a Spanish but with all
other languages up to and
including those that are written
and those that are and language
only and of as we move on to to
the rest of the bill you'll
you'll take notice that we're
making of some statements with
regards to those that we have
done in all finished up with
that but first talk about the
fact that even the the LFC did a
report that we need to I think
take a little bit into
consideration exactly where we
they need to be and we put that
in the memorial the state
exactly what the LESC says we
should be doing and taking a
further look at that that
particular concerns that they
particularly had and I will
ended Mr chairman by making note
of of the bill that was I was
very honored and privileged to
be at the top at the particular.
A time when I was here and that
was the New Mexico state still
bilingualism by literacy that is
a really important piece of
legislation all over the nation
now and the NCSL still gives me
a call real as well because
other people are trying what
we've done here and I think
that's the purpose of this
memorials you can get through
the the details of it so where
we've been where we've we're we
want to go we want to be fifty
years from now so with that Mr
Chairman is that right great.
Thank you out of the audience
those in support.
Sir anyone in opposition.
They will would like to to come
up and and speak yes two
minutes.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee on
behalf of transform education
New Mexico we offer our support
for this memorial I'm honored to
say that I am an educator who
served in a state that had this
foresight to enact this
particular act but also more
importantly in terms of our
housing Martinez lawsuit we know
that there's so much potential
in our scholarly community and
in our community at large to
propel the state forward in
developing culturally
responsively responsibly with
stick materials and this is an
opportunity that we invite all
of our lawmakers to step forward
into that work in partnership
with all of these thought
leaders and all keepers that we
know are in our community so I
ask you respectfully.
To pass this memorial thank you
thank you.
Steve.
But I still Mr chair members of
the committee Steve Shani is
within the New Mexico government
relations director in on behalf
of our members it's a little you
brought me instead of that this
state is a stumbling on the
apple young bill Estep replaced.
Number of place to get title you
will check in the muscle rule
you I was stressed out that just
symbols a lot of S. and thank
the what are but it's in those
stuff request that the court
orders but the let the most it
will come up.
Summary English we ask that you
support this bill thank you
that's just thank you Steve.
If we have yes Sir.
He
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is former
governor Rick be here for the
public to suki and I'm here
standing before you on behalf of
governor Melton on the twenty
twenty twenty three tribal
council.
This house Joint Memorial is
something unique as you realize
here in the state of New Mexico
we have a lot to culture.
And that's where as an advocate
in looking at bilingual
languages in the institution of
high schools we initiated a
symbol.
To honor our native students for
being proficient in our native
language and the opportunity to
continue this relationship to
give us that opportunity to
continue to be a state of
sharing our resources and most
importantly for demo to culture
perspective that this community
or the state passed so I
encourage members of the
committee to have a due pass on
house joint memorial three thank
you thank you governor.
We have anyone online.
Okay of questions from the
committee Senator Kernan thank
you Mr chair and.
It's good to see you have
Representative more I really
appreciate that and glad to have
the all of you here today as I
look through this and certainly
had broad support in the house
and I appreciate that there are
a lot of requests to in that I
think that's appropriate I worry
a little bit I'm not worried
that tell me how when you talk
about funding on page I believe
it's page for that be it further
resolved that funds be made
available so help were you gonna
get the money and is set in
house bill two and will it come
later once all of this is is is
coming next year how are you
gonna make sure you have the
money to do what you have here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I'm gonna be for they
have the the sponsor here too so
I think I'm I think you're doing
great and I feel like a master
of right now Mr chairman and
centers I'm sorry for being late
but you know what we talk about
house memorial you know it's
it's with the intent that all
these things are going to come
if not now in the future so I
think a lot of things are into
the future as we look at it we
just want to recognize that it's
been a long struggle to get to
this point to with all the
institutional things that been
put into place we want to make
sure that we recognize those but
with an eye to the future that
there's so much more things to
do to yet to come that we need
to address and so to answer your
question long long long answers
that those I think for the most
part are looking into the future
as we are still struggling
fighting the battles to get
things into the budget thank you
Mr chairman I think I think it's
really great if I could my
analyst just came over and said
in health bill to like you it
looks like there's about five
million dollars from the
education reform Fund for the
bilingual multicultural.
The in in the the path thank you
Mr chairman and and as I was
gonna say I think it's always
good to recognize that there is
a cost to doing some things that
we that we do whether it's in a
memorial or fill in the spirit
that there is money that could
ultimately reduce the appears
yes but not all of it will be
done at one to the present times
journal but that's all I have
just want to make sure that
thank you for bringing this.
Thank you other questions.
Would you pass Mr chair those
are pretty pass second by
Senator Kernan if you'll call
the roll please Senator Brandt
Senator Hickey Senator Kernan
yes Senator my S. centered
renewable Senator Pinto yes
Senator pol yes Senator full
yes.
So you have a do pass
recommendation members members
of the committee that completes
the business that we have right
now.
Just what we see is what's going
on with.
At this point there are no bills
sitting in our queue for Monday
and so we may not have a meeting
on Monday I will certainly work
with the ranking member and let
people know if they come up to
where we need to but probably
will not have a meeting Monday
do be prepared Wednesday I
suspect we'll have a couple
house bill's come over by that.
K. I I the whole bunch of bills
that are sitting in Judiciary
that are sitting here and staff
that are sitting in business
that.
We're open for business we can
help if there's some way we can
justify doing it here.
The bodies got any content and a
bunch over in finance it they
just give us the money we can
decide which are worthy but oh
well we are yes.
I was about you do this before
we adjourn.
Wonderful.
Your daughter she's doesn't
incredible job and.
So please.
And you just introduce the
other.
Unemployment and I made the trip
here today because we're
following Representative your
amendment bill of.
Creation of that because of
Santa Fe Indian school we
already do have similar.
On this and I'm not going to go
on the Senator that and so we're
here to celebrate that yes I
would like to introduce amber.
Wani and I would like to
introduce Kristi sandal
and design of the terror of.
Anything else.
