Today he I think as doctors of.
And
Senator Hickey is still out with
COVID he will be participating
by zoom and so please let me
know if he's got his hand up the
for making a comment and then
certainly as we call the roll
we'll make sure that his focus
counted as well Senator Hickey I
hope you're able to hear us
okay.
Okay.
with that Senator pope let's
start off with you in just the
one twenty and then the next one
will be SB one thirty seven on
the
of thirty minute recess with
senator bill Center pope.
Thank you Mr chair Senate bill
one twenty is the open aroma for
military children SB one twenty
immense two sections of the
public school code to allow
military child dependents to
enroll in public and charter
schools prior to the military
member arriving on station to an
installation in New Mexico.
As we all know military families
are disadvantage when it comes
to the role one options
available to their children due
to military directed
reassignments states can provide
military families with increased
flexibility to access to
district open enrollment
policies.
Now the interstate compact on
education opportunities for
military children includes many
provisions that easy enrollment
challenges for military children
however due to their
unpredictable and high rate of
mobility and limited housing
options military families face
additional challenges not
addressed by the compact so Mr
chair what this bill does is
just allow for military families
in their kids to wear when they
get orders or when they're in
their temporary housings
temporary housing they can apply
and and get their apply to try
to public charter schools or
rules other children in public
schools here in New Mexico with
that we also have an amendment
on this bill Mr chair.
Okay.
Yes the amendment.
Some of.
Right also though we were
discussion current Mr chair on
page three line twenty after
four.
will strike the remainder the
line strike lines twenty one
through twenty four in their
entirety and strike line twenty
five up to the semi colon and at
the semi colon it will read are
the children of military
families living in temporary
housing and are signed comma
awaiting placement or pending a
move to permanent housing in a
different attendance area where
the students family seeks
enrollment of the students in
either their current school
attendance area or the school
attendance area of the permanent
housing.
So.
Discussion on the amendment.
The discussion.
So I guess Mr chair why do we
have to remove this Mr chair
Senator Kernan but we introduced
a bill there were discussions
here negotiations on the wording
and so we work with the
department of dust to the
department of defense liaison to
kind of come to an agreement on
the proper wording to address
you know that would what we want
to
amend in the public school code
so that's really what happened
here's when it came here there
were some issues with with the
wording that we initially did
and so we basically came to an
agreement and and Association.
Mr chair Senator with this
removed are you going to be able
to achieve the intent of what
the original bill stated yes we
are Mr chair Senator and that's
why included the department of
defense liaison to ensure that
thank you.
Other questions about the
amendment.
If not we have a motion and a
second if you call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hey.
Senator Hickey.
On the amendment.
Yes thank you.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my S.
service Senator Neville yes
Senator Pinto yeah Senator pope
yes Senator yes.
Amended bill.
The the Senator with that Mr
Chairman we're ready for
questions or public comment you
get out to the audience those in
support.
Thank you anyone in opposition.
That and so that if you wanna
come up first and we're trying
to do comments through the Mike
so people can hear.
Mr chair members of the
committee we don't make it a
practice to oppose Center pope's
bills or adicional benefits for
military members and I want to
thank the sponsor for sitting
down with us a couple times to
try and find a solution most of
our charter schools really like
the idea of this but we do have
an issue when we add in role
meant preferences in statute for
additional classes of of people
we are diminishing the ability
for people to apply and enroll
in the charter that don't
already have a sibling there or
work at the school or in this
case are involved with the
military we have several very
high demand charter schools that
have fewer than twenty spots
open each year sometimes fewer
than ten spots open if those
spots for students to enroll go
to members of military families
that be great but it closes them
off to have open enrollment for
people in their community that
are not involved with the
military it's an unintended
consequence of the bill but one
that we think is very severe and
puts the question of whether
charter schools are public well
puts it into question for a
number of the schools and we
think that would be a bad
message to send a family so we
really appreciate the intent of
the bill and conversations with
Senator pope we did discuss the
military compact which actually
provide some benefit first for
families out of state to apply
to schools we've actually
clarified that with our members
but but oppose the bill because
of the consequence I outlined
thank you thank you anyone else
in opposition.
Those in support please yeah and
if you'll turn to come line up
so I can see how many and.
Okay.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Bob
Caroline I'm a member of the
veterans and military families
caucus we support SB one twenty
as was mentioned there are some
charter schools in New Mexico
where there's a lot more demand
than there are available slots
under to schools charter and
there are exceptions for current
students so they don't have to
go through the lottery more than
once
children of school employees and
siblings so that parent families
can stay together in the same
school and this adds a fourth
preference for children of
active duty military service
members without the preference
Children a military members
actually worse off than anyone
else you might want to attend
the desirable charter school
that people are competing to get
into.
This is because the open
enrollment period for charter
schools occurs in the spring.
And sometimes many months before
the military family actually
moved to locations served by the
school or may not even know
where they're going when the
military could show up state in
the summer after the enrollment
they go to the bottom of the
list and if it's a desirable
school they stay at the bottom
of the list
So there they really have little
or no chance of getting in the
school and they are you know
disadvantaged Biver virtue of
being
military children so the
department of defense when it's
looking for a location add
additional person for a new
mission they grade locations
around the country based in part
on how well the families of
military members are treated so
this bill will help New Mexico
receive a higher education
school or from the DOD and avoid
the appearance of a penalty
against please against military
children so I think you and I
hope you will give this bill a
do pass recommendation thank you
Sir.
Thank you.
Yes yes.
Hello hi good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce members of the
committee it's not easy being a
military family when those
orders come through this
families have to pack up their
life and settle into a new
community which includes finding
a new home new doctors for the
family and new schools for the
kids I know this experience
personally of my father served
in the United States Air Force
for twenty eight years this
legislation would make these
transitions a little bit easier
for those families allowing them
to start the school enrollment
process for their students
before they arrive in New Mexico
our military institutions in
person contribute so much to our
local and state economies in our
communities this bill proposes a
meaningful way to support them
as they make New Mexico their
home thank you thank you.
Joe.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Joe again
representing the New Mexico
school boards association we
support this bill our membership
of four hundred and fifty
members eighty nine school
districts passed a resolution
and passed it unanimously so
again we support the bill for
all these three.
Thank you.
Senator any though we have one
online Beth then.
You can promote her up please.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in support of this bill my name
is best man and I am Kirkland
airforce base liaison program
manager and the subject matter
expert The New Mexico military
children education compact State
Council.
We move sixty nine times during
your K. through twelve school
years and faced many challenges
as a result our military members
volunteered to serve however
their children or practice this
bill will help level the playing
field for the military children
also Sir I stand in support of
this bill and asked that you
supported as well thank you.
Thank you Mr man.
Center a thing for we go to
questions from the committee no
and questions may center Kernan
thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator just for clarification
so by giving a preference does
that mean that they are.
not required to participate in
the lottery a process I would
support the ability for these
individuals to apply prior to
their moving to to the facility
that that would seem fair but
then they would need to go
through the lottery process just
as all other applicants argue
that I pass that in their
automatically admitted Mr chair
Senator the intent of this bill
is that they are able to apply
and they're in that than the
preferences that they're apply
before they get here except for
temporary housing so it's not an
automatic this is they're able
to actually and then missing
something us the met thanks
that's not correct clarification
please.
Mr chair and senator Kerr sorry
yes.
Mister chairman Senator Kernan
as you outlined and as the
Senator agreed to the bill we
are in support of however that
portion of statute is providing
for automatic enrollment and not
participating in the lottery and
you see it there along with
siblings and the children of
staff.
So Mister chair with PED confirm
that is someone here from PED
that could clarify that just
because I think we have a
difference of opinion here.
Mister chairman Senator it is
the PED's understanding that it
would be problematic because it
would automatically enroll the
students which is against US
Department of it guidance so
Mister chairman Senator any way
to change the bill to give them
the ability to apply.
Whenever if they know they're
coming to to Albuquerque or
Alamogordo or Clovis they could
go ahead and get their names on
the list and be part of that
lottery system but I'm
understanding maybe that's not
what your bill says I certainly
would support that a bit to
automatically give them a slot
we have I think in Clovis
there's a charter school I
believe no no charter school in
clubs as a private school I'm
sorry so I I guess I worry about
doing anything that would
jeopardise
The opinion of the United States
department of education and how
they would treat a charter
school programs in New Mexico
with regard to grants and that's
clearly what it says but is
there any way to to maybe work
on this bill to make sure that
they get in the queue just like
everybody else wants the
enrollment season opens what
what would you think Mister
chairman Senator doing that Mr
chair and Senator Kernan you
know I just insure with those
concerns with you just the and
you know Department education
and the concerns you brought up
I would be willing to see what
we can do on this to to modify
that I think you don't know if
we could do it here we we might
want to bring this back to do
that whatever thing up at but I
you know I I I I just wanted to
you know do this the right way
but not also impact some of that
federal funding if that's the
case that I think Mr chair and
senator you can have a much
better chance of getting a
signed yes because if there's a
concern from PED might even if
it made it all the way through I
would really support your idea I
think they should have every
opportunity to get the you know
get their name put in that pot I
don't know how it all works but
whatever you could do and and I
would like to do it quickly I
I'm not trying to hold this up
so whatever we could do maybe to
to bring that back real fast and
get this for thank you Mr chair
that's all I have Senator
Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
I see one place that there may
be some other places where that
could so all the
Page seven.
You definitely need to remove
for.
That takes it out of the
basically automatic enrollment
preference so what what happens
with that preferences those
students are enrolled if their
space before it ever goes to a
lottery
and so by having that in there
there may be some other issues
but I'm not sure this does what
you're wanting once you take
that out of there so I think
it's something that needs to be
looked at I've actually voted
for this bill and next not the
first time you brought it but
we've never had that concern
raised I didn't realize the US
department of education and DOT
looks like they need to sit down
have a conversation
so that they you our system.
One of the jokes military
intelligence just should be
federal government intelligence
because they don't work together
like they should
we're our department educations
putting on one set of guidelines
and then the DOT's wanting
states to give a preference
which I support but not if it's
going to conflict with the board
of education and harm the
schools that we're trying to
help
So definitely forty three taken
out there may be some other
issues all of the two looking we
will help you with that anyway I
can't thank you Mr Senator
Hickey I know you had your hand
up and so if you please you're
on.
Yes thank you Mr chair and thank
you senator poker bring this
bill it certainly is a
legitimate issue
but I think probably I would
recommend
my two colleagues are bringing
up and
rather than taking it out of the
committee could do we work it
and bring it back it sounds like
Senator Brandt eight able to
provide some insight as well.
Mr chair Senator Hickey I
believe that's what I.
probably want to do after by
from the chair so we probably
want to bring this back to work
on a little bit and come back.
So they come out.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you senator
pope for bringing the support
seems like the charter schools
always want something from us
but yet to our military service
members have you know signed and
I think it's the ultimate
service because you are not when
your detailed somewhere you
don't have that choice and we do
your family to
to go there.
If you have a choice either you
can stay put where you are and
if you decline to move to those
areas then you are probably
jeopardizing in a way you are
What do you do in the military
service so I fully support the
bills where it is I think if
because of the state of New
Mexico we don't have that many
military installations we don't
have a lot of housing for
families to come in to New
Mexico so I think it's a very
minimal number and probably a
very low impact to have this
bill four of full support of the
bill as it is thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chair Senator I
appreciate that and Mr chair I'm
wondering if I could have ask a
question from PED on this issue
before one you want to contracts
are.
And so the question I have and I
remember seeing the FIR where it
was it was going to be impacting
funding from the US department
of education on this preference
of of folks coming in how how
does you just in the the U. S.
department education look at
what we've done with the other
preferences for example a.
Educator that were Senator
school and that child can go
there it put that at risk as
well just just wondering just
want to understand sure.
thank you great frosted from the
public education department
good morning again Mister
chairman Senator pope the
The USD in guidance exempts
I believe four categories of
students specifically saying
that only those four sets of
students including those who are
students of staff members may
participate at at the.
Maybe go to the school without
having to go through the lottery
process.
So basically this is outside
that preference and that's where
we put it at risk correct.
Thank you thank you to
understand that Mr chair thank
you that.
Etcetera I I have.
This could very brief questions
on this particular area the.
I don't have a problem with
taking out this hard preference
yeah with the last people
essentially to jump the line
However I think it's important
that.
They be allowed into the lottery
as soon as they know they're
coming long before they've
established a residency that
they're allowed into the lottery
that that gets them there
because the lotteries often take
place over the summer early they
may know they're coming but not
actually get here until August I
think typically it requires that
people have a and an address
established and and are already
here so I think they really do
get some preference of being
able to get in that lottery
before they are actually
residents of New Mexico and I
think that's really the intent
not that they be allowed to jump
the line to a particular
school or charter does that make
sense in which case I don't
think we any of that is hindered
by removing this section for.
I think that's taking care of
prior where talks about.
be able to have rules prior to
getting here so that they've got
can start establishing things
does that make sense yes Mr
chair and that's really the
intent and and I guess but so my
concern is what we're hearing
about just part of education
but.
The intent there is is not to
have that preference to where
that would be an issue but I'm
just trying to recognize the
concerns for folks I also
recognize the concerns of from
the charter schools but the way
I look at that as well as folks
are going to be PCS sing a
baseline here sometimes in the
spring times in the fall
sometimes in the summer to where
some of them aren't even going
to have the ability to even
apply for the lottery or to get
in some of these charter schools
so in a way I I don't know if
there would be a huge influx to
take all the slots
so Senator and please if
committee if I'm misinterpreting
things I think they're strong
support for this bill.
Where I think we probably could
remove for and you can get a
pass but if you want to take it
back and look at whether there's
other language and bring it back
on Wednesday I think you have
support for doing that it's I've
talked to you Senator unless I
hear different from the
committee and I see everyone
kinda nodding the.
That I'm reading that correctly
so Mr chair I would be willing
to the strike for and and move
forward and with that as well to
continue have discussions to get
this passed and for those of New
and senator you're allowed to if
you went from there to move an
amendment to the strike for on
page seven winds twenty four and
twenty five.
And I think it goes on in the
page eight yeah it's got a
couple words on the page eight.
Mr chair is that I know there
was line for on page seven.
And.
Did you mentioned somewhere else
or was at the UNM the last word
or two words as New Mexico or
whatever is clear over on to
page eight but essentially it
would be strike number four
starting on page twenty four.
Twenty twenty four so okay the
right place for.
Yeah early still.
Mr chair I'd like to move an
amendment to strike.
Line twenty four page seven.
over to page eight.
Okay.
It is in second a discussion on
that amendment.
It's not if you'll call the roll
on the amendment.
And I think that then gets us
support from the charter schools
right now.
Yes.
Senator Brandt yes.
Senator Hickey.
Yes.
Yes Senator my assistance
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto the.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator soul yes okay so you
have amended bill any.
Twice as twice amended and we
have a motion to do pass on.
And I live Senate bill one
twenty best place amended if you
call the roll please on the bill
as amended.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Maestas.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto yeah.
Senator pope yes Senator all
yes.
Thank you senator and.
I appreciate your willingness to
kind of work through what
because proceed to some of the
concerns thank you Mr chairman
thanks for we have not to come
back again.
Senator Neville and if we know
where the attendance going get
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino that he
will be up next he's in rules.
Yeah they were on the bill in
front of his so whenever he's
able to get a.
So we are on Senate bill one
thirty seven to require thirty
minute recess for some great
senator Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman of the Senate bill
one thirty seven years old and
contained on.
So the last but the last page
two so it's one paragraph on
page four and five it basically
includes in the statute.
wording to the effect that there
will be
Thirty minutes of at least
thirty minutes of unstructured
child directed supervised recess
time each day which time is not
included as part of the
instructional day of research of
in addition to physical at and
it may be aligned with other
programs and that's the essence
of the bill it's all about one
paragraph this came about
because my experts who will
allow to speak she's on the zoom
call on she has written a book
and I'll pass this around in
just a minute it's called the
play prescription there's other
documents and information out
there.
Many states and I've got a list
of agency in this book as it
passes around and look at all
the states that have adopted it
that's actually several years
older is probably more than that
and the essence is is that kids
learn a lot about social order
and all kinds of things that I'm
not an expert in all that drive
lease yes I'm just a moment and
she can tell you why this is
important and why we need to
consider this many many if not
most school districts already do
this to a great degree and so
it's really not but there are
some that don't so this is to
make sure that all kids have
that opportunity because it is a
very important part of their
curriculum besides math and
reading and all those other
things we teach this is for
kindergarten through third grade
and all a past drive leases
program.
I just.
With that I would like my
expertise on the soon to make a
few comments yes please after
Lea should be online.
Ariel are you there.
yes I was waiting to get a muted
thank you
good morning thank time to speak
all start with that revisiting
the state of New Mexicos
education system is unnecessary
I believe that everyone grant
it's of the full measure of its
challenges and also understands
the importance of recess is a
crucial part of a child's day
but it's not merely a break but
an extension of their learning
and development especially for
grades K. through green what I
struggle to believe is that
everyone grasps how
exponentially your challenges
especially socialemotional for
mental health has grown post
comment I'm on the front lines
every day immense tools and I
bear witness that we are at
crisis level then this bill is a
targeted new approach for
improvement of Peron's dying at
we can't solve our problems with
the same thinking we used to
create them.
All the research.
Well the bill revisits the use
of recess aligned with already
in place programs outlined.
as individual school rules and
control being fit for purpose
they are already using of the
bill intends that children are
sure of the benefits of recess
while in class because research
shows that screens dominate most
of their lives when they're not
in class of the bill counts
recess as lady based
instructional time meaning with
those said purpose of not
escalates tension or cutting
recess for extended instructors
and as senator Neville said
there are many states already in
line and I love us New Mexico
during the other fifteen states
that already have reached a
recess legislation to address
and Services students growing
crisis mental health needs of
while still keeping a strong
academic focus in on behalf of
New Mexicos children who might
serve every single day and have
for the past two decades we also
need support this bill thank
you.
Thank you the the Senator that's
it I think there's fifteen
states on the list I won't read
to let states but there's
probably a few more since then
that was two thousand fifteen
data so this is a very important
we take care of a grand daughter
who's in third grade and I can
guarantee you it's very
important for her day to have
that times were she'd
interaction socializes and some
kids go off and sit and buy
themselves some don't but that's
how we develop society and
become state senators and that
whatever we become with that
I'll stand for questions and
etcetera I see that there's an
amendment here I think that's a
correction and I forgot about
that.
It's a and I typed it looks like
it's just technical words and
things of that sort.
So would you like to move the
amount of the amendment there
type orders.
So we we have an amendment is it
is just typos wording
corrections it I don't think
it's substantive at all so we
have a motion seconded the
discussion on the the amendment
if not if you call the roll
please so we formally do this.
Thank you.
On the amendment yes.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan it's center
my Estes Senator Neville yes
hello.
Senator pope yes Senator soul
yes so we have a mandate with
that out to the audience first
show of hands how many in
support of this bill.
Anyone in opposition.
Okay Google in opposition if you
come up to the the Mike please
do we have anyone online.
In support.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee jokey and with the
New Mexico school board
association I want to thank the
senator for bringing this bill
forward I think the intent is
great
for you know providing for the
health and safety and well being
of our students however we feel
this would be a local decision
we as you know we favor local
decision making on these issues
we feel that our school boards
should be able to make this
decision whether to go to from
fifteen to twenty or even thirty
minutes I would well I was in
school I would prefer forty five
minutes or an hour of recess but
but that's beside the point
don't think kids vote.
The but again I think if it was
a recommendation rather than the
mandate I think that we could we
could support it currently the
statues to not address the
recess and the wellness guide
that is put out by the I think
by the department of education
let ask for a fifteen minute
recess so again thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul with public
charter schools of New Mexico do
want to thank the sponsor and
our local researchers well for
the work that they've done on
this bill but I stood behind to
geo and the school board
association because I know he to
articulate our issues better
than I could which is just the
fact that we'd like local
control over this issue many of
our schools are already do this.
Prior to the potential of
passing extended hours for
elementary schools it's hard to
fit this in right now for some
schools depending on their
transportation.
Issues and things of that nature
so appreciate the intent of the
bill but stand in opposition
currently thank you.
Thank you and I think we have
one online of this straddling
straddling.
Yes.
This is under struggling.
Information.
Can you hear me please yes
please go ahead okay thank you
also my time now
I have
I have lived in terms of my
whole life and raised four
children and they all have
eleven grand kids that was all
live here in reside in
Farmington I'm also on the
school board in Farmington that
is not who I am speaking for I'm
speaking for myself but as you
can see I'm heavily invested in
children especially requests and
I have eight of them the under
our excuse excuse me now I have
nine because we have a brand new
one under the age of nine.
Recess is very important we have
very social kids their mental
health is has been really
affected of since COVID the more
time that they have to socialize
we have found the better off
they are but they're it's still
hard the discipline is a problem
in the schools I expect that had
conversations with many of the
principles and this is a problem
and I agree with Joe that we do
need local control but I think
that this would be a good start
for the rest of the state you
may not have the backing of from
there Representative so I I
support this
just for the mental health of
our children and thank you for
the time.
Thank you and we have one more
Karen lu settle.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee we I am a physical
therapist he acted
Representative worked with young
children for many years I'm with
the American physical therapy
association New Mexico chapter
and it's very important for
children to have a change in
their activity over the course
of the day so putting this into
more than a guidelines make sure
that children will have that
right that
Social emotional time a chance
to guide their own learning and
have some changes in that
activity over the course of the
day so it's very important to
their their sensory
organization.
So thank you very much we stand
and support thank you misli so.
I think what we go to the
committee question Senator.
No Mr chairman I think of the
only other comment I might have
is that the because of COVID
because of our changing the
rules on how many days and hours
we're going to have a school it
may be more important than ever
to try to get this in statute so
that we can sure that we don't
sacrifice the kids social
development in in place of
trying to make sure they have
enough hours in the all of the
rules thank you Mr thank you
questions from the Canadian
government.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you senator I I worked in
a school many many years ago in
Houston Texas and I think there
were twelve hundred kids
elementary kids in that school
it was first of all the school
is too big and and we didn't
have recess and I lasted there
couple years and then I moved in
I couldn't participate in that
as a teacher that I will tell
you when you say on page four
line twenty three that this time
is not included as part of the
instructional day sore you
saying that as you as you know
we think it's nine hundred forty
ours right that we go to the pet
kind of explain what that would
mean if we added thirty extra
minutes.
To every K. twelve K. three.
School but would would put that
look like and then that's it.
How do we pay for that could the
Pat answer to defer to pay yeah.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan this
great frosted from the public
education department and
it would at present other than
lunch the rest of the school day
is counted as part of the
instructional day so this would
if we were to require thirty
minutes of recess it would also
require increasing the and
instructional day thirty minutes
if you were at the nine ninety
nine bottom right now if you're
at the the minimum requirements
so Mister chair up what what
what the cost of that be because
contracts currently with our our
educational with our teachers
and everybody that would
increase the amount of time that
would be in the classroom
classroom what would that mean
but with that look like for cost
then you have to pay them for
being there another thirty
minutes Mister chairman Senator
Kernan the the the average is
well over a thousand hours I
don't know that the cost would
actually
four I think most schools would
be able to incorporate thirty
minutes of recess that was not
part of the instructional day
without significant increase in
hours but it's certainly not all
there would be some that are at
the minimum now and would be
required to increase their
instructional day.
And we I I don't have those
figures available right now to
provide to you but that is
something that we can calculate
thank you Mr chair with that
shift then time spent in other
areas it said they're over the
nine hundred forty and they have
capacity but would it shift what
they're doing now to accommodate
for the thirty minutes I mean
maybe time they're spending on
reading or math that would have
to kind of shift that and take
some of those time minutes away
in order to allow for for the
other Mister chairman Senator
Kernan that is a possibility yes
that that
Time if they didn't already have
thirty well even if they did
have thirty minutes but we're
not over that.
So if there thirty minutes over
the required nine ninety F.
present so let's say they were
at ten twenty but thirty minutes
they had thirty minutes of
recess then it would not cost
anything additional because they
already had that worked into the
schedule however
as I mentioned there are some
that would be close enough to
the nine ninety or not exactly
at nine ninety where they would
have to increase their
instructional day and and that
could be that that would we have
not calculated that cost yet so
Mister chair thank you very much
and senator do we know how many
school districts do not allow
for recess for the housing
kindergarten through third I
don't have those that data
Mister chairman Senator there
are experts here that might have
a feel for that so Mr rounds
just walked in and he's he's
always good for numbers and then
the PED might have some
information I don't have those
numbers.
Thank I just I just wonder if we
have a problem.
Are we don't have a problem I
just you know I I don't know the
the information I got is you
visited Mr chairman with the
various people was that most
school districts accommodate
something similar to this not
all and and that's the situation
we're trying to address is that
there's a significant percentage
out there that do not
incorporate to recess into the
into the curriculum thank you
very much that's all I have
thank you other questions from
the committee Representative.
Mr chairman Senator I
appreciate.
What you're trying to do in the
bill but I've just always been a
staunch supporter of local
control of even more than some
of the.
Oops the state they believe in
local control
so I I just can't support
something that takes away the
control from local governing
body who selected by their local
community
I think this is something we
definitely ought to encourage
districts to do without
encouraging by showing on the
research that you brought for us
but I really believe that it's
up to local body to decide these
things as other calendar for
that reason I can't support the
bill.
Thank you for the comments.
Not just the sort of along the
same lines as very concerned
about the time would not be
included in the instructional
day which yup we look at an
average of somewhere around a
hundred ninety days that's going
to add ninety five hours to to
the totals on that and and
that's fairly expensive in needs
to be paid for I'm also
concerned it says shall provide
and they haven't been of
principal there days when their
thunderstorms all day kids are
not going outside how are you
going to find thirty minutes a
recess for every kid that is non
structured adult eight just
student led.
Teachers are good just a okay
kids I'm going to just sit back
for half an hour do whatever you
want in the class.
So I'm very worried about the
shall requirement in their I
believe in and Greg you might be
able to help but I think the
guidelines from the pad our.
For districts to provide
unstructured recess for kids but
doesn't have a guarantee
is that accurate or do you know.
I'd have to find out I don't
know I think the guidelines are
and I think more and more
educational leaders are
understanding the importance of
of recess but putting in a
required must thirty minutes per
day means if there is a day with
an early an unexpected early
release for whatever reason then
the school and teachers are in
violation of the law and that's
concerning so if I might Mr
chairman of the good doctor
lease would like to comment on
some of the things she's heard
that we are at yes Sir.
He also has a phone.
Okay.
doctor Lee's could you give us
some comments to toward some of
these concerns.
Well I keep but what I'm what
I'm hearing is that it's like a
a set aside specific thirty
minutes
but what as I had Representative
earlier is that you know yes I
it is thirty minutes of play
based learning which is if in
the schools you have maybe this
amount of time for E. LA and
it's and it's thirty minutes yes
you may spend fifteen minutes of
that but then use the other use
the other fifteen minutes which
could count as the recess time
as play based learning which is
based on
you know outside opportunities
where where it's still
you know supervised teacher let
but it's more child child
directed based on objective so
it's it's not just this
you know thirty minutes of of go
time it's still within
objective.
You know whether it's based on
E. LA social studies science for
K. through three that that is a
possibility.
As I stated based on the various
programs bullying prevention
you know so S. C. L. social
emotional skills compromised to
go she ation there are so many
standards that can be aligned
with things that you can use
according to that time.
Which can be included in part of
the school day.
That's all I have to say.
Thank you Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair
It you know that if we get these
things that are really good
ideas.
the.
What are the devil's in the
details
and and I understand that and
could create an immense amount
of bureaucratic headaches
but I mean signed up both part
symbolically because I think
points being made by the expert
are so true I just just more
interesting check it slides
skills and that once my skills
are learned so much earlier and
having time to honor that and
faster that is so important so I
would probably at both yes
symbolic act of yes the that
also expressed to PED are we
somehow makes work that social
interaction skills in a
spontaneous format RP are these
early grades when they kind of
set the pattern my thank you for
the opportunity to comment Mr
chair thank you a motion from
committee.
Have a motion to table from
Senator Pinto if you'll call the
roll please.
Senator Brandt from all of the.
Senator Hickey.
And out.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my
Estes Senator Neville no.
Senator Pinto.
Senator pope yes Senator soul
yes.
And your bill is it Sir thank
you Mr and and again I don't
think there's anybody that
doesn't think recess is a good
idea.
This is really it's a
requirement I think the next
time that.
Thank you senator Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino and thank you for
waiting patiently and coming
back as we told you you have to
built up Senate bill one forty
eight community college in
branch college health programs
and then we'll do one forty nine
right afterwards on the study
free tuition for certain
programs.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members of these two
bills came from the work of the
interim health and Human
Services Committee this past
summer.
One of the things that was a
recurring theme throughout the
summer during our meetings in
Los crucis in Albuquerque Gallup
Taos and Santa Fe was that we
seven serious shortage of
behavioral health professionals
in the state we have a separate
bill that's addressing the upper
levels of that pipeline trying
to get more master's level
counselors and social workers in
doctoral level psychiatric
nurses and so on.
Even bachelor's level these two
bills deal with with two aspects
of that study one is the of of
that work this summer one is a
request that we we appropriates
the money to the higher
education department to give
come back to us next year with
and that's this one forty eight
the branch college of and
community college program.
What would it take for us to
have in all of our community
colleges in all of our branch
colleges enhanced feeder
programs into those behavioral
health field so community health
worker programs a peer
counseling programs a level.
Community the social worker
programs social service aid
programs there's a whole variety
of such pro a drug and alcohol
counseling programs many of
those already are in existence
already this is a study to see
what would it take to get more
of them out there what do we
need in the way of a bit of
enhanced funding for those
programs to make them work.
And and the ideas that they
would then feed into the
bachelor's level programs that
will that exist already in in
the in the four year colleges
around the state.
Thank you and the audience those
in support.
Thirty one in opposition.
If not we'll go to questions in
the committee.
I guess Senator I I don't see
anyone else's hands up there
service chairman and up the the
chairman here knows my feelings
on the special appropriation
bills C. served with me for
eight years and public affairs
but have have you talked to hire
there they wanting to do this
with they do this through I mean
I'm sure they have to contracted
out because with that we might
get into anti donation issues
because we can't do need for
services my understanding from
committee previously so how do
we do all that and thank you.
Mister chairman Senator Brandt.
We had originally or I had the.
With the committee support
originally proposed just going
ahead and appropriating a large
amount of money trying to get
the appropriation to do this and
then I talked to the higher
education department and they
their feeling was who the better
to take a year for them to put
in the time to to to find out
what's going on already which of
those programs are the ones that
are that are most likely to
enhance our our supply of
behavioral health professionals
in the long run and then how
best to go about it
and and so I said well how much
would it take for a for a full
blown study and the could you do
it for fifty thousand and they
thought a hundred thousand was a
better figure.
That would be it would be
possible to contract out get
this done for a hundred thousand
and because we are getting
something in return as as you
argue the other day I don't
think we would have a violation
of the anti donation for us
thank you we we contract for
studies all the time thank you
Mr chairman Senator appreciate
that and and I thank you for
having reached out to them a lot
of times we see these and people
haven't which has kind of become
one of my pet peeves in this
place so I appreciate that I'm
actually support these ones
thank you thank you.
Thank you David Senator Hickey
after the okay thank you Mr
chair and and I support this as
well and looking at the goal is
to study the feasibility of
creating additional training
programs you know I wish that
they could maybe go a little
beyond that because I think when
you talk about behavioral health
providers once I've completed
just the credentialing piece
takes too long and that's I
think going to be addressed in
another bill because
credentialing is what is is
really one of the major
roadblocks so whether that's
part of this study or maybe
we're doing something else
legislatively this session not
just credentialing but then once
their credentials getting loaded
into the program I have a
constituents back in my
community they got credentialed
but they weren't loaded so they
can get paid and these are
things that we can take care of
and and make those who are
responsible for paying providers
to do what is right so this is
one piece and I don't know where
the other piece fits in but
certainly we need to continue to
discuss that and get that
changed thank you thank you
senator Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino
what are the certificate
programs or these course credit
programs and
I'm wondering if they're just
certificate programs they
qualify for the governor's up of
speak to which.
For the governor's I I missed
the last question up that the at
it would there be free tuition
for these courses in these
community colleges and are they
are they three credit courses
are of a strict gets.
Mr chairman and senator Hickey
of I honestly don't know if the
certificate programs are
included in the opportunity
scholarship but I don't know
that answer the higher rate.
We don't have anybody in center
I I believe that they are
provided they are leading to a
credential that leads to a job
good.
Yeah.
Mr chairman and senator Ortiz Y.
Pino I states they have to be
street credit programs two I for
the free tuition and I'm hoping
that the governor up
looks at doing this for people
looking for this ticket the.
Up having.
Being very profit mental health
the community health workers for
gauge that.
For people with addictions Care
counselors are absolutely
essential
heard me say a number of times
you don't get sobriety without a
year of sobriety you don't get a
year of sobriety without
virtually the ability to have
twenty four seven interpersonal
connection with other peoples
particularly in times of stress
and and creating and if you're
counselors have been shown all
over the country to do an
incredible job of meeting that
need vastly improving
individuals chances of getting
to longer term so I south I
certainly support bills thank
you Senator for green I members
about it and the intern this
summer but I would ask them to
also look at is there some way
that this could be potentially a
certificate course rather than
that two year eighty eight to
create and it's so it's there's
some way to get free tuition is
against the tuition for these
type of things are often
unaffordable but folks thank you
very much Senator to speaking on
Mr chair.
Thank you and and I think the
idea of the study is to deal
with those very issues is yeah
which ones are certificate which
ones are leading towards for
your purpose which ones have
jobs waiting at the end of them
as an associates yeah I I think
it's all of the above is the the
point in my correct Senator Mr
Chairman yes exactly okay any
other questions in the
committee.
I had one or two very short ones
we keep hearing and I've heard
it from our finance chair are
you putting junior money towards
this.
I'm I'm somewhat joking but
that's kind of his response
whenever people have the small
funding months like wanted to
use your junior money.
No light at this point because
we had to turn it in today but I
had already committed all of my
junior money to other things to
so no I I didn't particularly
for the thank you senator he's
got a bill coming up which is
similar that I'm gonna pass also
whether he committed his junior
money point for that particular.
Bill and I guess similar to
Senator Brandt pants gives me
what we're kind of focused
always together on things but
up.
I've got the same concern about
the higher ed's ability to to do
this they are short handed
Senator FTEs and but that you
have talked to them and they are
interested and capable of at
least contracting this out.
The do this work yet Mr chairman
at yes of says secretary of
Rodriguez of assured me that if
we got them enough money hundred
thousand she's out would do it
we could we could get it done we
get an I have a bill supporting
research where it potentially
could be done in our
universities with that research
money for state agencies to
contract out these kinds of
issues so that might be where
she's planning so little help
getting that money of any any
other comments.
The motion two thousand of the
one forty eighth motion for you
pass on Senate bill one forty
eight second a second by pope if
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes etcetera
biases send me a bill yes
Senator Pinto yeah Senator post
yes Senator so yes yeah would
you pass senator thank you and
and one forty nine Mr Chairman
is is again a hundred thousand I
read in this case.
We had we had thought well we'll
just put money into making
better for you starting to that
one I think Senator.
It had a COVID.
Much for those junctions are
that Senate bill one forty.
That the motion for a do pass a
second their second and again I
do wanna make sure that we if
they are there comments or
questions from the committee.
Seeing none of you'll call the
roll on one forty ever do we did
have a second right hello for
one forty nine Senator Brandt
yes Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan Senator by assistance
center can develop yes Senator
Pinto.
Hello.
Yes centerfolds yes.
Thank you very much.
Let's get back to your life
senator elect rules.
that I.
Don't see Senator moon yo's the
center Brent Turner you able you
want to go now we're really
trying to in order but we do
have center Moores here.
I think his okay just want to
make sure and check with you all
the Senator Wirth thank you Mr
chairman thank you members so
just for the the public we have
jumped down to Senate bill two
nineteen college student athlete
endorsement we will then go back
up to to to into eleven after
that and again for the public we
will not be hearing Senate bill
two twenty seven on the U. N. M.
Chicano and Chicana studies been
rolled over to Wednesday.
So sorry Senator please thank
you Mr rich preacher you jump in
head so I get back rules also
Senate bill two nineteen is a
cleanup bill of legislation we
passed dealing with student
athletes and universities
name image likeness you for all
the circles who are sports fans
around the country of seeing a
lot of information about student
name image likeness last number
years I'm proud that then
Representative Maestas who of
students shot today for his bill
and I when he was in the house
sponsor this legislation we
weren't the first state to pass
name image likeness are
California wasn't about six or
seven of state for for us we're
the first state to implement it
because we change the
implementation date and weeks
before our bill became law the
NCAA decided that they weren't
going to deal with and and I'll
anymore and they pulled back and
so what this bill does two years
later to come back and do over
to clean up our from that and
one of the unintended
consequences of in our language
that we had put in there because
of NCAA rules that prevented
universities from being involved
with and I all members like this
we have put language in there
saying that they could not every
other states since then since
the NCAA has pulled back their
rules on this issue has allowed
universities so we're in the
awkward position right now you
see a lot national press on this
that our coaches are not allowed
to be involved and I'll yield
Mister Norris Affleck Department
but they follow their student
athletes on Twitter or tech talk
or whatever they see these deals
so it's very awkward situation
and so we want to remove that
language that universities on
have you should've also received
an amendment if not I just check
with staff I'm not sure god here
that the university's flagged as
a major issue in New Mexico
state's also was all the right
here also we work with in the
original language we have I
don't believe that we have an
amendment at this point it is
very simple but.
One moment I could if it's not
here I did ask the the
university's work with us there
so I could present that to you
lawmakers practice expressed the
issue first it would be
interesting issue first so merry
and trying to get a feel for
where it is that we go to the
specific wording if it's
relatively clean and started to
be really clings on page to
start online line with put in
there that the student athletes
could have their own shoe deals
which is Kovesi very lucrative
sometimes what that did is it
put an issue and UNM they have
their own contracts are like
Collett at a new news maybe
addressed a little bit before
Sir ma'am it's going to be just
a strike section two on page two
line nineteen through thirteen
leave the or and such is going
to remove that sure that shoe
portion and that's something
that they both universities
flagged as a concern.
And thank you are actually some
that are
analysts had come up with is
your concern about that because
there's a long term contract
with the university and we can't
make a lot here that violates
what's already a contract runs
so that actually fixes a problem
I was going to bring up later.
Everybody understand what the
amendment is in the plan the
reason why.
The amendment would be online
page two.
Right section to start online
nine through thirteen and right
remotely as player leaving three
number as needed and then but
leave the or.
So to read line eight like this
or athletic Representative
representation for and then the
new re number three.
Prevent a student athlete
they're very comfortable and
understand the amendment.
Discussion on the amendment what
we need to have a motion for
them and their space.
Motion by Senator Brandt and
second by Senator Kernan.
Discussion on the amendment.
See if you will call the roll
please Senator brass yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my
assistance center in the bill
yes Senator Pinto yeah Senator
pope yes centers sold yes we
have an amended bill your and so
I'm I'm here to answer questions
or to testimony from an issue
and you and and if you want Mr
chair okay thank you at the
audience first your hands those
in support of this bill.
Anyone in opposition.
So if you both like to come up
and use the the Mike so that is
clearly picked up on the the
web.
Morning Mr chair members the
committee quite nebula New
Mexico State University we stand
in support of the bill for all
the reasons already outlined
thank you.
Thank you.
Mr chairman of the committee my
name is Mike fully with the
University of New Mexico we have
our vice president for athletics
here testifying for the bill and
I just want to express
University support thank you.
Thank you I didn't see anyone in
opposition twenty one four
against online nope so we're
questions from the committee.
Seeing that.
Motion FOR do pass by Senator
Kernan seconded by which of the
bill.
Your call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Maestas Senator Neville yes
Senator Pinto yeah Senator pope
yes Senator soul yes.
You have to do has as amended I
think you ought to Judiciary
next with this thank you Mr that
and I I understand some of the
members on that committee can be
really is probably tough and
just point out that I'm bringing
the NMSU and UNM together this
is the age of of where and it's
frightening it's frightening.
Seminoles.
The morning and just a reminder
I think we're doing alright with
things but we do have a hard
stop at ten forty five so just
reminder to the committee
members I but I think we're
doing pretty well on schedule
with things so Senator yes
morning Mr chairman members
committee of the Senate bill to
to does a study for higher ed
institutions to look at the I.
N. G. in the cost of of higher
education.
And that's pretty much helpful
does.
Okay.
the audience those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
This if you want to come up in.
Good morning senator more.
Okay thank you your smiling face
thank you it's wonderful seeing
you as well I Vanessa Hawker the
executive director for the New
Mexico independent community
colleges.
And as council university
president is not in the room I
was told I could speak on their
behalf as well both the captain
and in my C. C. strongly support
this bill.
I have been involved in New
Mexico higher education for over
thirty years and to the formula
has changed it has shifted it
has been manipulated but we have
not looked at what really is
going on in New Mexico higher
education and what do we need to
do to support our students to be
responsible to our taxpayers and
senator Munoz this bill will
help us to do this so we thank
the senator for bringing this
and we strongly encourage you
vote favor of it thank you thank
you.
Thank you the only one in
support is there anyone online.
Any opposition I didn't see any.
Anything else for we go to
committee questions questions
from the committee.
Senator well we've been hearing
lots of of things of this sort
that are one time funding are
you supporting this with your
junior money.
I didn't look to my junior money
because that hire its secretary
was gonna do this and so I don't
know if we really want to put
junior money and I don't have a
request from either well if we
really want to put you money
into this.
Has the higher ed department
supported this I mean are they
are they able to handle it in
who's going to do the study.
That's going to be turned over
the money can be turned over to
the hiring department in they're
going to hire somebody to do the
study.
Are they aware that this that
this Senator is aware this right
we know we have a a new issue
and if you just look at what's
happening Mason lands today
right
of the students aren't there
there shredding documents we
know that I. Angie used to be on
the square footage and we change
that and so now we're into the
go back and look person per
student cost we're getting with
opportunity and we're getting a
lot of their combined cost.
Senator what Senator Hickey went
to speak also up for got I'll
get back to him up.
Who do you envision doing the
study I mean it the money flows
through higher ed the I don't
think have the person or to do
this what kinds of organizations
would contract to do this and
fully understand New Mexico's
higher ed funding formula takes
about a year just to understand
that much less make
recommendations I think that all
determined by the secretary
hired.
Senator is the the intent then
that whatever comes out of this
study that that is how higher it
is going to be funded into the
future and I was worried about
the me back up I always worry a
little bit that sometimes we
find things because we don't
want to actually do things and I
want to make sure this is
something that's leading towards
really making change rather than
signing something so we can put
off another year actually doing
something Mexico tech the study
in a believe it costs them about
thirty thirty five thousand to
do their study and they came
back in they can get that to the
committee of where they were
short where they overspent where
the cost savings could be
determined that in that
institution particular problem
cells because they say we're
short on on funding is there
trying to figure out where where
they're holes were and where
they over spent in their costs
and once we sing that study we
figured that since I NG has been
the topic in LFC for a couple
years now.
And how we fund higher ed
institutions in any quality and
equity right are so far apart in
so many institutions across the
state that we need to get a
handle that and
I give you a couple of highlands
he doesn't have dual credit
students.
Is over is over fund because
I'll have bill credits western
New Mexico which has dual credit
students is underfunded inequity
so it's it's it's so hard to
manage throughout the state.
Thank you and I know that my
area New Mexico state always
feels very shorted compared to
you and them on the funding
that's available and how it
flows through that formula and
so you know I I guess I'm hoping
that this truly is a study that
will be utilized of by to try
and make those fair rather than
everybody going to their camps
to just do a study to justify
what's already being done could
agree with you more has to be
fair across the state and no
matter if you're a college or
university in Albuquerque if
you're in a branch causing
Gallup it should be fair
complete across the state and
how we fund those.
UP in senators is also going to
include the research side of
university funding or just the
the student credit side of it I
use this fully open to all of
the funding or is it and then
limited in any way in talking to
the secretary little bit we're
looking at just I NG for the and
how how the hell the disparity
is from one school to.
Senator as I look at your bill
it doesn't say just I in need it
says funding which would include
research funding I would think.
I haven't asked for that
question and thought about it
so.
Okay this is what's listed here
means the full funding not
narrowly towards how much we're
supporting tuition in particular
things that are directly
students which are very
important higher education in
many of a maybe not as much down
at the two year schools but
certainly all of the four year
schools Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
Munoz up thank you for bringing
this concept or I have a couple
of questions about it
number one that concept Sarah
I'm of the needs deeper
definition if there is a
Ali H. that dominates and
arts and literature it's
probably significantly less
expensive to train the students
that are eight college
university that specializes in
science has laughs and so forth
and so I'm wondering if there's
some way to
normalized at their cross the
extents of the emphasis and
anyone school versus another do
you have any observations on
that.
You know my observation is it
costs more to get a doctor New
Mexico that does cost more to
get a nurse a nurse in the in a
program at eastern New Mexico
for four years tuition books and
everything is about forty
thousand if you go do you have a
nursing degree for four years
and books intuition is about
sixty thousand so there's some
differences that happens in that
I don't know why but there is.
Thank you Senator soap this
study would try and look at get
apples to apples find out
where the differences are add
up.
Judge Lee explain those
differences
which I think is a very good
thing to do that's kind of
normal business the county and I
think that the state could use a
lot of that
my second question is a little
bit of the fox guarding the
henhouse your
And
and also if there's enough money
to to really do this study yeah
that
Since you're reading the
department of higher education
the study there are always
biases even though I know it's
that you talk about contracting
it out of those prices to work
their way into a contract I
think you'd really be you you
get you get more clarity with
less emotion excuses
differences if you were to put
it to stop independent agency
that act now irons in the fire
particularly interest I think
you know that what we really
have that just things like that
is
the LFC particularly since we're
talking about finances did you
consider having them our take on
this contract study it come up
with answers.
You know Mister chairman Senator
Hickey we run into problems with
higher ed institutions we don't
leave it at the higher end
Department of how they can
legally gather the information
and and get it all and get
accurate LFC we can request
information that doesn't mean
they give us all the information
or everything I don't think L.
she's prepared to do this to
contract with someone to get the
study I think the requirements
for the higher rate secretary to
get all the information from all
the schools will be easier done
that way then LFC trying to.
Try to ask for and what is
required from the higher it
Department.
Thank you for that insight
last week again I'm just I'm I'm
concerned about oversight my
experience in the legislature
having come from the business
community is that why we're
starting to get some oversight
from LFC we are having the kind
of rigorous oversight time to do
it I'm multiple programs up
throughout the state and
perhaps it's only S. C. or
somewhere over the summer really
going into hi very up insightful
credit call review of the
results of the study so where we
are seeing some potential biases
approve revised that we can get
that cleared up again just it's
it's it's the lack of
independent oversight that
worries me
particularly it it I I know we
have none our health care in
health care is just a run away
costs I'm not just in New Mexico
it's everywhere in the country
this is really no accountability
for oversight and the spending
and and measurement my sense is
that in education particularly
higher education we just keep
shoveling money at and they're
always going to take it and use
more it's very low our ability
for how it gets spent but the
results are so it's probably
somewhat of an editorial comment
again I just think the state
would that be getting much more
value if there were some
entity that that did oversight
of this study that that just the
and I I don't know if you have
any other thoughts.
that otherwise I'll just the
that is Madam for further order
thank you.
Thank you I'm you know I wish we
had some oversight committees
that could do
all budget oversight from PED to
to school districts to hire and
institutions I just don't have
that.
The only way since I've been
here the only way we can really
gather information either on
pensions or pay rules is we got
to hire an outside company to
come to the studies that
specialize in that Hey and and
see what the outcome is.
Thank you.
No.
Thank you and and I
Mr Chairman maybe this isn't the
venue but I'd sure like to know
what the results of the study
act the.
Then after that I right but
aside
right I'd like I'd like to see
the results of the study to see
Have more public scrutiny and
maybe we could be you are the
results of the study yeah or at
least the the progress on the
study sometime next year I know
it's not a bills but yet as the
senator mentioned we just we we
don't have a R. we just don't do
oversight activities your bill's
we don't go back and do
oversight and the the
superficial and very fast
oversight of LESC over the
summer just doesn't get that
needed to really provide the up
are very important that insights
that can actually change the
stop thank you for the
opportunity to comment on that I
think it's a great idea and I
hope that leads to more studies
at their equity and most of all
just a concept that maximize the
value.
The eight taxpayer of New Mexico
both health care and education
are just kind of huge up buckets
that that overflow we keep
throwing money at it not getting
a hell of a lot better all of
our I'd like to know why thank
you very much.
Thank you Senator one other
comment a little bit what
etcetera he picked up on.
This has nothing on who gets the
report where does it go looks at
it who uses it to make a
decision higher ed as you know
doesn't really have a home in
the interim L. E. S. C. doesn't
oversee it.
Finance does some but you know
that's more just on the money
side of it it doesn't have that
but also if the breadth of what
this says in here as far as the
study I don't think a hundred
thousand dollars is enough to do
a full study and this isn't just
having each university tell us
what they're doing in this this
is to study sustainable models
which is looking outside the
other ones and so I'd like to
propose an amendment to move the
the funding up to two hundred
thousand so they can do a full
real study.
So I made a motion to make it
two hundred thousand one hundred
thousand.
Mr Chairman said not that I
don't have proof of that I don't
know what is going to cost right
we're just assuming.
Just assuming with the but the
costs are going to be in talking
to people.
Have a motion second discussion
on the motion.
It if you'll call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
center my Estes Senator Neville
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
pope yes Sanders Sauls yes you
have an amended bill any other
discussion on the general.
Bill.
Motion for a due passi Senator
Kernan second second by Senator
pope if you will call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt this is what.
Taking.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
my Estes said the Nobel Center
Pinto yes Senator pope yes
Senator so yes yeah they do pass
within amended bill.
The grant thank you Mr chairman
and and Senator yeah I really
hope that they'll look at you
know what other states are doing
we have a lot more colleges I
think than in others
for our population
and also I I think that we did
we brought a bill a few times
haven't we Mr chairman to
actually bring some
accountability to hire at
through LFC
and Kim if we had vetoed last
time and didn't make it through
but you know we no one whole
tire at cal.
LFC holds them accountable kind
of for budget but no one
actually looks at what they're
doing
our young whether or not they're
doing a good job teaching and.
I agree with Senator Hickey it's
time to find some oversight
accountability to a lot of our
departments and you said it with
that we need to start providing
some oversight that's one of our
jobs and we do not do well thank
you Mr thank you senator that is
the number one quick comments
you guys are aware this if you
start watching it maybe I'll
take a letter down to the floor
Mason lands community college
in in two can carry right is
going under.
They had their numbers of
students
they only have enough money to
make payroll on Friday they
don't have anymore operating
capital and and so that schools
is going to collapse unless we
do something.
There should be saved hello
could be another community
college yet could but those are
just on the certain things we
need to look at what's happening
we've had oversight known that
they weren't but you know the
books are changing numbers then
it would have been able to help
save the school the other thing
that really bothers me in this
bothers me is not only as a
parent but you know you get a
six percent tuition increase and
then they came back with a
seventeen percent fees increase
so too young girls my office
that are taking nursing in
Gallup.
Their books were twelve hundred
dollars for a year that's almost
impossible for students to
survive so there's gotta be some
cost controls in the book costs
is based off the number of
credits they take not the actual
cost is.
Thank you senator and that as
indicated we hope that this is
expansive and not narrowed well
probably tune it up a little bit
as we move forward that thank
you senator.
Senator Brandt we're doing great
and again for anyone watching we
were not going to be hearing SB
two twenty seven Center Lopez's
bill on UNM Chicano and Chicana
studies I believe this is the
last one we've got today Center
Brandt centre turning creating
development success pilot
program thank you Mr chairman
Senators you know at.
This this really comes from
suggestion by Dr Cleveland in my
district we were trying to
discuss you know what can we do
to help with C. T. E. what can
we do to really encourage it to
be more focused on actual
certificates to go into the to
the job filled
member in really you'll see
tease about getting students
from high school to a job
and so this bill is set up to
encourage that what we've done
to set up a pilot program to see
if this idea would help
and the pilot program will go
for three years it does you know
set up some
It.
Sets up a system of of for every
certificate they were just on a
higher at this is basically
taken from what they do.
So for every degree that higher
ideas or certificate for the
community colleges they get a
bonus basically that money would
be able to be used back into the
CTE program for whatever
expenses they might need
but it's really to encourage our
our high schools to really focus
on getting those kids an actual
certificate the one I probably
know a little bit more about
that any is the automobile
program you know where they
would get the entry level
certificate to actually be able
to go to.
Don Chalmers which is our you
know our dealership and Rio
Rancho and actually get hired
right away make it forty fifty
sixty thousand a year
with that first level
certificate and then don
Chalmers I've talked to them
about this specific bill they
actually help them then from
there get the research it
certificate there's eight levels
in the automobile certificate so
ours would be focus I get on
that first one to get that job
so then don charmers can move
them up when they get to the
eight level are making over a
hundred thousand a year.
So.
That's what this bill does just
encourage us to really focus our
CTE on getting certificates
that's a.
Thank you first that the
audience those in support.
So anyone in opposition.
Could not if you'd like to come
in and speak if you'll come up
to the microphone please.
Mr thank you stand around for
the school superintendents
educational leaders we support
this concept it's time we begin
to look at how do we change the
system to incentivize moving
success along and so we stand in
support of this with is very
worthy for consideration thank
you.
Thank you anyone else like to
come speak job.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee New Mexico school
board association of supports
this of the endeavor I think
it's a good pilot to see if we
can expand opportunities for
students and again we think the
sponsor for bringing this
forward.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
Gary Washburn superintendent
Carlsbad up I just want to
commend the senator on bringing
this forward we have been
converting our high school to a
career academy models for the
last two and a half years I
invite anybody to come down I
think it's the direction of
education moving forward we have
got to get all of these kids.
Where they need to be and the
vast majority of home need to
have certificates when they walk
out of the school because they
are walking directly into the
workforce so full heartedly
support this thank you thank you
Mr.
Yes please come up.
We can stand in line so I don't
move on without you thank you
thank you Mr chairman members
the committee my name is Carla
Kugler I am the president of
associated builders and
contractors we are a commercial
construction association but we
also have the largest multi
trade apprenticeship program in
the state I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward
career technical occupations are
in a crisis
I can go into a diatribe of how
we got here by providing college
is the only path of the colleges
importance but tax now we are in
a situation that we need every
tool in the toolbox to be able
to create at these these
occupations for students so we
want to thank the sponsor for
for having the idea of
incentivizing and allowing
students to create or obtain a
certification it postsecondary
in a career field while in
school so thank you very much
thank you.
Is there anyone online.
Okay the things Center for we go
to questions in the committee
no chairman of you questions
thank you questions from the
committee.
Bill sponsor.
Well I'm very supportive Mr
chair this bill and and it does
remind me a little bit about how
we fund higher it when there is
a credential involved there is
funding that's connected to that
so I think we're we're just sort
of.
Copying that process and it's a
pilot we'll see if it works and
see how far can get thank you
Senator Hickey.
Senator Hickey are you there
question
I've I've I'm sorry Mr chair I
saw it was I and you button in
that you to opt again Mr chair
Senators turned and ran thank
you for bringing this bill
I I think this is more the
timely and if this isn't a
successful experiment I hope
that we look to funding it
dramatically throughout the
state that there are is such
need for skills that
we we we we kept trying to take
a
Creep along and see if it kind
of works in measured forty years
we need to see a pathway through
the year really it track numbers
of students and really
succeeding at that look to
expand its substantially so
again thank you for bringing it
up but I have I have a question
because this is an area that I'm
I'm learning is critical but I
don't know much about this last
summer I had the opportunity to
spend the day with the
top commerce and I think that
there's and the amazing amount
of apprenticeship training that
they're doing in areas in which
such dramatic need at the rate
limiting step it's the state and
chemistry is that there are near
enough instructors because
people who read the fear or the
making under twenty five hundred
fifty thousand come back into
the school to teach and get paid
act that and so there's not a
lot of incentive for many of I'm
back and I was hoping that these
two senators who seem to be much
more knowledgeable than I am
would look at that probably too
late this year but for next year
doing something to enhance as we
did for nurse instructors in
nursing schools to enhance the
compensation
in the you are training shut up
for all of these different
skills if we don't get the
instructors we're not going to
get students it start in college
and get some credit but to get
all the way there in Indy
anymore instructors so I just
make that is a suggestion to my
two colleagues who seem to know
a lot about this area we need to
and.
The state the instructors and
not have that if the for being
willing to do that thank you
very much Mr chair and yet
Senators thank you Senator
Hickey other questions to the
committee.
Just just wanted to up I thought
I understood this bill and you
described it slightly different
this is not.
Correct me if I'm wrong this is
not the paying for the license
or the crew the actual
credential this is awarding to
the district for the credentials
that they have is that accurate
chairman Senator that is correct
we get up.
I'm carrying something similar
where we actually will pay the
licensing fees and other things
for students so that it's not a
burden to them and I was
wondering if this was similar
for high schools but I like the
concept because it incentivizes
districts to to put more of
these in is a student able to
get more than one that or the
district able get more than one
incentive per student Mr
Chairman we've actually limit
it's just one per student get
the bills of the students doing
multiple credentials the
district only gets paid
essentially for that student one
time that's correct Mr okay
thank you other questions to the
committee.
Motion FOR do pass secretary
center seconded by Senator pope
if you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan center
yes this Senator Nobel Senator
Pinto.
Senator pope yes centerfold yes
you have to do passers thank you
and I would like to say this to
drive Senator Hickey that I I'm
dealing with the licensure bill
that should be dropping sometime
this week and I look forward to
supporting yours on there
helping with thanks for the
thank thank you that completes a
good work committee we kind of
got caught up on we've gotten a
little behind the some link to
your bills on Wednesday we will
hear Senator Lopez's Bill first
thing and will have probably a
full agenda of other ones we
give we're doing fine so I think
we can continue to meet at nine
don't have to move back down the
thirty yet we'll keep that as an
option with that Senate
education is closed for today
