Right at the blaster they with
the low thank you I will vote
Senate Education Committee
Monday morning we've got an
agenda we got carry over over
bills SB two thirty six
independent Carlsbad community
college SB two thirty four
lottery for home school students
SB two forty locational training
scholarship act then Senator on
the new business I'll try and
let everybody know the next
couple that are coming up is the
fund goes by we are at nine
o'clock today because we have a
floor session on Wednesday
Wednesday will start again at
eight thirty so that we make
sure we preserve enough time to
get through all of our bills
just some reminders to the
public been doing public comment
the limit public comment to a
maximum of two minutes are you
don't have to use that much time
please try not to say exactly
what other people have and it's
perfectly fine just to say I
support a particular bill if
there is additional information
that's needed also very much
maintaining decorum is important
in the New Mexico Senate so
please no personal attacks of
any kind or attacks on
particular districts or anything
of that sort we aren't going to
tolerate that that's a necessary
and I needed for a stab good
discourse about of bills and
legislation and doing the work
for the the people of New Mexico
before we get started with the
SP two thirty six independent
Carlsbad community college any
comments questions from
committee members.
I don't see any and so with that
Senator Kernan if you would like
to take this through SP to
thirty six independent Carlsbad
community college.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I'm presenting Senate bill
two thirty six seventy years ago
in the fall of nineteen fifty
New Mexico's first community
college opened its doors it was
called the Carlsbad
instructional center and which
created by the cross board
school board with very strong
support from the community.
Some years later in the nineteen
sixties the Carlsbad
instructional center positioned
itself under the umbrella of New
Mexico State University the T.
C. I. T. became a branch
Community College that we all
know today is NMSU Carlsbad.
Banding together was done in
order to create a synergy
between the two institutions
the hope was that that would
work better together.
That NMAA you were hopeful also
that the branch would become a
feeder school for the main
campus in Los crucis.
For a number of compelling
reasons which will be mentioned
shortly the time has come for
the crosspad branch to become an
independent community college
once again and this is a reason
for Senate bill two thirty six
which is a more bills house bill
two twelve.
State law provides a mechanism
for branch community colleges to
become independent community
colleges New Mexico has seven
independent community colleges
among them Santa Fe community
college central to Mexico Luna
community college San Juan
college Clovis Community College
investments these are public two
year institutions that receive
state higher ed funding and
offer courses leading to an
associate's degree and
certificate.
Every New Mexico community
college whether a branch or an
independent is credited the
Carlsbad brains colleges
accredited by the north central
association of colleges and
schools and this regional twelve
accreditation would continue.
If this bill passes a major
difference between branches and
independence revolves around two
governments that the entire New
Mexico State University system
is governed by a board of
regents weather Carlsbad
community college to become an
independent community college it
would be governed instead by
board of trustees elected
locally from within the
community colleges taxing
district the office advantage of
local governments is that the.
We'll have a better
understanding of campus needs
and potential local governments
also means more accessibility
accountability and
responsiveness to students
faculty and staff needs.
According to the community
college at there should be no
need community college created
after January one nineteen
ninety eight unless specifically
created by the legislature
that's twenty one dash thirteen
dash four point one NMSA
nineteen seventy eight.
This provision was added in
statute because the legislature
at that time was concerned that
New Mexico might have too many
colleges for state our sites the
goal was to hold the line on the
proliferation of colleges it's
important to point out here that
Senate bill two thirty six House
Bill to twelve would not be
adding for college it would
simply can for independent
status and a name change to an
already existing community
college.
So an explanation of the bill in
section one of the bill NMSU
Carlsbad would be made into an
independent community college
known as southeast New Mexico
college this man was selected by
students staff faculty members
and interested community members
and public health.
The governing board of southeast
New Mexico college would be
created in a regular local
election call for about the
current state municipal school
board to be held in November of
twenty twenty one.
Section two of the bill all
functions person property and
contracts pertaining to the
crosspad branch would be
transferred to southeast New
Mexico college with the
exception of the Carlsbad
environmental monitoring and
research center that building M.
programs and personnel with
remained within the New Mexico
State University system.
All references in wall.
To the New Mexico State
University board of regents
regarding crosspad branch would
be doing references to the
governing board of southeast New
Mexico college want Weiss
references in walked New Mexico
State University crosspad would
be construed to be references to
southeast New Mexico college.
Section three of the bill there
are two effective dates in the
bill The effective date for
section one provisions is July
one twenty twenty one
essentially on that date
southeast New Mexico college
with existing law.
Be the effective date of section
two provisions is April tenth
twenty twenty two essentially
this would be the closing date
for the transfer of documents in
property and the overall
handout.
The conversion from a branch
college to an independent
college is a process that takes
time a long list of transactions
must be tended to it is an
exercise in logistics we believe
that the conversion is
achievable within the timeline
set forth in this bill
especially since New Mexico
State University chancellor Dan
R. P. Singh has promised a
cordial and collegial process
and to not let this convergent
become adversarial.
Why independence and why now.
Complaints about New Mexico
state university's management of
the crosspad branch our long
longstanding and pervasive
although what I'm about to say
is not the most essential factor
in the decision to pursue
independence issues in the
relationship came to a head when
the main campus eliminated the
position of branch president
without even consulting local
administrators faculty staff and
community leaders the branch
president is the official voice
of the college delay a cell to
the community and advocate for
the branch in the New Mexico
State University system the
unilateral decision by in an
issue completely.
This confirm the value of the
college community as well as a
broader community it is the
event that press precipitated
the creation of a Carlsbad
higher education task force to
evaluate the worsening situation
and explore options the task
force conducted extensive
investigations and compiled
summary documents the task force
consists of approximately forty
current and former students
staff and faculty public school
educators business leaders
elected official service
professionals and respected
community members.
Thank Matt weekly during the
fall and winter of twenty twenty
and continue to make but when
members of the task force began
sharing their stories it became
clear that many of the problems
with NMAA you are systemic the
most agree to observation is
that the prospect britches
treated more as an afterthought
out of sight out of mind there
is consensus that the
relationship with the amendment
issue it's for a beyond repair
in December NMSU faculty staff
and
faculty and staff voted on
whether or not the branch
college should become
independent seventy six percent
voted in favor of separating
from the NMAA you system.
Following that the Carlsbad
higher education task force
itself was followed and members
voted unanimously for
independence additionally six
hundred fifty citizens have
signed a petition supporting
independents and signatures are
still coming in.
Concerned citizens have spoken
loudly through a number of
letters and resolutions the task
force received official
statements supporting transition
from the crosspad municipal
school district the city of
Carlsbad in Carlsbad department
of development letter to receive
from the mayor of the village of
laughing the NWC P. twelve
County the Carlsbad chamber of
commerce and Carlsbad mainstreet
as well as from a cross section
of businesses and private
individuals.
The task force produced and
submitted a preliminary plan for
transition to the higher
education department acting
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez as
required by law NMSU chancellor
Dan are facing get insurances to
the higher education task force
that he would support the will
of the community.
However in surprise testimony
during a hearing last week on
house bill two twelve which is a
more built this legislation
chance are are these two came
out in opposition to house bill
two twelve his desire to tackle
the issues after years of
neglect comes too little too
late the trust and goodwill
evaporated a long time ago the
chancellor said he was has
started to study to get a
systemic perspective and therein
lies the problem as what is been
needed in tech lacking all along
is a focus on welfare at the
Carlsbad branch not the NMAA you
system as a whole the task force
sees this as an excuse to the
light the local college moving
forward to a better future.
It's important for the committee
to understand that much in
advance of the study now being
undertaken by May nine campus
crossed budget higher education
task force conducted its own
detailed careful and objective
study to investigate whether or
not independents make sense the
legislation for you was not
entered into lightly.
If the task force's objective
findings at the and to not seek
independence that matter would
have time to regenerate
proponents of southeast New
Mexico college conducted a
thorough investigation of the
justification for separation and
the work involved in
transitioning to independence
the task force study the
transition plan she's passed
several other New Mexico
community colleges the group
consulted with higher education
experts higher education
department staff consultants and
turning into a pond a
considerable for professional
talents members of the task
force.
One of the compelling reasons
for seeking to become
independent is that research
shows that independent community
colleges before better than
grants colleges according to the
New Mexico legislative finance
committee in the policy and
performance analysis published
in January of this year all of
you have the purple dragons and
that this is where this message
came from independent community
colleges showed the strongest
performance among the two year
college secretary the difference
between the independent
community colleges and branch
campuses may be the level of
local communities financial
support and participation and
that's found in volume one page
one well.
Also according to the LFC
completion rates for first time
full time degree seeking
students are far better at New
Mexico's independence community
colleges according to charts
provided by LFC the completion
rate at the crosspad range for
this cohort of students is only
fifteen percent compare that to
the results for students at CMM
at twenty seven point four
percent San Juan college twenty
seven point nine percent Clovis
Community College thirty five
point five percent New Mexico
junior college forty seven point
nine percent it makes the lancet
fifty point nine percent.
Finally I'll briefly present
three of the many and there are
many telling reasons for
independence first throughout
higher education research shows
that college affordability is
one of the essential problems of
our time we're all aware of the
on going efforts to standardize
courses making it possible to
offer essentially the same
course.
At any campus in the state a
student taking a three credit
general education course at the
crosspad bridge K. one hundred
forty seven dollars that same
course taken for main campus
costs nine hundred eighteen
dollars requiring current
students to roll through main
campuses pricing students out of
an education and that should not
be happening.
Second the mission of the
community college is much
different and that the mission
of a research university
oftentimes community college
students attend to develop
workforce skills often directly
related to the needs of local
employers and the local
community they intend to improve
their lives in the most
practical ways in ways that have
little to do with a liberal arts
education or the broader aims of
researching for state more often
than not the community college
provides a path forward to
nontraditional students and the
students we have yet to succeed
in American schools this brings
me to an acknowledgement of the
teaching that takes place on a
community college campus faculty
members as community colleges
are teachers the play a powerful
role in the lives of the people.
Community colleges provide the
personal touch from deeply
experienced and committed
teachers the individual
attention that is necessary to
student success that individual
attention comes with the
territory it is a kind of
personalized instruction and
support the campuses with
thousands and thousands of
students Mexico State University
in Los crucis must be challenged
to find finally an overly
complicated bureaucracy imposed
by parent institution actually
detracts from the community
college environment among these
difficulties are impediments to
procuring resources managing
budgets hiring staff adjusting
salaries and growing in the
waste necessary to serve
communities Senator the cost of
doing business in Carlsbad
because of the college's
attachment to a bureaucracy
heavy system has become far too
expensive to be up.
So now Mr chair I have three
expert witnesses I have Mister
John Heaton former state
representative who is the task
force co chair I have miss
Austin who is with the city of
Carlsbad and I have Mr Craig
Stevens who also speak so at
this time may not turn attention
to our experts starting with Mr
heat please.
Madam chair that would be fine
please try to go over new things
not necessarily all the stuff
that Center current went and
that was very expensive yes Sir
please go ahead.
Mr Chairman it was very
expensive and very good.
Mr chairman and committee again
my name is John Heaton I would
like to begin and again with
making some points for clarity
the communities only interest is
to be able to provide more
opportunities for our students
and be able to control our own
destiny without being strangled
by an issue the Carlsbad
campuses and campus and all
campuses are independently
accredited by the heard higher
learning commission and that has
nothing to do with animation the
campuses and courses are all
twelve totally independently
from one another our campus has
its own money through a three
mill levy appropriation and
tuition the overwhelming
majority of the money comes from
the mail at we typically get
four million from the state
million from tuition and between
twelve and sixteen million from
our mail every going independent
will have no impact on the state
budget whether we are a branch
or an independent college the
formula is exactly the same we
will not add to the number of
colleges in the state we will be
converting from a branch to an
independent college the
chancellor speaks often of an
amendment to system we have no
idea what that means or how to
explain it to us it means more
centralization more central
control and less local control
for us to be innovative and
creative in offering our
students more opportunities.
With all due respect to the
chancellor.
You will hear him talk about a
due diligence study by an
outside consultant group that
won't be complete for two months
and that this bill is premature
most of what is in the list of
items to be completed our what
we have told an issue they need
to discover and complete less on
a number of schedules property
personal property equipment
leases more money scholarships
dedicated to the Carlsbad
students grants and so on are on
that list that we have provided
that.
Let me make it perfectly clear
that we understand the time it
will take to make this
conversion that is why the bill
in the bill there is the
implementation date July and the
conversion date in April of
twenty twenty two giving us both
more than a year to complete the
details after the bill is passed
we have a number of long lead
items to complete the higher
learning commission
accreditation.
a C. E. N. which is the
accreditation for our nursing
program both will take four to
six months.
I've been getting title for
approval for grants and and
loans that will take somewhere
between six and nine months and
I think you all recognize that
it's difficult to run a college
without loans and grants being
provided.
Board the board elections can't
occur until November purchases
of some six software programs
and conversion as well as as
complete a process agreement
within an issue are still well
will be part of that that period
of time that will be needed we
don't know what their study will
reveal but the path is straight
forward and if something new is
discovered we have plenty of
time to complete that as well Mr
Chairman this is all very
straight forward it is just time
consuming Mr Chairman we have no
way we have we in no way want to
be level an image you they're
one of our provide research
institutions and we want to work
cooperatively with them after
the conversion for the benefit
of our students however we have
a litany of grievances and we
need to and we need to give you
a few examples if you all allow
me to become independent New
Mexico state controls all the
records and financial system
systems go down and they don't
respond this is not a system the
communication is really horrible
vacancies and operations are not
allowed to be replaced we can't
even print our own transcripts
locally Carlsbad has a higher
cost of living in Los crucis and
they won't approve adequate
compensation for us to recruit
instructional staff as an
example our nursing program is
fifty percent understaffed and
all the while we are putting two
to three million in the reserves
it makes no sense.
New Mexico state forces
compensation levels on us even
though they don't fit our
positions.
For for a capital project the
charges between eight and eleven
percent and the contractor
usually comes from somewhere
else not from Carlsbad and we
can't get warranty work that
there is no there are no
services we get from an issue
that we don't pay dearly for.
They this year we will pay
around nine hundred thousand
dollars plus the usual tack on
for.
The computer a upgrades and and
different systems and so that
will be over probably a million
dollars by the time it's all
added up.
We believe that we can easily
make the conversion using that
money and in fact we think we
can save money we want to remind
you that the purpose of the
community college is to allow
easy access low cost and for
students to live and work at
home.
Independence means we will be
able to create be creative and
responsive to the educational
needs of our area without delays
and allow the Niles made campus
for those courses we bill a
would be able to give students
more articulation options
independence we will maybe and
maybe we will able to recruit.
Our instructors committee very
little change will occur in the
organization other than electing
a board of trustees and
appointing the president we will
have our own buildings equipment
reserves operational fund and a
great staff committee we are
treated like a stepchild by an
image you are people locally pay
seventy five percent of the
operational cost of a college
and it is only just that they're
that that control the.
The local and we become
independent thank you very much
Mr chairman committee.
Thank you Mr of Senator Kernan
and and please remind please
don't disparage the other
university or anything of that
sort so that we keep it on on
topic images my university so
please don't disparage them and
I understand that there are
concerns as to how people have
been treated but yeah let's
let's keep it all on topic thank
you Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much and now
we'll go to Wendy Austin.
Chairman can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you ready.
Thank you.
Thank you chairman souls and
distinguished committee members
thank you for allowing me to to
take the time to speak with you
today my name is Wendy Austin
and I'm the deputy city
administrator for the city of
Carlsbad I was born and raised
in Carlsbad and I know this
community very well I have a
very strong accounting and
analytical background and I've
been providing financial
leadership for more than twenty
years I'm respectfully asking
for your support of Senate bill
two thirty six independent
community college.
The city of Carlsbad needs local
control of our community college
for the benefit of local
businesses and local students
our local college in Carl's that
has not been treated fairly by
the main campus for a very long
time and I know the current
leadership at the main campus
but not argue this point.
The city of Carlsbad has a three
mill levy to support the college
in Carlsbad by statute
independent community colleges
are only required to have a two
mill levy.
Not only does Carlsbad have a
three mill levy cross that has a
very strong tax base related to
this three mill levy and the
property tax that it does
collect calls three mill levy
generated twelve million dollars
in revenue in fiscal year
nineteen and fourteen million
dollars in revenue in fiscal
year twenty this is very
significant.
The FIR attempts to compare the
cost of operating Carlsbad
springs ranch college with other
independent community colleges
not only is this not comparing
apples to apples as each of
these colleges have very random
romance in addition this is a
one sided comparison the
equation should compare expenses
and revenues the FIR briefly
mentions Carlsbad strong revenue
pace but not to the extent of
the needed for comparison versus
expenditures in other words the
revenue calls budget range from
not only having a three mill
levy but and having such a
strong tax base associated to
the rebel levy is more than
adequate.
To have more than adequate to
cover the costs excuse me with a
from in a few staff I prepared a
detailed pro forma for an
independent college in Carlsbad
I use very conservative
projections where I actually
reduced revenue buckets over the
next five fiscal years increased
expenditure pockets over the
next five fiscal years and year
after year this independent
community college would be it
would remain profitable.
Chairman cells.
This is the next topic is very
hard for our community to
understand the city of Carlsbad
has an approximate thirty six
million dollar reserve at the
main campus controls
unfortunately for the city of
Carlsbad and its businesses and
students this reserve has
accumulated year after year
because the main cap as well not
just these funds back into
Carlsbad.
This is so unfair to the
taxpayers of Carlsbad.
And I say an approximate thirty
six million dollar reserve
chairman because it's likely
higher than this we can we have
been asking for over six months
for an accounting of this
research from the main campus
and we cannot get this
information.
In addition to the thirty six
plus million dollar reserves not
deposited in Carlsbad thanks we
do not know where we this
reserves deposited and again the
main campus will not share this
information with us.
Also the interest earned on this
reserve is allocated to a main
campus Fund which the main
campus controls during the last
committee hearing test
incorrectly stated that we are
credit our interest but if you
listen to the NMAA you regions
call meeting from January sixth
twenty twenty one both Dr van
Winkle and Dr Burke clearly
state our interest is not
allocated to our resort to a
main campus Fund.
Any reasonable accounting
perspective this method seems
completely inappropriate.
In all reality the citizens of
Carlsbad in our community
college have zero control over
our own tax dollars.
To my next point in the current
fiscal year the main campus
charge our local college nine
hundred thousand dollars for
brandy in fiscal year nineteen
this amount was six hundred
fifty thousand dollars this
forty eight percent increase for
branding from nearly two fiscal
years ago there has been no
explanation for the increased
besides increased for shared
services.
But in addition to the forty
eight percent increase in the
branding feet or the shared
service do the main campus at
the main campus also increased
our local college budget a
hundred twenty seven thousand
dollars for software liability
insurance and other shared
services what we here just seems
self contradicting.
You will hear the leadership
team of the main campus promote
consolidation and centralization
as cost savings all well this
certainly doesn't seem to
translate to cost savings for
our local college with over the
past two fiscal years the share
costs have increased more than
forty eight percent.
And frankly chairman so this
consolidation and centralization
of shares Services isn't that is
in the best interest of the main
campus.
This centralization has not only
increased our costs but has
eliminated jobs at our local
college and increased jobs at
the main campus the main campus
to benefit in our community over
and over gets the short end of
the state.
All this knowing that we have
thirty six plus million dollars
in reserves in the main campus
accounts.
This is the main campus charges
are local college eight to
twelve percent service fee on
any operating or capital
projects the maybe even gets to
select the vendors we certainly
have the capacity to manage our
own projects.
Finally businesses in our
community and not get the
support from the main campus in
evaluating and developing
vocational programs we hear
story after story about the main
campus not considering the needs
of this community and this is
especially concerning
considering our large reserve
that we cannot utilized.
This is not fair to the
taxpayers of Carlsbad and
specifically not fair to our
local students.
I would ask you all how would
you still.
If your personal property tax
dollars had accumulated year
after year we're deposited in
banks hundreds of miles from
your home town not your local
banks you did not receive the
interest on those revenues and
you couldn't even get an actual
accounting of those funds this
is such an injustice to this
community college and the
residents of Carlsbad.
What college should not be
forced to stay in a system that
does not work for the benefit of
the local students we have a
recently have a strong revenue
base we can cover our
expenditures and we can say for
future capital infrastructure
needs again chairman souls and
committee thank you for allowing
me time to speak with you today
and I truly appreciate your
time.
Thank you center court and they
were already half an hour into
this bill we're not the public
comment I know there are many
people who the public comment if
we can move along please some.
Thank you.
Yet another expert
yes when I get Craig Stevens
Germans all members of the
committee thank you for allowing
this to be with you this
morning.
Our task force yes Matt every
week that's on the first of
October we have between thirty
five and forty members of the
task force that are on every
call at seven AM in the morning.
We have submitted our
preliminary plan to the GDP and
we're awaiting their approval so
we could submit our detailed
plan.
With the preliminary plan was
submitted a petition of over six
hundred names and this Senator
Kernan said we have more names
every day twenty five letters of
support from businesses and
resolution from the city of
Carlsbad
the schools schools in the
Carlsbad school board we have
met with the governor her chief
of staff and the secretary of
higher education.
Why do we want our independence
we water independence for more
control and direction from a
locally elected board local
resident we can offer more
competitive salaries for faculty
and staff are money can be
brought to Carlsbad banks and
our interest or a local college
we can do all the things New
Mexico state does for us for
less money we can create and
outreach program designed
specifically for our college we
can offer degree programs for
New Mexico state and other
colleges we can more effectively
partner with local industry
business formal programs and
certifications and finally
stability for our college by not
being dependent on New Mexico
state and their leadership
changes.
We ask that you losses bill as
our journey has already begun
are Canadian citizens of
Carlsbad and the surrounding
communities are committed to
making this dream a reality
there is absolutely no reason
with the passage of this bill
that New Mexico state study
cannot be completed and reviewed
by both New Mexico state and our
task force we are ready to work
hard for the students faculty
and staff.
So we can see our college
progress.
In meeting the local needs of
our community and the
surrounding your.
Thank you for allowing us to be
here to support.
So thank you Mr chair we are
through with our experts and at
this time certainly would
welcome public comment thank you
very much.
Thank you and Martel and I know
we have quite a number of people
I would please remind people
make sure that you stay on topic
of you have a maximum of two
minutes you certainly don't have
to use that you don't have to
repeat exactly what everyone
said if you just want to say I
support this that's perfectly
fine too I tell if you would
take us to public comment.
Absolutely Senator souls are
senator Neville has requested
that chancellor Dan a resume is
allowed to speak with ample time
in opposition is out all right.
We wait with the opposition we
don't opposition has an
opportunity to text and email
members and and such I will give
Dr breeze to with Senator Kernan
because I don't want to change
things but would give him up to
four minutes or so instead of
the two minutes so that he can
present some of that side but
but typically we don't allow the
opposition to have full time on
a particular bill and go add up
that's where I know we're good
friends and things but I'm just
trying to make sure that I'm
very consistent across the.
You Mr chair go ahead and
proceed miss chancellor go
ahead.
Yeah I think there thank you and
and chairman souls and members
of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
speak I would like to also ask
Dr can van Winkle to to say a
few words so I'll allocate my
time two minutes for me two
minutes for for offer can if
that's okay with you madam chair
chairman of let me just let me
just start by by saying first of
all I think from Representative
heating the suggested that that
I have made statements regarding
wanting to make this process a
collegial and and and
informative and to be at least
to at least to have you know
reasonable people have to have
differences of opinion to have a
a as a civil discourse around
this tonight hopefully and
committed to that I'll start
with with the with first of all
recognizing the frustration that
I've been hearing from members
of the Carlsbad community
some of you know that that the
the community colleges this past
year after pandemic and even
before have been extremely
challenged in this state and
that is true of the three
smaller branch campuses at the
New Mexico State University
where essentially enrollments
have dropped precipitously I
think many of our campuses are
half to two thirds the two
thirds down from where they were
ten years ago let's say for at
for for students that are
essentially in from those
communities so clearly there's
an issue that needs to be with
addressed and resolved and so I
I in fact have been working very
very diligently on the process
of developing a restructure this
integrated system for the
purpose of making sure that the
system operates more picked more
efficiently more effectively all
of the units and acting
independently so I'm a big
proponent that that systems can
work they don't always work but
they need attention and
obviously there's been an
opportunity to to not to not pay
attention here for number of
years and and we're looking to
go to resolve all we do have one
improve communication
integration of sustainability
and.
Actually how these communities
can actually be part of the
recovery from the pandemic
economic development variety of
other things in there are a
number of tools that the
integrated system can find we're
focused on doing that up for the
purpose of really engaging they
they the rural communities and
community colleges in ways that
are different from what the way
they have the it was mentioned
that you know a lot of different
things that were that were
mentioned in and alleged I was
going to say up front of the
regents of New Mexico State
University field at a very
strong the new scare
responsibility make sure they
understand what it is we're
going to do before it's done and
and I understand the frustration
again I understand the somewhat
unilateral declaration on the
part of of the community that
they just want to go independent
I get that I think there is an
opportunity also to hear a more
rigorous and informed I think a
perspective which I think the
the regent
Required study that we're doing
for a we're doing the due
diligence allows us to
understand what are all those
changes are going at occur in
order to get to have this
institution go independent so it
is with that that we have you
know a number of students of
services the central functions
that that that that a system
provides to the community
colleges it's quite great for
student support services or that
missions and graduation support
there's everything that relates
to administration and business
processes auditing external
payroll procurement human
resources institutional equity
legal counsel advancement
government relations institution
analysis sponsored projects
administration marketing and
communication internet phone I
T. liaisons all of that stuff
gets done in a in a shared
services sort of approach with
our community colleges and and
industry seconds thank you that
there is a lot of a lot of work
being done going forward so the
one thing I will ask is is you
know give us the opportunity to
actually look at some of these
allegations have been made more
clearly the thirty six million
dollars is is Carlsbad money has
not changed the interest on that
money will be allocated to
Carlsbad it's in a pool right
now that needs to be addressed
by individual request that that
money will be allocated
according to who generated so it
there's there's a lot of mis
misunderstanding or
misinformation regarding how
works going to do that so I just
want to make those comments
clear I just end by saying I
think it's important that we do
this due diligence you know I I
mean I get that that the
frustration and the wanting to
move and we're already decided
we're going to go but at the
same time I think there's a lot
of unanswered questions in the
devils are is always in the
details and I think it's
important we understand that we
have not seen the comprehensive
rigorous report thank you
chancellor your your time is up
thank you thank you Mr turn over
to my colleague.
We will now hear from Mister
Kenneth van Winkle Mr van
Winkle.
A good morning chairman souls
and committee members my name is
Ken David Winkle and I'm the
branch executive director for
New Mexico State University I
work with the requests
Alamogordo and Carlsbad campuses
I was a faculty member at NMSU
for twenty five years the
department head of music for two
and associate dean for the
college of art arts and sciences
for I and then the president of
NMSU Alamogordo for I I've seen
a lot over the years and have
perspective from both the main
campus and the branch campuses.
I've been involved in
conversations with amendment
issue Carlsbad in the higher
education task force in Carlsbad
since September over the past
six months we've discussed many
of the issues that have been
brought forward today and in
this bill I know there are
misunderstandings unclear
information and assumptions from
both the main campus and NMSU
Carlsbad certainly those issues
need to be resolved however we
just don't have the time nor all
the information needed to do
that today this will take some
time and effort.
We do have the opportunity to
address what I believe is the
heart of the problem and has led
us to this bill introduction
today.
Let me preface my remarks about
the heart of the problem by
recognizing that I've met
appreciate and respect many
wonderful hard working creative
caring and concerned citizens in
Carlsbad who I believe only have
good intentions and the best
interest of students in mind
including the faculty and staff
on the Carlsbad campus no
question about it.
I also know this is true seconds
I also know this is true for
those who work on the main
campus in my opinion this issue
boils down to a simple lack of
clear communication and respect
that runs both ways examples of
lead this to inconsistent
information operational
processes and procedures
especially related to our branch
campuses and I know this because
I've experienced that myself the
end result is a lack of trust
the branch is play a different
role and serve an important
purpose in the larger system
variety is healthy and in fact
that.
Thank you Mr van Winkle are
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hand at this time
using the reactions there at the
bottom of the screen.
Any other members of the public
who wish to speak in opposition
of Senate bill two thirty six.
Thank you we want to move on to
statements of support first
we'll be hearing from more Dale
gently more gently.
Good morning chairman children
members of the Senate Education
Committee.
My name is Dale Janel and I'm
the mayor of the city of
Carlsbad.
I strongly strongly support this
bill an independent college the
college.
Our community reach the decision
to pursue independent of our
college after much research and
study it was not an easy
decision for maybe only after
speaking with current and former
faculty staff and students with
local business leaders and other
stakeholders and with the
colleges and universities we
also carefully evaluated every
financial consideration.
Well colleges becoming
independent isn't something that
happens every year in New Mexico
we were fortunate to have a few
excellent I have to shambles to
service models in particular San
Juan college in Clovis Community
Health we are only asking for
the same prior treatment I
appreciate we have already put
together very extensive analysis
what is been done before.
When we met with chancellor or
visa several months ago he also
played she would support
whatever decisions are made by
our community for students Dr
van Winkle's also don't receive
support the decision would.
We know everyone is committed to
improving educational
opportunities in New Mexico.
We are prepared to take bold
actions such as this which we
believe a second report
opportunity to trying and worse
for our work for.
We have had actual conversations
with New Mexico tech Mr New
Mexico university would love to
develop partnerships with the
old in with in the may issue.
We're also very excited about a
consortium of community colleges
in New Mexico look forward to
working with the.
All the students are the top
priority we also want to do what
is right for faculty and staff.
We have struggled for many
years.
Thank you Mary chan wing we will
now hear from Mister Ron
singleton Mr singleton.
One more time for Mr Ron
singleton.
You can't make it but on the
school board as as well my
name's Robbie took on is that
okay.
You're on my list for later so
I'll come back to you thank you.
Are we wanna hear from Mister
John Heaton.
Mr here.
Okay you were a witness my
apologies Mr Solomon Soto.
Yes.
Thank you for the time my name
is Solomon Soto I'm a student
from NMSU Carlsbad I've been
attending classes on and off
since I was in the seventh grade
so like around two thousand
seven
now speaking of the around for
that long and still currently
going to the school there hasn't
been much change in the school
for us
and there's quite a bit of
things that need to be done
especially for the school and
it's it's with that that I do
speak in favor of SB two thirty
six
because I do feel like this bill
will help our college reach its
full potential.
Thank you for the time today.
Thank you Mr Soto we will now
hear from Robbie chuckle Mr
check on.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
committee and thank you for your
service a special thanks to
center Carmen Carmen for
carrying the bill money probably
check on on the school board
member at Carlsbad municipal
schools and I support.
As B. two thirty six our school
board unanimously voted for a
resolution in support of this.
For the amendment and community
college the introduction of the
career academy model in our
district.
Has helped us to.
To look at this as a way that
would better align and be more
agile and seamless and what we
will do our pre K. through
fourteen program moving forward
we have a good relationship with
them as you and have it article
credit and our early college
program but we think this would
better align.
As a parent and youth leader at
my church I feel that on top of
the award winning nursing
program.
The independent independent
claim college we would be able
to provide programs for students
in southeastern New Mexico that
are more relevant to our local
industry it is evident in the
number of the levies bond
pastor Carlsbad that we support
education your call back I'm an
Aggie I value my experience and
education and I miss you there's
numerous students to go to an as
you'd Los crucis every year from
our school and I believe they'll
continue to go but for those who
say they around here and want to
get in into the industry I
believe for southeast Mexico
independent community college
would be more beneficial to the
education of our youth and
nontraditional students thank
you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mr Brady right Mr ray.
One more time for Mr Brady
Brady.
Moving up Mr corky frost still.
One more time Mr Burciaga.
Moving on and miss jasmine yes
I.
Jasmine are you with us.
Moving on Mr leroy States.
One more time for Mr sees.
Moving on Mr Trudy Jackson.
Do we have the security checks
and.
No I do we have Mister Roberts
say.
One more time for Mr rate.
Mr Ashley Bock.
Yes I'm here thank you.
So I would like to say chairman
thank you for allowing me to
talk today I am supporting HSD
two thirty six I am across but
native and I attended NMAA you
see for a year and a half and
then I moved over to a new
agency to where I graduated with
my bachelor's degree and that
was a and in two thousand to two
thousand and three is when I
attended an image to see and
only thing that I will say about
NMAA you an image you see is.
That when I go up and visit the
college now this is almost
twenty years later there isn't
much change things have stayed
the same nothing seems to be
growing and so what I am really
excited about what this bill is
I see the potential that we have
for Carlsbad I can see the
potential for our our
independent college we can build
dorms we can help with our
housing crisis we can create and
expand our trade school programs
my husband I have a construction
firm and I believe in the power
of education and want to help
our students and our and our
employees to get the trade
school programs currently we are
sending all of our non licensed
employees to Los crucis where
they attend trade school there
once a month and we pay for
their tuition their books and
their hotels to we believe in
education it would be wonderful
if we could have something like
that in Carlsbad we can continue
to diversify our community in
the current political climate
we're trying to work towards
moving away from oil and gas the
only way for COVID to continue
to succeeded through
diversification and we can
continue to grow our college
other businesses in in just
seconds.
Thank you other industries will
see that and help us move in
that direction so we will only
be limited by our own ambition
thank you.
Thank you misspoke we will now
hear from Joseph Esposito.
Mr Esposito.
Okay moving on we will hear from
Mister mark buckles.
Yes can you hear me yes we
cancer all right hi I'm doctor
mark buckles at present I'm
associate vice president at the
end of this you Carlsbad campus
I want to begin by saying that I
love New Mexico State University
I'm along with the twenty five
year employee of my campus I've
been ten years since two
thousand and two I'm cert twice
on the faculty center for the
university Amoros award
recipient for teaching
excellence what though NMSU has
mattered so much so much in my
life I support independence for
the college I think we all know
how serious the Carlsbad city
task force takes to thirty six
million dollar reserve and the
feelings that in some way those
monies are not being applied
to the realities of the college
but for me this is less about
MSU Carl's our Los crucis and
very much about the autonomy of
our local rural college it's
important to understand that
this bill does not propose as we
said before the creation of a
new college that this is the
oldest community college in the
state
that we are independently
accredited in every program
especially in regard to the
nursing program which is the
number one program in the state
right now the community is put
forth this bill it's a community
whose oil and gas industry has
over and above its population or
representation right contributed
to the finances of our state
passage of this bill is merely
the start of a process that will
not result in a hurry to
separation but rather a recent
response so responsible careful
detaching of the staff wished
institution are now able to
pursue unimpeded our goals and
character.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We will now hear from valerian
because I.
Hello.
hi chairman members of the
committee my name is politica
Sulla currently I am a senior at
the Carlsbad early college high
school taking courses with NMAA
you are working towards to
associate degrees early college
program in the college courses
have been beneficial for my
future as well as the future of
my peers and that we do
appreciate MSU since it has
allowed us to work towards
higher education at a faster
rate than normal since we are
introduced to college classes as
juniors although and I miss you
see has provided higher
education press up until now and
for the past early college
graduation classes there has
been a few issues I've seen
first hand during the fall
semester of my senior year there
has main campus which companies
for text books NMAA you didn't
have any knowledge of it up
until school was already started
almost two months my peers and I
were without textbooks discussed
high levels of stress and
difficulty for not only the
students but for school faculty
as well in my opinion this was
careless and NMSC was not
considerate of the students or
the staff an independently
governed college will focus the
attention on the students and
minimize the carelessness we
experience with NMSU main campus
I also believe that an
independent college will provide
many opportunities in terms of
higher education through my
years of taking classes the NMAA
you see I've heard of many
students who have had their
academic pathways limited
because the necessary courses
are not offered here for
instance in the fall of two
thousand seventeen my older
brother signed up to take
courses with NMAA you see later
he was notified that the.
Thirty seconds thank.
It was also not refunded for
this callousness to a year later
I'm sure this happens more
students in the college would
allow more growth and right
students with a white white
writing courses they could take
locally not only is it
beneficial for current college
and early college students but
for future students as well.
Hi to each other colleges
because he appropriate degree
plants or careerpathways are
currently offered a and M. S. U.
C. as in any community college I
believe that would be a
significant increase in
enrollment and specially if more
partnerships are opened up with
more New Mexico colleges yeah
opportunities would be endless
thank.
Thank you miss Cassada had to
cut you off there Mr Edward
Rodriguez are you available.
Yes ma'am can you hear me yes we
can okay hello my name is that
were delivering yes I am city
council for work one in Carlsbad
also bear pro tempore city
across that I too am a graduate
of New Mexico State University
however to reiterate my the
young lady who just spoke
I was not able to get my
bachelor's degree here I had to
I did take get associate degrees
here at the drive to
College and hopped in order to
get my master's degree at and
was able to get my master's
degree the NMAA you here to NMAA
you say so
Discusses the fact that we have
a very very large nontraditional
base here most of our people
have families who whether we
like it or not get into the
nasty habit of needing to eat
the state so we do have to
continue to work while we work
on our education the community
colleges very vital call at
and to that respect I am in full
support of Representative thank
you Mr and a college
although I can understand the
desire to ban the bridges that
have been burned out this is a
long festering wound that has
Been allowed to exist for years
and years and years and at the
application of an aspirin at
this time just seems
It's sufficient I would support
this I do.
Thank you I do want to offer
that a lack of support lack of
communication lack of
transparency that we see cost
increases and increased without
an increase in service I would
also like to express our
community's ability to support
this venture physically and
stress that the governor wants
to push look local education
into the into our realm and this
would be a major step in that
direction thank you.
Thank you.
we will now hear from chase and
surely Mr surely are you
available.
One more time Mr Jeez and
surely.
And finally miss Lisa Butler.
This but where are you
available.
And John I've had unfortunately
I don't see a last name there so
go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee says John grant
speaking I am a past president
of NMSU Carlsbad until I retired
from a job I love.
As of July one two thousand
twenty I job I serve right now a
few years I think all the people
speaking in support of the bill
that a wonderful job I I don't
want to repeat any of those
things I think my main concern
with and why are support going
independent this time is the
community colleges have had knee
Commission in terms of the needs
of the community the president
of that campus's the face of the
college and and that the role
that individuals crucial in
terms of meeting that mission
I am very concerned animation to
remove that position.
And replaced it with the person
in Los crucis that.
It I know that person magistri
campuses but every campus in
every community is different and
it's very difficult for one
person not living in that
community not being part of that
community to provide the
services are needed by the
community in terms of that so in
conclusion in order for an issue
Carlsbad to continue to serve
Eddy County the community county
and Carlsbad within business
industries that are very
important I think it's essential
and therefore I support
completely Senate bill two
thirty six thank you very much
Mr chairman.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of Senate
bill two thirty six at this time
so Mr chairman R. J. Jenkins is
on the list and I'm not sure if
you.
Cease working is to brace his
hand.
Senator yeah we that more than
half an hour of public testimony
I'm not sure there's any new
information if we can move on to
to get to questions from the
committee that would be probably
be good at this point well I
appreciate that but he did raise
his hand and I think he needs to
be recognized if you don't mind
for one minute at least mark
hello daisy available he is
available Senator yes okay
please go ahead.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much I'll
make sure you've heard
compelling evidence through
community members through
students through staff seventy
six percent of the staff voted
to leave the amendment issue
system this wasn't know the
statistics were put together
overnight months and months and
months of looking into every us
every piece of this whole
endeavor and and summary our
community can do better that's
that's the way it is local
decisions as a business person
of the year in our community a
couple things that stood out to
me you heard from the student
that they were short changed on
the books last year I mean
really it is without books at
the college level and then we
heard many times testimony for
internet service again this just
didn't happen overnight those
things along with the thirty six
million dollars held hostage
that could be put right back
into our community to be put
right back into our students
that's what we're supposed to be
doing in MSU is a great college
make no mistake about it and all
boils down to management
management we can do better on a
local.
Perspective thank you.
Thank you Mr Jenkins.
We that concludes our statements
in support of Senate bill two
thirty six there anyone that I
missed.
Thank you very much bye
concluded public statements for
Senate bill two thirty six thank
you mark hello and Senator
Kernan that if you have any
short comments and also when
indicated their questions from
the committee directed towards
chance are these two or drive
then we will do all allow them
to answer the questions directed
towards them Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I I'll
wait make comments following the
committee participation.
Thank you of first I have
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator Kernan and I apologize
to the committee had to jump
back and forth between House
government elections in Indian
Affairs we got our our bill
through the committee which is
feeling pretty good.
And back here so I had two items
and I so I apologize if these
were in directly or indirectly
already addressed
I'll start off with the you know
I ran a business I've had my own
business for twenty one years
now and we have teams that are
poorly performing we have teams
that are brought Representative
rockstars and we have teams that
just are confused and
misunderstood did you talk
Senator Kernan or one of your
experts are or whoever you'd
like to address this at a high
level can you tell me what sort
of action plans have been put in
place how much time was given to
improve it was there any of that
discussion in your presentation
I might have missed.
So Mr chairman and Senator
Padilla.
I believe John heating
Representative if he can
probably get.
Pretty good job of talking about
what the local community has
been doing over the last.
Many months they have done very
due diligence in looking into
every piece of becoming an
independent college and I think
that work has been done I think
that they have focused on
on the transition piece of that
in this bill simply allows the
transition to begin that's why
it's important for the bill to
pass because we need to begin
the process we understand NMSU
regents are doing a study but in
my view I think that's more to
determine how this will affect
the main campus.
Carlsbad was not included in the
selection of that and great
that's doing the study and and I
do think that prospect has done
due diligence.
And so met Mr chairman and and
and then met and Senator Kernan
so I I think I I what I what
really wanted to hear was on the
flip side of that did did the
school to do the the college
give NMAA you a list of.
I want to call demands but you
know a list of things that
needed to be corrected and
improved in the relationship or
in the management the remote
management of the school I did
hear about Dr van Winkle's the
change with the role and all
that business use that when I
say action plan I I'm saying for
improvement before we make this
kind of a moving I'm not saying
I'm I want you know I'm I'm
listening to this entire
conversation you and I had a
great conversation Senator
Kernan but we can go on this
matter but was the school was
the mother ship if you will give
in.
orders on what's but what's
what's ailing us out here in the
in the in the school yes
absolutely and I'll let to Mr
Keaton John Heaton responded
that because they have met with
that Mr van Winkle and so let me
let John Heaton.
Recently tell you what they have
done in their communication with
the main campus.
Senator Padilla.
there have been long standing
issues that have been brought to
the cot to animation over and
over and over again and they
just don't seem to ever get
resolved the the laundry list is
is very lengthy and it just
seems like year after year they
just continue and people just to
that that work at the college
seem just acquiesce to the lack
of concern by the main campus
and I I can give you a perfect
example and in terms of when an
issue in order to reduce their
costs.
They they had a roof going on a
voluntary risk where people
could retire early and had a
package.
They didn't consult us one bit
about that and yet offered that
package to our people at our
campus and you may not realize
it but and just in a small town
it is very difficult for us to
recruit and.
As a result of any of our our
science people are biologist our
chemist are are people and
physics any of those had taken
that package for our nursing
program it would have been
devastating to the local campus
that we are just not ever ever
considered in anything that goes
on in the main campus and it's
only been since we decided to
become independent that they
have even acknowledged us and
began to make some overtures
and and a a you know it's just
those overtures should come long
ago I hope that helps.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
Senator Kernan and and
Representative heat in New
Mexico so good to see you Sir
good.
And so tell me again I'm
stepping back and forth and I've
I I've I knew of this issue
happening I knew was going I've
heard about it multiple times.
Where did the issue staff how
long ago to the issue start
would you say what's the length
of time that we've had to to
implement an action plan to
reprove relationship to improve
the the working environment how
long has this been.
Senator Padilla I would suggest.
That it's been going on probably
for fifteen years or more I mean
we we have we have gone through
this discussion more than three
or four times when they they
environment has been.
Very difficult for the campus to
survive and and and and provide
the kind of services to our
community.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and and Representative
heat and so it's been through a
couple of iterations with
leadership also.
So you had a couple of leaders
leaders in that fifteen year
period and and you're still
facing this issue and and I
think the groundswell of.
Of all the comments that were
made are very meaningful and I'm
I respect everybody that spoke
today so I just want to shift
gears just a little bit again
running a business always have
to ask these questions to make
sure that we're being good
stewards of the dollars that are
available on one side of this
equation or the other.
So once a school is going to
become a independent this way
are there.
Are there
economies of scale and
efficiencies that are
experienced by this school
because they're part of a larger
organization that are part of
the mother ship if you will.
I I I I know that in my business
you know I can implement I'm
I've been implementing three new
clients over the past four
months and they are all
benefiting as a result of coming
in at the same time.
What is this due to the budget
for the school.
I would like to Mr chair if you
don't mind Wendy Austin to
responded that she has done a
very at extensive.
Amount of work into the
financial issues related to
this.
Thank you thank you chairman for
allowing me to speak on this the
city of Carlsbad the committee
along with faculty at NMSU
prepared a very detail pro forma
financial statement I can share
with you if you fight
we realize that there could be
additional costs and we also
realize there could be costs
that we haven't considered so
within this pro forma we have a
contingency line item we also
realize that we'll get back our
clocks in at nine hundred
thousand dollar branding fee
that we sent to the main campus
will also get back are eight to
twelve percent
I see that we get charged for
any sort of operating or capital
project back into our budget so
could there potentially be
additional cost yes there will
be but they're also be cost
savings to us that we won't be
sent to committee campus in
addition you know like I
mentioned Carlsbad has very
strong financials here with our
tax base this this campus
already has a three mill levy
and I would like to remind you
that this bill your nineteen the
three mile left the generated
almost thirteen million dollars
of local tax dollars the budget
the total budget of this
university was only thirteen
million dollars that year so
just our local tax dollars
covered the yearly budget thank
you for your twenty the local
tax dollars were almost fourteen
million dollars.
The expenditures that year with
thirteen million dollars so this
university is is very capable of
supporting its its own
operations thank you thank you
Mr chairman and all are only
have two more Mr Chairman I'm I
know we've been on the subject
for a while
so so what is there was a lot
covered there Senator Kernan so
what's the net the net net net
here on financials for the
school if this decision is is
approved and made.
So Mr chairman and Senator
Padilla again Wendy Austin can
responded that which I think
would including to up thirty six
or seven million dollars that's
sitting in reserves at the main
campus it's my understanding
that that would come back to the
to the branch the when you could
you confirm that place.
Yes chairman Senators thank you
again for allowing me to speak I
would be more attention more
happy to send you all this pro
forma the net for fiscal year
nineteen was seven point four
million dollars and that some
fiscal year twenty was nine
million dollars which all
accumulates backed more research
once again we really don't know
what your ballots of our service
on my very conservative pro
forma statement projection here
were actually reduced revenues
and increased expenditures we're
looking at and that.
Anywhere between three to two
million dollars a year.
Thank you appreciate that
summary thank you Mr chairman
and senator current
With this just shift gears one
more time to enrollment what
what is the school receive in
terms of assist you know the
assist on it on enrollment to
bring
students into the school.
It is there this is there some
massive annual.
Program to for enrollment or is
to school do all their own
enrollment what what happened
how do you drive at.
Are you gonna lose anything is
what I'm saying Mr chairman and
senator by moving over here to
to an independent status on the
enrollment front.
So Mr chairman and senator the
not quite sure.
How that relates to a separated
from the main campus I think
enrollment is down typically
from the community and so
I don't know how to answer that
and maybe if John all of the
more to that than Mr Chairman
representative so I'm I'm I'm
guessing that the school but
that the mother ship if you will
does certain things to help you
drive enrollment they run
certain campaigns they have
certain branding that that
happens and it sounds like
you're gonna change that which
is fine but I'm just curious
what what happens to enrollment
if this changes made.
So Mr chairman and senator I
think it would be very much like
all the other community colleges
right there in Albuquerque I
think that they certainly don't
have an issue with enrollment at
CNM other they have very strong
enrollment and they do that on
their own I know well New Mexico
junior college that's the same
Clovis Community College all of
the community colleges even in
San Juan they're pretty much
responsible for their own
enrollment I don't think that
would be an issue I think the
issue of branding.
I I don't think that's something
that students locally that are
looking for a an efficient way
to get an education think too
much about being connected to a
major university they're
interested in completing an
associate's and then potentially
moving on to a four year so I I
don't think enrollment is
anything that would stand in the
way of that this successful
transition to a community
college that would be happy to
bring in an expert if you would
like on that well Mr chairman
and senator I I take your word
for it I I and just wanting to
know because this is something
that I don't know that I
completely agree Senator Kernan
what's the amendment as an
example we there are probably
five major campuses the fact
that they are a unified front
where the that the advertising
that whatever the marketing goes
across the the region of where
the school set everything is
very helpful to each one of
these Brandt I have a brain to
see and I'm in my district and
and yes our many of the students
are say seventeen year so
present to provide my district
but the other thirty percent of
them all over the place and the
last thing I had Mr chairman if
we make the decision today on an
issue like this so let's say
this rules all the way through
the legislature meets there the
signature by governed by the
governor and.
This is only affect this school
are does this open the gate to
work or other community colleges
to do the same because now it's
in statute or does it only
affect this one school.
So Mr chairman and senator it's
my understanding that this
particular bill only impacts
this particular school.
Because it includes of course
the the dates are included that
would not that you could not to
consider that for other other
schools as well I think it's
strictly for this school so
we're just talking about New
Mexico State University Carlsbad
in and their desire to to
separate.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator I apologize Mister
chairman but if I could I had to
run over as you know to the
house side for a committee
hearing I didn't hear Dr van
Winkle's comments and I don't
want to single him out here but
I would I'm very interested if
he's supporting this move are
not supporting this move.
So thank you senator Padilla and
committee members
I don't support this move and it
it is under the auspices that we
just don't have all the
information that we need in the
best interest students I
understand both sides have been
involved in the conversation
with Carlsbad and also
represented the main campus in
those conversations and I I just
feel like for the students best
interest we don't have all the
all the information that we need
and that the biggest problem
here is lack of communication
and respect from both sides of
our campuses thank you Sir thank
you Mr chairman and senator
thank you doctor van Winkle I I
did mean to single out there but
I wanted to hear from you and
make sure I got it right I'm
gonna keep listing thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator I next senator
Neville.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'm in a some of the rock and
hard place here on the today Mr
Chairman as you are I've got
three degrees New Mexico state.
I was very involved in campus I
work for the university for two
years a long time ago my
daughters both graduated my
oldest daughter was student body
president there's not many
activities that are more anti
that I.
But I also have San Juan college
appear.
And I know that last time I
moved to San Juan County two
years after couple years after I
got up here San Juan went
through the same process I don't
know if they have to go through
the Legislature provided it
differently.
And I gotta tell you that San
Juan is the heart of this
community some college.
And it can be that way for for
a.
For Carlsbad as well if if
everything is done right and
that's that's the question here.
the chancellor or somebody
mentioned a study or maybe
already in the notes that
there's a study being done by in
this year staff to determine if
there is a need for a separate
are you gonna you're not Senator
or one of your experts could you
respond to that.
So thank you Mr chair and
senator.
First of all the study that is
being performed and requests
through a resolution by the
regents of NMSU we really don't
know what it's about we don't
know who they have that well I
guess we know who that secured
at this point but we were not
involved the the prospect group
they were not included in making
a decision on who did the study
I think that this study and I
you is probably more to
determine what the impact will
be on the main campus I believe
the local community have done
their due diligence on on
throughout the last few months
on on why they believe the
separation is necessary.
Separately the study can
continue to occur even if this
bill passes so.
I have no problem with the study
but this bill needs to move
forward based on the time frame
that's included in this bill the
study can Percy that does not.
Being that Carlsbad in well I'll
talk more about this in that
Carlsbad would be interested in
in changing direction if they
are going forward at this point
so the steady can continue even
if this bill passes and
certainly welcome that but I
think that study is more for the
main campus not particularly for
what Carlsbad is seeking thank
you.
Thank you senator.
On the.
The okay as a.
Branch campus you can S. bonds
and so forth I guess probably
with permission to main campus
and so forth is there any
existing debt that with the.
Problems farger separating from
main campus that we have to deal
with how is that.
So Mr chairman and senator
outlet Wendy Austin answer that
I'm gonna make sure it's the
correct answer.
Okay thank you.
Chairman thank you the branch
campus here in college has no
data at this point.
None at all so
None occurred either by the main
campus as well.
This farmers debt that would be
all the that would be on your
behalf this.
I'm gonna say no because that
has not been brought to our
attention if there is if there
was again there's thirty six
million dollars or more in
reserve that it
hello relinquish that that that
I believe there is no data so
stated with the main campus in
regards to college nor is there
any doubt here locally in
regards to our college.
Mr Mr and senator we might see
about Mr van Winkle might want
to answer also on behalf of the
major restriction as options
there that's good for you.
Yes senator I don't believe
there is a incur debt from the
main campus to for Carlsbad.
Well I've got you on could you
tell me a little bit about the
thirty six million dollars is
that all principal or.
Something services implications
that there's no interest Hey
Matt to so over time that could
be millions of dollars yes it
Senator that's a that's a of
what they call
it the person on the main.
My understanding is that it's
an what they consider a plant
fund and that's worst reserves
are often kept for the entire
system this would include
Alamogordo grants Carlsbad Dona
Ana and the that fund is
available for those particular
campuses in other words the
thirty six million dollars for
Carlsbad is Carlsbad money and
they can spend.
There are some processes that
you have to go through to make
sure that you're compliant and
and and taking care of business
is appropriate but but it's it's
certainly Carlsbad money the
interest on that money from what
I understand is in a pool for
the system in which you can get
to but you have to request and
my understanding it was is it's
for small capital outlay
projects and and and things of
of of of that matter now there
is there is no question that we
need to take a look at some of
our procedures and processes but
the fact that the thirty six
million dollars is
in in the plant fund is still
it's still remains Carlsbad
money and this this goes back to
my point my original point which
is that there's just confusion
and misunderstanding on how
processes are handled between
the main campuses and our branch
campus thank you.
If you have any did you have any
other comments chancellor.
Thank you madam chairman cells
and and and senator Neville yes
I I kind of want to weigh in on
on that as well I think you know
there is a little bit of I think
misunderstanding regarding the
processes and you know for the
the thirty six million dollars
what a branch campus needs to do
is to act actually request a I
process and and in fact the
president the grant and did
request process last year
regarding housing and up but but
the request wasn't to do a pro
forma to do due diligence and
understand how with this money
be spent as anyone would would
would expect in terms of in
terms of an approval for
expenditures but instead was to
just the start of design on
actually moving ahead to to
actually do the the the
construction
the regents of our institution
the entire system look at that
from the perspective of what's
good stewardship and and said no
the do the pro forma first and
then you can do these the staff
and so that process is actually
one that we write Act expect
everybody to go through and that
helps a lot in terms of making
sure that you know we've we've
looked at all of the things that
are necessary when you make you
know a big commitment for
expenditures so those kind of
processes are in place they're
cumbersome I get that and and in
some cases a you know they that
they don't that they don't feel
user friendly and that we're
that's part of our integrated
system you know initiative to
to.
all of those processes have
greater impact more money on
mission and more that helps our
students and our community so
that's really the intent behind
that we just haven't had a
chance to get through that whole
process in a way that that
allows us to demonstrate those
those more enhanced outcomes and
then we've had that we've seen
in the past thank you for the
opportunity response.
Thank you the chancellor Mr
Chairman chancellor up.
I think you've got a serious
problem I think you've got a as
I think Senator Kernan said
something that maybe that can be
fixed it's getting pretty a.
It's it's gotten.
Pretty far along and I do want
to relate the San Juan county
situation someone college I said
something about it was the heart
of the community it is host
leadership Santa on it has
developed a school of energy it
even hosted the the voice winner
should L. Sheppard when she won
that last year
and and on and on and on it's.
It's it's a good thing for us
and I don't know whether would
be for Carlsbad a suspected
might be it's it's.
This is a difficult decision but
I'm.
Real concern about the future if
we don't do something here
that's that's all I have Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you senator I accept
Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Kernan a few questions
about the future are you
mentioned that if I heard
correctly that you now are the
top nursing school in the state
is that correct.
So
Mr chair and Senator Hickey I
think that they have been
awarded I am not certain and I
went to someone from one of my
experts respond to that it's my
understanding that they have
received recognition recently on
that but let me double check if
I can get one of my experts to
respond to that.
That is correct Senators.
So thank you very much so the
answer is yes thank you of my
other question is
I I certainly am white to merry
the CNM and and I have been to
many conferences that are the
college in Farmington and and
Santa Fe
it sometime in the future do you
anticipate that Carlsbad with I
believe there's a consortium of
five of the.
Associate degree cut community
colleges we're working together
to
to get a boot camps and it the
combined high school and a a
degree and
through broadband training all
over the state and.
I'm from a developmental point
of view for the state I just
think that's one of the most
wonderful things and one of the
greatest assets that we have in
New Mexico our our community
colleges to create much better
paying jobs jobs with dignity
and and good compensation and so
I'm just wondering if at some
point and maybe one of your
witnesses could answer it if you
in some form or manner they'd be
able to coordinate with this
consortium in terms of these
degrees because people do move
around the state sometimes there
in one place or the other and
coordinating the ability to get
credit for your degrees in one
place or another and as soon as
we can get people off of the
lower paying jobs those who
really want to to the much
better paying jobs the much
better we all are going to be
thank you so thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator Dr
Nikki and.
All of the community colleges
that are not associated with the
branch have formed an
association of the independent
community colleges and I think
that worked very well together I
think about being an independent
community college that would
have more flexibility to reach
out into the community and
figure out what are those
classes that best fits this
community and that's why
independence is so important for
Carlsbad because we are a bit
different we certainly different
from C. N. M. in Santa Fe
community college but all of the
things you've mentioned are
certainly possible under
community college independence
community college college status
so I think all of those things
will happen just a second and
all the other intended colleges
across New Mexico thank you for
that question.
One last
comment on that I think you you
just struck a chord and in my
head I have worked in large
corporate bureaucracies of for
many of my professional years
and thought there's always been
a.
Strain between corporate and
local and I know that's not
quite the same here but I think
you just pointed out something
that's really critical and
that's the ability to have the
independence of take the actions
you need for the community and
again what I am so passionate
about is getting dignified high
paying jobs for the workers in
in the state of New Mexico so
thank you for bringing this bill
and I yield Mr chair.
Thank you I don't see any other
committee members let me make
sure and check one more time who
had questions.
Kind of I'm not sure I have any
questions I'm very towards the
border Center develo all three
of my degrees are from New
Mexico State University long
history there and some of you
may not know that I actually was
a part of the administration
that NMSU Carlsbad back in the
late seventies at that time it
wasn't president that that it
was a provost and I was the
assistant provost for student
services our lived run house on
how it when you know and
Yeah was very engaged and
involved in certainly saw and
and actually thought there from
both sides that always branches
the white they're not getting
the things that they need but
then other times are very much
like a leave us alone don't
don't don't tell the main campus
what we're doing and so it cuts
both directions having come from
the main campus you know I you
very much saw both sides and
both sides were up doing the
right thing and both sides were
also not doing the right things
and that was clear back in the
late eighties so you know I'm
very torn about this my biggest
concerns is if we do this
there's kind of no going back
this is something where a year
two years from now the Carlsbad
to come back and say Hey that
was a lot harder than we thought
yeah we're struggling will you
take us back that's kind of one
of those no give backs so just
kind of struggling in my my
concerns are are certainly with
the students and making sure I
mean many of them out and will
continue to be very proud that
they are NMSU and many of them I
know will be going to introduce
you after they finish whether
it's NMSU Carlsbad or whether
it's southeast community college
that NMAA you still will be that
the college of choice for the
community of the university of
choice for the community of
Carl's but doctors my comments
on things and you know I'm I'm
very torn on this because I I
fully understand and see both
sides but with that happy to
have a motion from Mr chair
cannot can I just close just
rigorously just I promise.
And and I understand the
conflict I understand that.
And and and I just have to say
that chancellor
the chancellor and I'm
additional with Ricardo and all
of the stiff tried I think to to
figure this out
however just from my perspective
and I I'm from Hobbs I'm not
from Carlsbad and I committed
early on that whatever the the
whatever the community chose to
do with regard to this I would
support them and that's what I'm
doing today and I understand
it's difficult for some of the
what I wish for is for this bill
to move forward even if it's a
no grant maybe just to keep have
to having the conversation going
giving us an opportunity to
continue to talk but I do think
it's it's almost like a family
situation where it has gone so
far yeah I look at relationships
is a savings account and and and
so sometimes you put money in
the account sometimes you take
money out and then sometimes
that gets off center and it's
bankrupt on one side and that's
because that's kind of where we
are with Carlsbad.
The greatest respect for the
chancellor and I respect for for
the regions that I know there
and I know this is difficult but
I just feel that this needs to
continue to move on I'm just not
sure the relationship can be
salvaged at this point and so
I'm just very taken care.
Very.
Encouraging the encourage the
committee just to consider
letting this bill go forward
even just a no grant just so we
can continue the conversation
and that would be my my hope
that I'll I'll certainly go to
the committee thank you.
Pleasure the committee please.
Mr chair
Mr Chairman over do pass on
Senate bill two thirty six and
seconded to bypass and seconded
by Senator Hickey Marianna if
you'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
etcetera Novell yes explain more
about.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes.
Etcetera pope yes Senator.
So.
We do have you have a do pass
and senator Neville wanted to
explain his boat yes they'll.
Just briefly I think that this
needs to be looked at a little
further I have to go with the
community because I see how good
someone colleges with our
community and what to what an
asset it is more so than what I
understand Mr that was branch
and that's my reasons for voting
for us certainly a support New
Mexico state every time I was
looking through my old panorama
city.
When I was laying on my desk to
the reason why I have that on my
this is got mine and my
daughter's picture it so I I'm
good at you really have a hard
time with this because I know it
hurts both ways that's all thank
you Mr chair thank you senator
Neville.
Going on and and committee that
could cause more than an hour
and a half so we're we're fall a
little behind today so with
their their ones and and
certainly and and this
committees pretty good about it
your your questions tight
concise and that the appreciated
next up we have just built to
thirty six independent Carlsbad
community college received that
you passed we are now on Senate
bill two thirty four lottery for
home school students with
Senator Pirtle all of by Senate
bill two forty vocational
training scholarship that
Senator Pirtle and Senator
Brandt I see you.
Mr Chairman just the one person
privilege I am going to roll
over to sixty three today yes
that be held till Wednesday I'm.
Was on that thank you thank you
Senator Brandt and so following
those Senate bill two sixty
three will not be heard today
it'll get moved over to our
Wednesday agenda reminded
committee Wednesday and the
public we will be starting at
eight thirty because of a four
session that starts at eleven
thirty so please make sure mark
your calendars
that are pirtle are you with us
for Senate bill two thirty four
thank you Mr chairman I am here
I am actually in three places at
once so I appreciate the the
opportunity to come before the
the committee today with Senate
bill two thirty four
this is something that I've
brought forward before and it's
it's really just addressing the
the fact that the heroes who who
go through a home school
program.
Have to go through an extra step
just to to be qualified for the
lottery scholarship and that's
they would have to get their
high school equivalency exam
also known by many as the GDP so
this would just take that away
they already have to to pass the
hi the competency exam that all
students have to and there's
other qualifications that they
would have to do to ensure that
I'm it would have to be
residents of New Mexico and we
need to remember that before you
get the scholarship you have to
maintain a two point five to
four point oh for one semester
so the students would have to
prove their competency in that
way as well protecting the fund
I will point out that the F. the
FIR stated that these were
somehow going to be new kids
that we're going to qualify for
the lottery scholarship these
kiddos can already do it they're
just required to take a high
school equivalency exam are the
yes a high school equivalency
exam and so we're just taking
that owners staff out of their
way so that they can go to one
of our great New Mexico schools
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for businesses
Senator.
Mr chair I I don't but there may
be some people waiting to speak
in favor of it I I really don't
know at this point time.
Thank you know I understand
sometimes that way we have our
experts before we get the public
comment Markelle if you'll take
is the public comment please.
This time I don't have anyone
listed to speak in opposition of
Senate bill two thirty four if
there are any members of the
public who wish to make a
comment in opposition please
raise your hand at this time.
One more time for those who wish
to speak in opposition of Senate
bill two thirty four.
Okay we'll move on to support I
don't have anyone on my list to
email to head are there any
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of spent of
Senate bill two thirty four.
One more time this is an
opportunity for members of the
public to speak in support.
And it looks like we don't have
anyone so that concludes public
statement present a bill to
thirty four thank you so much.
Thank you and Center pirtle
sound like this was flying under
the radar we will now go to
comments or questions from the
committee anyone on the
committee with questions about
Senate bill two thirty four.
Do passed Mr chairman.
Have a motion for it to pass I
do have a question or two before
we get to that and but we'll
keep that motion on the table
Senator.
Again before I get to my
question any other members and
have a question.
See none let me ask then.
Senator Pirtle on page two down
under hi on qualified students
why did it remove this section
of or accredited private New
Mexico high school and take out
the twelve portion of that that
scene in.
That it's important that people
work from an accredited school
because then the next part goes
on to talk about school based
but why are we removing twelve.
Private school.
In in Mr chair I I appreciate
that question and and it's
because there's been a new
Style of home schooling or home
based education and that's that
they go in a for almost like co
ops and so that the child may
not be home school per se every
single day but it goes to a type
of coop school where parents get
together and and then they help
each other teach so one one
parent might teach one day out
of the week and teach multiple
kids and then another teacher or
parents teach other days so that
way there was a confusion that
there are some private schools
that are not twelve full time
private schools that they are
also part time home based I know
there's one in Roswell that the
kiddos actually signed up as as
home school because it is a
hybrid type learning system
where they go home school some
days and then not so that way
that they would be left out
we're wanting to get as many
kids as possible I am sure that
we don't leave anybody out but I
think that question may be and I
didn't ask for for Mr combat to
be on with me today but there
was something with tying it in
with other parts of the law Mr
chair and bringing that language
in I think there's other places
dealing with education where
they talk about instead of
twelve private New Mexico high
school they started using the
term non public school.
Senator I not sure that really
answers my question if students
are registered and I believe the
whole screen they have to
register with the PED then they
are less home school
if they are attending a.
School yeah we're it's a rate
school type of thing that they
are listed as attending a school
it concerns me what we take out
the twelve for any of the
private schools that that is
opening up a whole area that is
should I don't think should be
opened up that twelve private
school that's an important part
of it we got quite a number of
those from some of the.
The religious based schools are
Albuquerque academy all of those
are accredited private schools
which you're discussing is a
hybrid I think would still fall
under the whole screen and so we
concerns me taking out the
twelve part that that opens up
high school to almost anything
that isn't
Home schooling and and changes
that definition and I think
that's a serious concern of of
what this this bill does is that
particular section I don't have
any problem with the main part
of it of a lottery scholarship
for home school students but
that does concern.
any response request insert.
Mr chair again I think that was
changed because of other
sections of the law to bring it
in line with what they call
private school is is from twelve
private New Mexico high school
because that was not the intent
that was evidently something
caught by the the drafters that
they call those non public
school or the term use now is
non public school instead of
private New Mexico high school
and so that's from what I
understand that's why that
particular portion was was
struck is to bring it in line
with with other questions of law
because this was supposed to
only apply to
home base so I think that
language is just keeping it
consistent with other sections
of law.
And senator on the top of page
three that section continues on
and it does talk about non
public.
Cool primary education programs
I don't have a problem with that
my concern is the twelve taking
out the word twelve that's an
important part that those
schools maintaining comply with
and I don't think should be
opened up in other areas and so
I don't have a problem with
where it says non public school
primary education.
But the twelve matters in
education accreditation matters
for teachers accreditation
matters and removing the word
twelve is a concern yeah and I
yes I would that would motion
that we take out that one place
where strikes that out so that
it would continue to read a full
time student graduated from a
public high school in the state
or completed requirements of a
home based or non public school
primary education program in the
state I think that reads just
fine but where it takes out or
accredited private New Mexico.
Twelve private New Mexico I
think is important to keep in
that and I don't see where what
you're talking about is still in
there in the next portion.
And I.
On the.
They they they talk about it but
I would be more than happy to
pull that if if that's the
will of the committee and would
would get your support I think
that would be a friendly
amendment because again Mr chair
that in no way was what am I
trying to circumvent you know
accreditation of private schools
this is a hundred percent for
our whole school kids out there
that have to take a high school
equivalency exam and it's an
added step that really isn't
necessary so that's really the
intent of the bill and and so if
we did that and and we moved out
of this committee you know that
would be a friendly amendment
because that that was not the
intent.
In in any way.
Senator and you're most.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman emotion.
The motion to amend that portion
yes that we've done that but
thank you for a you know having
that that mental connection with
me is just on page two we're
making a motion to online twenty
four the portion that is struck
out is to put that back in is on
strike that the motion to strike
the struck portion of one twenty
four on page two.
And center branded about
seconded that and so we're on a
discussion on that motion in
Merion are you comfortable with
what we're doing there is that
makes sense.
Yes Sir I am.
Okay thank you.
I'm watching for anyone on the
committee have any.
Questions discussion about that.
Nine million if you will call
the roll on the motion the this
to reinsert the struck portion
on page one twenty four page
two.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes.
Bill your bill is now Amanda
we're back on the main bill I
still don't see any hands up we
do have a motion from senator
bill is there a second to that
motion.
I second.
Seconded by Senator pope and
single mothers discussion
Braniff you'll call the roll on
Senate bill two thirty four as
amended.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Yes hundreds of Bill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes.
We have the do pass as amended.
Senator revenue passed as
amended sometimes it pays to
follow of great big like the
bill.
Sometimes.
For the public this is Senate
education we have passed Senate
bill two thirty six with you
passed Senate bill two thirty
four was amended and got it you
pass we are now on Senate bill
two forty vocational training
scholarships Act with Senator
Pirtle Senate bill two sixty
three has been rolled over to
Wednesday at the request of the
sponsor and then we will have
Senate bill two seventy one and
Senate bill two seventy two
which are both Senator hope
bills so Senator Pirtle if you
will take us through Senate bill
two forty and what it does for
you Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and for the zoom
operator there should be doctors
Sean Powell
signed up to speak and he is the
in charge of eastern New Mexico
university Ross wall and that's
where this idea came from is
this is a piece of legislation I
introduced a few years back it
was a little bit ahead of its
time and so what we decided to
do was through junior money
do a pilot program at eastern
Mexico University Ross will and
the goal is to take the group of
kids that sometimes gets
forgotten it's the group of
kiddos that drop out for one
reason or another and and and
gives them the opportunity a
true opportunity scholarship to
better themselves to go from
minimum wage jobs to specialty
jobs we talk a lot about
locational Education and in this
act it's all about action and
and not just saying okay well
let's do something well our
community colleges across the
state have really great
certificate programs whether
it's getting a CDL or a welding
certificate or a nursing
Coming and nurse I mean there
are really great programs out
there is and especially and also
very proud of of our community
college and what they've done in
designing programs and
certificates for what our area
needs we need a lot of truck
drivers will they came up with
the CDL program so this is a way
that we can get these kiddos at
you know sometimes they are
forgotten and it's a way for
them to really improve improve
their lives they made a mistake
they dropped out of high school
not realizing what path that was
going to put them on and this
says you know what as a state we
want you to better yourself
because it betters the state and
helps them get that
certification or credential that
they really need to improve
their life and without all that
Dr John Powell
talk a little bit about it as as
he's seen the impact that it's
made in the lives of so many in
in Brussels up to this effort
basically just in two years.
Okay well thank you Senator
thank you chairman souls in
senators appreciate up to speak
with you today why Senator
Pirtle indicated we have been
operating this program through
capital outlay support from our
local legislators and was led by
Senator Pirtle in twenty
nineteen the legislative session
we received two hundred fifty
thousand dollars it was designed
for students who have graduated
from high school who were going
through the adult education
program at our college and also
the cadets of the use challenge
program so is a joint effort
between our campus Senator coral
in the New Mexico military
department and we're honored to
have The New Mexico military
challenge program on our campus
it's designed this bill is
designed for students who didn't
graduate from high school.
As I indicated the focus is a
little different from some of
the bills that have been put
forth for scholarships because
this focuses on tuition fees
books tools and supplies is that
tools pardon supplies for that
often are provides difficulty
for students who are coming back
because in many of our
vocational programming they need
to have tools and the supplies
in order to go through the class
in twenty nineteen twenty twenty
like I indicated receive Jordan
fifty thousand dollars seventy
three students were initially
enrolled in that program and
some of them are still
continuing their studies in that
so seventy three students from
that year additionally received
scholarships of the cost of
about twenty nine hundred forty
five dollars for students not
all of the students of finish
their programs as some have
received funds in twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty or
continuing and you have to
remember that most unity
colleges sixty to seventy
percent of our students are part
time additionally COVID nineteen
has impacted some of the
students abilities to complete
the programs however what I am
proud to report is that from the
twenty nineteen twenty twenty
years thirty six to to get some
degrees were awarded and I know
there have been concerns about
the types of degrees and
certificates so I just wanna let
you know twenty four of these
certificates were in health
education former an automotive
technology seven we're in
welding and one was in media
arts I email the scholarship
form to the committee members
last week the on that I'd be
able to find the answer any
questions if you have an answer.
Thank you Senator Pirtle thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair.
You are you all ready for autumn
or from out of public
participation Hey Mr chair I
think after after a
Mr Powell's presentation I mean
you can see how many people
we've impacted.
With really not a lot of of
money for for such a small
amount of money people out there
have accreditation and in health
education and and are able to
improve their lives I think it's
a great investment it's really a
small amount of money that we're
having to invest so I think you
know is is testimony really
speaks to that.
Okay and but if you'll take a
few public comment please.
Absolutely at this time I don't
have anyone signed up to speak
in opposition of Senate bill two
forty are there any members of
the public that are here in our
meeting right now who wish to
voice an opinion in opposition
of Senate bill two forty.
Please raise your hand at this
time.
One more time for statements in
opposition of Senate bill two
forty.
Okay moving on we will not hear
statements of support Mr Ashley
Wagner actually are you
available.
One more time for miss Ashley
Wagner.
She appears and available so we
will hear from miss sharing
Berman this Berman.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee my name is Sharon
Berman I'm a civic engagement
and policy manager at New Mexico
First and I'm a registered
lobbyist for New Mexico New
Mexico first we support Senate
bill three to forty and thank
Senator Pirtle for sponsoring
this bill.
At our most recent town halls on
higher education health and the
economy over one thousand
participants from all over the
state overwhelmingly agreed that
workforce development including
vocational training was key to
the success of New Mexico higher
education students.
Students want training that'll
help them get jobs in your home
employers need trained job
applicants let's help our
students get the training they
need and want and help industry
hire from within our state it's
a win win proposition thanks for
the opportunity to speak in
support of this bill we hope you
will improve we will approve
Senate bill two forty thanks.
Thank you Mr president are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Senate bill two forty please
raise your hand at this time.
One more time for Senate bill
two forty statements of support.
Thank you and that concludes
this portion of public
statement.
Thank you we are now to
questions from the committee I
don't see any hands up yet are
there any hands.
Representative this is money out
of the budget.
I'm joking Sir.
Senator Kernan.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you for reminding me that I
hadn't thought of that but
anyway at actually I'm trying to
figure out I don't think the
fund has been set up at this
point is that correct Senator
Pirtle.
And and Mr chair and senator
that is correct.
So you know I'm thinking about
that it's not a lot of money and
and certainly at the fact that
we have received the opportunity
to make amendments to house bill
two that if if this bill for
whatever reason since the fund
is not set up would it be
appropriate for those of us that
support this to actually
dedicate part of.
Junior money to this what it
where would it go and what it
that with the higher rate
department be able to utilize.
Those dollars for this specific
type of scholarship.
Mr chair and senator I think
that would be a a more than
appropriate way of doing it is
and and to my understanding it
would go to the higher it
Department
for for
The next fiscal year so you know
I think that would be very
appropriate as if this piece of
legislation doesn't go through
our door is not added to House
Bill to for us to use junior
money and you know I think with
just within the Senate this is
something that we could find and
our community colleges all
across the state could could
take advantage of this so I I
think every single member of the
Senate has a community college
within their district I.
I don't know of any off the top
of my head that don't so or at
least within their county so I
think this is something that you
know if we could get everybody
behind it that would be that
would be great and on a great
idea on how to get it funded.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
that would be a very proper way
to to allocate your money I know
that that for all members it was
a learning experience for us the
last time we had your money to
spend and I learned a great
lesson in that that you have to
be really careful where you put
it and this really would be a
great opportunity that I would
like for a little bit more
detail if this bill moves
forward on how
that sun could be set up in high
rate to make sure that any
junior money that would flow
into that would be dedicated to
exactly what you're talking
about so certainly something I
would be interested in doing and
you're right across the state of
New Mexico hi everybody do the
minimum that that is allowed on
that we would we would we would
have some recurring dollars to
go to a very important mission
thank you.
Mr chair representative I'd be
remiss if I didn't mention that
it was up myself and and Phelps
Anderson and we came together
with the junior money the last
time and we were able to put
this program together and so I
wanted to make sure everybody
knew that Representative
Anderson at a large part to do
with this as well.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Pirtle I'm a big
believer in in this effort
so what I I may I'm I missed it
I think but what was the
appropriation the first time you
did this versus what we're doing
what you're looking for now.
And Mr chair and senator I I
really appreciate that question
so we were able to do a pilot
program for for two hundred and
fifteen thousand dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman and so I'm
just thinking two point two
million it is how will sisters
obviously wildly successful
wildly popular program what what
is the two point two five what
percentage of the need to sit
meet.
Mr chair and senator.
Taking this the the scale we're
thinking that would cover.
Of the needs across the state.
Okay.
And and and when you I think you
heard use the term vocational ed
and then what what what what
what with the correct
terminology be today.
is a different terminology for
this type of Mr chair and
senator being creatures of habit
I will always call of occasional
education education I know
there's some other terms out
there but for me it's it's
always vocational that's a a
passion of mine to ensure that
we really value that training.
And I and I agree Mr chairman
and senator that's what I call
that I was a big part I've
participated in multiple Boca
programs I was a state state
officer international officer
for some of these will get
organizations and just a very
very important thing for our
state not you know.
All there all sorts of jobs out
there and if we're not focusing
on all of them and helping lift
them all up and we're really put
ourselves behind so I think
that's all I have at the moment
Mr chairman and when you're
ready Senator Pirtle or or
Senator Kernan to do the junior
money effort I'd like to help
you with that a little bit.
Yes it Mr chairman senator on
page two line nine subsection F.
locational training program
means career technical education
so that's the term that I think
we use now is career tech and so
that that if that answers your
question more specific thank you
Mr chairman and that's what I
was looking for just to make
sure it's I've had a hard
transition to that new term also
thank you.
Thank you another term is being
used a lot of advanced
manufacturing programs as well.
I don't see any other hands up
I have just a quick question or
two
yes I'm a little bit like
Senator Brandt you know you had
a program that was two hundred
and some thousand this is more
than ten percent increased by
ten percent.
It's a up.
Couple of thousand percent
increase its as of ten times
increase or the other.
which is a substantial one how
many students approximately will
this support each year.
And Mr chairman and and senator
we're hoping between seven
hundred and and one thousand
students.
Okay.
Senator
Is there concern that this is
duplicating scholarships already
if that are available for
community college level students
out for instance they already
get the opportunities
governorship affordability
scholarship student Senate
brands there is some ones that
are specific towards
It types of programs
Is there a concern that these
duplicates many of those things
and which one would take
president of the student
qualifies for instance for the
opportunity scholarship that
free up money here or B. which
was first in line.
Mr chair I think all right I
will let the Mr Powell answer
that if if he has an answer on
that question.
Senator and chairman centers
thank you the difference with
this one Sir is the
qualification that you don't
have to be a high school
graduate in order to apply and
so in many of the opportunity
and lottery scholarships need to
have that high school diploma or
a GED or a high set we want to
encourage the adult education
however again this goes beyond
what the opportunity scholarship
and the rotary scholarship
provides as it again provides
for
fees books tools tuition and
supplies.
Thank you I mean you indicated
that it would support somewhere
between seven hundred and yeah
what thousand so one of my
analysis indicates will support
up to seventeen hundred students
are there that many students who
are waiting who don't have high
school diplomas that are waiting
are there waiting lines to get
into those programs at the
community colleges.
So the chairman and senators I
can answer for our port if you
look at the.
Non completion rate of high
school seniors in the state
there are a large number of
individuals who don't complete
the typical K. through twelve
experience and so this is an
opportunity again across the
state to provide these career
technical education or what we
spoke tech is has been
referenced earlier opportunities
for the students to move into
workforce development and also
go out and get gainful
employment in different fields.
Thank you is there a scaling
problem at the community
colleges to handle what could be
up to seventeen hundred students
a year moving into these
programs again for committee
colleges that often not a
problem you'd love to have but
are you able to scale up where
the students who might be
interested as far as space Act
will be.
Equipment at that are.
Chairman I appreciate the
question and you've heard
testimony earlier today an
earlier bill that indicated
enrollment seven down in Trinity
college's and one of the things
again are facto our students are
primarily gonna be part time
they're going to be what we
would call nontraditional
students individuals or out
working they have a family and
so the average age at the
community colleges ranges
anywhere from twenty four to say
twenty nine years old depending
on the year of the Cold War the
class that that we're
particularly looking at so
those variety of differences
between the community college
student body population those
that are are going into a four
year institution or a bachelors
degree so in my mind I don't
think there'd be a scaling
problem in the various fields
that would be offered and again
I had forwarded the scholarship
form that we are using our
campus to you all last week in
order to show you the types of
programming that we have
available on our campus.
Thank you indicated that you
think the majority of the
students would be part time with
the appropriation of two point
five million then the number of
my analyst provided a seventeen
hundred potentially would be
significantly more than that
probably after twenty five
hundred people are so would
again just do we have that that
need to be be nice if we can get
them trained out there whether
there's that much coming through
each time but in my questions
with that is there a motion from
the committee.
I'm in the past thank you Mr
chairman you passed second by
Senator Padilla very attic
you'll call the roll please.
Brandt.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
No.
Yes Sander Sauls yes.
We have a due pass Senator you
have another to pass from the
Education Committee so you Mr
chairman and thank you for your
time to everyone on the
committee thank you.
Thank you we are next going to
be going for the public we are
not going to your Senate bill
two sixty three today that is
then asked to be rolled over by
the sponsor to Wednesday will be
going to Senate bill two seventy
one and Senate bill two seventy
two both have Senator pope as
the primary sponsor has been low
quite today because this is
first time in front of our
committee as a presenter I know
you were here for the the crown
Act before Sir correct we should
ban are hazing on you at that
point I guess there were.
And all of that if you Mr
Chairman we're happy to do it
now if you want to.
But I think it's one of those
okay of that I'm getting it for
the tide you can't go backwards.
Senator pope if you would Senate
bill two seventy one the
representative so as yes ma'am
please Senator Hempel is here as
well with.
So just want to let you know
that she's on the this is a
meeting wonderful that our help
will welcome the Senate
Education glad to have you with
us R. for Senate bill two
seventy one we have fifteen
minutes until our deadline and
so hopefully will be able to get
through these these two bills
Senator Paypen.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee are also want to thank
senator Hemphill was aware as
well as well she is a co
sponsoring this bill this is the
purple star school program
this is basically a state
sponsored recognition it you
know recognize the importance
but also assisting military
children with school transition
and developing programs that
recognize the value of military
service and civic responsibility
the average military connected
child will experience six to
nine different schools during
their K. through twelve
education experience with more
than one point one million
students attending schools these
issues surrounding schools
issues have become a top
priority for families and for
schools New Mexico as an
opportunity to make things
easier for military families
frequently on the move by stab
wishing a purple star school
program
that addresses such issues as
gaps and overlaps and the course
is being taught different
graduation requirements and
social and emotional challenges
military children face issues
such as gaps and overlaps in
curriculum different graduation
requirements and course
placement disruption as well as
difficulties relating to
socially emotionally connecting
with the new school and their
community
what this bill does is it it
will basically designate a
school staff as a point of
contact for military students
and families it requires a
professional development for the
staff assigned as the PLC.
It designates a page on the
website featuring resources and
information for military
families and it'll at at at
least one sample supplemental
activities such as additional
professional development or
school board passing your
rentals resolution to support
military children.
there's also another added
affected added program
with the purple star program for
for schools I do not have
military families involved and
that's really recognize the
accomplish of veterans
accomplishments of veterans and
active members and then
sponsoring special events
recognize a military service
this bill is just really
important we have other states
right now that I actually
already have this program in
place and here in New Mexico we
already have for example we've
talked to Alamogordo school
district and they already have
this program implemented
I want to pass this over to
Senator create Hemphill to see
if you words give her an
opportunity.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Senator cope it's
such an honor to co sponsor this
bill with Senator pope and I'm
also very proud that New Mexico
is one of the highest rates of
military volunteerism in the
country and our veterans and
those serving in the military
have made sacrifices to serve
our country defend our freedom
so one of our greatest
responsibilities is to honor our
service members by recognizing
their sacrifices and ensuring
that they and their children
receive the support and the
flexibility and recognition that
they deserve I'm a school
psychologist and I work with
children who are experiencing
social and emotional challenges
in the schools research
indicates that one of the top
stressors that a child faces and
their life is changing teachers
the classroom becomes like a
school family for children so
when children are having to
relocate to a new school family
you can imagine how difficult
that is so for children from
military families who move every
two to three years and have to
relocate to new schools due to
the parents change in duty
station it can be a really
trapped traumatic experience for
those children.
So the purple star school
program is designed to help
schools respond to the
educational and the social
emotional challenges that
military connected children
faced during their transition to
a new school and it also helps
to keep them on track to be
college workforce and life ready
and it's important to understand
that we become life and
workforce ready with healthy
brains and with healthy brains
that we develop executive skills
and executive skills are things
like time management and
organization skills goal setting
goal achievement working memory
self control and attention
regulation and we develop
healthy brains through
connection connection with our
peers connection with our
teachers are educators
connection with our families.
And when we feel connected and
safe and our school environments
and and at home we release
oxytocin which is the the
bonding CAC chemical and that is
what literally opens up the the
process for Miley needing the
prefrontal lobe so if children
don't feel connected to their
schools to their family and
their community it negatively
impacts that frontal lobe
development so to have a
successful life we have to have
healthy prefrontal lobes and so
the purples stark school program
will help children feel that
connection in their schools and
that will pave the way for them
to have successful lives which
ultimately we all benefit from
through growing a strong skilled
workforce and healthy members of
our community thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and senator.
Anything else that a expert
witnesses.
Sure I would just no expert
witnesses I guess I just want to
close and then we'll go to
questions this program has
already been implemented in Ohio
Texas and Virginia and and of
course the primary goal of this
is to help our military kids and
also it also will support the
kids of our military serving in
our guard and reserves I also
like to add that there's
actually a secondary effect to
this and that's that it actually
makes us more competitive
nationally from a perspective
from the department of defense
when we compete for military
missions coming in our state
they're looking how we are
treating our military families
and our kids so this is an area
that we can always find ways to
improve so with that Mr chair I
will close and we're open to any
questions.
Thank you mark all of you okay
because the public comment
please.
At this time I don't have anyone
who signed up to speak in
opposition of Senate bill two
seventy one OO Mr stand around I
saw your hand that no no support
okay I will come back to you are
there any other members of the
public who wish to speak in
opposition of the spell one more
time opposition statements only
for Senate bill two seventy one.
Okay with that we will move on
to statement of support I will
be hearing from Mr Dick Wilson
Mister Wilson go ahead.
Yes good morning Mister chairman
and the Senators pope and temple
thank you for bringing this
legislation forward my name is
Dick Wilkinson and I am
representing the Democratic
Party of New Mexico's military
veterans and families caucus I'm
speaking in strong support of
creation of the purple star
program as a statewide program
military families in their
school age children face any
kinds of stress and disruption
that many students and families
never face moving both all over
America and even all over the
world and attending foreign
school systems this leads to
difficult challenges for our
students I personally am a
father of four children who have
experienced this the purple star
program staff strives to help
educators understand these
challenges and support the
students to foster the best
learning outcomes and gain the
needed support from local school
communities even a small gesture
of support to a new student from
helpful school administrator can
make a big difference in the
transition to a new school I
hope our military families can
find that support a matter where
they are stationed in our great
state and for that reason I
strongly support the development
of the New Mexico purpose star
program thank you.
Thank you Mr Wilkinson we will
now hear from Mr Joseph Esposito
Mr Esposito.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee just of
Escondido Albuquerque public
schools we stand in support and
have a strong relationship with
Kirtland airforce base we thank
the senator for bringing this
forward thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
Mr stand rounds Mr rounds go
ahead.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee eleven
years ago you pass the military
compact act for the state of New
Mexico I was one of the people
the brought that forward to you
I've service certain Alamogordo
and white sands whether a large
military presence the issue of
movement of students in and out
our our critical that we handle
that correctly we fully support
as for as a school
superintendents of this act and
asked the committee to vote in
favour thank you.
Thank you Mr brown's are there
any other members of the public
who wish to make statements of
support for Senate bill two
seventy one.
One more time this is for
statements of support for Senate
bill two seventy one.
Thank you very much not
concludes public statement at
this time.
Thank you mark hello were now to
questions from the committee
we get my list up here Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you
to the sponsor very timely I'm
surprised we had done something
like this before thank you
Senators pope and have built
quickly I have built and also
thank you Mr Wilkinson for being
here today I think a your voice
lends a lot of credence to what
we're trying to accomplish here
I think I'm fully supportive of
it Mr chairman I I just want to
make sure that and maybe I don't
know if Senator Brandt would be
willing to to just kind of chime
in on this with the fact that we
took the star terminology in
topic I want to make sure that
we're not going to be that there
would be no trying to find an
artful way to say this Mister
chairman but I I wouldn't want
to offend the blue star mothers
in the gold star mothers and and
and that we have a purple star
want to make sure that we're in
good goods good standing there
with those groups
and again I don't need to call
you Senator Brandt but no and
you know Senator pope
so make sure not going to offend
anybody by using that
terminology to name the program.
So Mr chair Senator Padilla this
is actually a national program
an initiative and that was named
that was decided so okay that's
been approved we will will not
be offending anyone by using
the term wonder I'm very happy
to hear that I was not aware and
I appreciate your clarifying
other than that Mr Chairman I'm
I'm fully supportive thank you I
just want to make sure we're
we're we're in good shape and
don't ruffle any feathers thank
you.
Thank you Senator Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman I want to
thank us senator pope and create
himself for bringing bill if if
any of you remember and number
of years ago when we went
through the REC process I will
tell you that's a that's a scary
thing for state when you're
facing the potential loss of a
base and anything that we can do
to make sure that those spaces
are secure in New Mexico.
It's right thing to do not only
for the students but also for
the schools that that to take
care of these kiddos so.
Good bill creates you bringing
it.
Thank you Senator Senator
Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Cory have built for New
Hope for bringing this forward
I love the fact that you went
into cell biology and noting
that frontal lobe on its
maturation
I'm just wondering if there's
anything in in this process that
might help then
or boys as is well known in the
front of Logan Clemente connects
in the late teens and early
twenties his work judgment is
located but for some reason then
don't really connect they're
final Logan of their late
twenties I've suffered through
that with my own children are
really kind of a.
A comical question but I I do
think that this is a a wonderful
bill and I I I do hope that we
do through this program next one
B. as you know it we understand
more about how good judgment
develops and these connections
this is for the study thank you
very much a ring the bell now
you thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Hickey I think
I agree on the frontal lobe it
took me awhile to get my act
together.
Thank you and I'll just in mind
there's some of us then and
never get it we connected so
that have built arriving Senator
Brandt you're up next.
Thank you Mr chairman but you're
sharing those personal issues
with us.
The.
Mr chairman Sir pope thank you
for bringing the bill I did have
a couple of questions one of the
analysis I was reading brought
up to professional development
What what is this specifically
is there professional
development program out there
that the staff would be going
through or is it just of our
state would have to develop I'm
guessing since this is nation
wide it's probably already out
there.
Yeah us Mr chair Senator Brandt
I believe we would just look at
some of the materials that are
already out there some of the
chairs are available with folks
from military one source so
that's where we would I believe
would be leaning on and not have
to be developing that correct.
Thank you I appreciate that I I
I I understand fully the first
section help me understand the
sections C. were sung about
active duty the schools that
don't have students from active
duty military
Families what's the purpose of
that section.
that the the purpose of that
sexual Mr chair and senator
Brandt is there might be a
school or school district that
does not have military families
or does not have any military
kids but this gives them an
opportunity to be involved in
the purpose our program to where
we hold events and we really
celebrate the military and
students that are going into it
because it we want to actually
use this program to actually
promote military service so
that's what that point he would.
Okay well I fully support that
thank you
I I just kind of wonder what was
the reason behind that section
thank you for bringing to the
and thank you again for your
service.
You as well Senator Mr.
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you Jim
Senate appropriate bringing the
sport how can you can you speak
to the relationship with tribes
and this bill.
Hi I I would say that.
The way this bill is right in
it's changing the public school
code so that they're tribal
schools that are involved under
the public school code would
participate in this program.
I don't know if there's anything
else specific
Thank you wanted answering that
question I apologize if that was
too short.
But I but the way I look at it
is the part participation would
be the same I don't see any
difference.
So Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm speaking
specifically to students that
are in on schools founded on the
nation's.
Okay.
well once again Mr chair Senator
Pinto
I know that.
Native students and and the
indigenous communities have.
You know they've served our
military especially in this
state even more and a higher
percentage than many of the our
other communities here in the
nation's so I I don't see any
difference I just see that
They would participate the same
in this program I guess I I just
don't see a difference.
And the reason I say that
specific eight because there's a
different different aspect in
that manner of which that the
military within our you know
being a high school teacher that
the military and non recruiters
coming in that it is not a
A new issue to we want to
approach that it should remain
outside the school in that
especially outside of an MP do
that those programs remain
outside of
That they seek it out not where
we're imposing it on them in
that manner and even when we
talk about propose starter
Students.
I think it has to be expanded in
that manner we're trying to.
support them because we do have
students that are within the
school system that do have.
You know parents that are
actively serving but they are
going to school on in the public
school system.
But that's also in a separate
issue when we start to address
Address them in that in a
specific manner I am in support
of it in the.
You know because I do have
family members that are actively
serving in the military but as a
student
as a teacher of the student and
giving them
Different avid I don't feel that
it's almost in the center of
Because the natives are the
highest
in throughout every service
Members and that the do you go
into that service industry but
as far as having support after
that are having support for
their children to get different
so this is taking a different
turn for me to support it I
don't know if you can speak to
exactly how it would really
support those students.
Mr chair Senator Pinto this
program really supports the kids
of active duty guard reserve
members so for tribal
communities hopefully they went
to a state that had this program
they will get support there and
tribal communities that come to
our state we get support there
as well it's really an
initiative to aware when they
get there to the school where
knowledge gene the fact that
they might move six to nine
times within a military career
and helping them adjust helping
them deal with the issues that
the social issues and and really
supporting them and their
families
and and that's really what this
bill does now the the section C.
part we're proposed for we're
promoting military service in
schools I do not have members of
the military or their kids and
we're honoring service we are
doing that but I'd also say this
had this bill has nothing to do
with military recruitment
bringing the military into our
schools for that matter it's
more of promoting
supporting our kids that are
dependence of of our military
and you brought up a good point
even here in our state our guard
and reserve many of them get
activated many of them had to go
to Washington DC many of them
are deploying and we have to
find ways to support these
families.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee I support the intent
of the bill but I think the
implementation and it reaching
out to where the the the plan I
guess has to be very clear and
how it's going to be implemented
throughout the whole state not
just for the bases are whoever's
listed in the FIR
that perception is that only
those students are there in on
those bases that.
I would probably think that the
federal government already at
this point should have programs
in place to address it where
we're not taking monies out of
the state funding for our other
students especially when we talk
about impact aid
for those areas that already
fully get the the money for it
so thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee.
Thank you I don't we make tech
again I don't see other ones
just a couple of things I think
this is a wonderful bill when I
was teaching at or not they high
school now to be called organ
mountain high school wrote your
organ high school the we have a
large increase in the military
students out at white pants and
that my high school very much
put in a program like this
groups of students as welcoming
students just trying to make
that transition easier and it
was very good and I like having
this across the state I think
it's a fine thing I will also
put in a plug for funding and
potentially junior funding for
the NIH JD institute which deals
with a lot of the things that
senator I have hello of gray him
fell was talking about as far as
meeting the emotional social
needs of students also that's
very big on community schools
which already puts in these
types of programs for all
students that are dealing with
problems as well as mentorships
and other things that are all
important parts when people are
making these kinds of transition
so if anybody's got that will
take you know fifty thousand
dollars or whatever toward the
N. H. state institute to make
sure that we can expand these
programs everywhere I think if I
might just some of the things
that I know it'd been a concern
in the past it schools that
Senator and so we're talking
about where a teacher might
invite someone from the military
and to be a class for the day
and they talked only about re
trying to recruit students and
things that I don't think that's
what this bill does but that is
a concern within the schools
that they don't become a
recruiting ground where students
are captive within classrooms
certainly it's appropriate for
the military to set up a desk
where students can self identify
as being interested but not
where their captive in the
classroom I don't think this
does that but that certainly is
a concern within schools that
that we recognize people's right
to in their
associate.
With going into the military or
not certainly recognizing those
who are in the military and
honoring their service that
protects us all I think is
support important with that I'm
open for a motion from the
committee.
I'm moving to pass Mr Chairman
ocean for two passed by Senator
Padilla and seconded by Senator
Brandt million if you would call
the roll please.
Yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Yes well yes.
Idea yes Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes Senator all yes
we have a deep passer thank you
graduations you have the that
you passed very good there are a
couple of our freshman senators
look like old pros already about
halfway through the session.
Very good for the public this is
problem almost certainly is
gonna be our last yes the three
oh three is going to take too
long to get it done as well yeah
that's the two seventy two
military families early school
enrollment
that's J. M. one as amended we
will not get to today that will
be rolled over to Wednesday we
also will start Wednesday with
this the two sixty three adult
over program as well as there
will be some additional bills on
the list General minder for the
committee and the public
Wednesday's meeting will start
at eight thirty due to the
schedule or session at all
levels Center open if you would
Senate bill two seventy two.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members I will be quick there
are about a hundred eighty five
thousand military children
changing schools actually do to
PCS is the challenger
transferring records say
differences in education and
graduation requirements and
enrollment barriers and supports
electives and extra
extracurricular activities can
be daunting.
what the advance enrollment
initiative does is it gives
students the opportunity to
participate in random lotteries
for charter magnet schools a
chance to enroll in specialized
academic programs an opportunity
to begin coordinating IEP and
for I will for plan requirements
and ability to register for
courses and plan their course
study and in the comfort of
knowing which school they will
attend before arriving at a new
location the advanced enrollment
admission initiative has already
passed in nineteen states and
right now I believe Vermont is
is looking at it in more state
and so we would be the twentieth
or the twenty first St to pass
this bill.
with that being said I I will
close their and I would just add
that there is one amendment that
we didn't get done in time
because I was gonna be able to
be the twenty four hour limit on
this and basically we want to
make a change to where you will
be able to enroll once the
military family gets the orders
once they arrived they need to
certify where they live in that
district and right now we have
in the bill ten days and we want
to give a little more time to
make it forty five days so that
will be done and I will do that
in next the next committee with
that being said that's all I
have Mister chairman I'm ready
for questions.
Have any expert witnesses
Senator I do not Mr chair okay
Martel if you'll take a few
public comment please.
At this time I don't have anyone
listed to speak in opposition
central to seventy two is there
anyone in our room at this time
I would like to speak in
opposition preacher and at this
time.
Mr.
No problem Mr Powell.
Anyone else who would like to
speak in opposition.
All right moving on to support
we will be hearing from Mr Dick
Wilkinson Mr Wilkins go ahead.
Good morning Mr chair this is
difficult consent again it
speaking on behalf of the
Democratic Party of New Mexicos
veterans and military families
caucus thank you senator pro for
bringing this legislation
forward again I support this
bill one of my own students as I
transition here to be states
that Kirkland airforce base we
did face some challenges in
being able to enroll my very
young child early and.
Public school system and it was
stressful around that time and
so I hope that the parents can
make these plans early get ahead
of these issues before they
actually move and give their
students some peace of mind that
they understand the programs in
the school they'll be able to
attend I understand the benefit
of that peace of mind and and
reducing the stress and any
little bit you can do around one
of these military moves is
extremely helpful so I'm in
strong support along with my
caucus of SB two seventy two
thank you.
Thank you Mr Wilkinson we will
now hear from Mr Joseph ask just
because you don't.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee justice could be
Albuquerque public schools we've
added military presence to our
transfer process already and do
allow military families to to go
ahead and enter that transfer
process when we open it up I on
January first so we really
appreciate the Senator bringing
this forward and thank you.
Thank you Mr Esposito we will
now hear from doctor Powell good
how.
Thank you chairman and senators
I would just urge support of
this as you know the Air
National Guard and army guard as
well as the reserve components
of the forces are making up a
large percentage of our overall
total force those dependence in
individuals who.
Are serving the country in those
roles and I'm retired veteran I
would just encourage you to add
this to the list of things that
helps depends in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you doctor pal are there
any other members of the public
who wish to speak in support of
Mr Stan rounds go ahead.
Mr chairman members the
committee staff around The New
Mexico school superintendents
association as I indicated
earlier you pass the military
compact act eleven years ago in
its view this was exactly what
we were working towards doing
removing any barriers as
students
it is our families PCS from
point to point of this import we
move as you heard from Mr school
at all from APS many RT
accommodated that whether states
open enrollment I would would
most the problematic areas have
been taken care of so we
certainly support this and
urgent vote from thank you.
Thank you Mr rounds are there
any other members of the public
who wish to make statements in
support of Senate bill two
seventy two.
One more time statements of
support for Senate bill two
seventy two.
And it looks like that is all
for now for public statements
thank you so much.
Thank you and I have a question
for the ranking member senator
Neville
Center open the K. did that that
sounds like a fairly simple
amendment that he didn't have
ready yet with your of support
and the support of the committee
is it okay to discuss actually
making that and then that at
this time as it moves to the
committee instead of having him
do it between committees into
the next one.
I don't know the gist of it
exactly but of I personally
don't have anything unless my
Committee members is we have a
rule I think we're supposed to
do twenty four hour we did an
amendment while ago one word or
Senator Pirtle so we've kind of
broken president I guess at this
point so.
Yes and I think yeah that is
always with the the consent of
the other members of
particularly something that
simple I know what the Judiciary
Committee is making amendments
to all of our bills on the fly
you guys they always do when
they're in.
Without of those type of things
so I think we as a committee if
it's a simple of that that I
think it's appropriate for us to
do so but I want to make sure if
anyone on the committee has an
objection of we'll just I
recommend that center folks do
it between committees but if we
can do it here I think that that
eases the process.
So I guess anyone on the
committee have an objection to
trying to make that simple
amendment at this time if that
makes sense with Senator but
Center pope Representative.
Senator Brandt has you stand up
for this or something else.
That are bred.
Representative okay
these at some on the bill but I
think you're talking to page six
line sixteen we're taking within
ten days and making it within
forty five days is that correct
Sir pro that's correct Mr
chairman senator Graham.
I think that's fairly simple.
I think I think that's very
simple and so Center open that's
all it is that I would make a
motion to change on page.
Six one sixteen says within ten
days and change that to forty
five days to make that motion to
amend this bill.
The.
And second by Senator Brandt and
again I want to make sure of
anyone on the committee has an
objection we can go through the
other process but if not I think
it's important we get that done
here.
I don't see any other hands up
of and I think we have that
seconded a discussion on the
amendment.
The renter hand is up for the
regular what I understood is
that correct.
Yes Mister chairman although the
forty five days that was one
concern I had with the bill was
that ten days of being able to
try to get in and get I mean.
Yes it takes forty five days to
get a house closed in down our
state right now so for the tough
trust me I'm going through the
process right now so.
Okay thing no other discussion
that we have a motion and a
second to amend on page six wine
sixteen in the middle of it is
just change ten days to forty
five days medical call the roll
on the amendment.
Brandt yes Senator Hickey yes.
Under current yes Senator
Neville yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes we have an amended bill
Senator your bill is amended we
are now back on the main bill as
amended Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
actually was wanting to talk
about the the importance of this
bill would actually talking
about this for several years in
the military Veterans Affairs
Committee during the interim
effect I think we've carried
this bill before so I'm really
hopeful that senator pope's can
help us get this across the
finish line because it is one of
the things that the military's
asked us to do they would really
like for this to be taken care
of it is very difficult for
families as they come into our
community to not be able to to
know where their kids are going
to go to school not be able to
get that situated.
And that taking care of ahead of
time and so I I really applaud
Sir pope for doing it a lot of
times these families get moved
in right before school starts
because our state actually start
school much earlier than most
other states most other states
don't start school until
September and so the military
does a lot of their transfers
you know you know June July and
August and so if you're getting
here in August it's really
difficult for your family it can
be really difficult on on
teenagers trying to get into
sports them trying to get on the
team and so I really just
appreciate the built like it's
really important for us to
support our military community
in this way thank you Sir pro.
Thank you senator Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
question how are we going to
hold accountability as far as
from where they are students are
coming from and from them coming
into.
Mr chair Senator Pinto the way
the process would work once a
military family gets the orders
they would be able to send those
off to that school district and
and have the child be able to
register for classes and
register for sports and any
other extracurricular activities
once they arrived they still
have to confirm and that's what
we did on the amendment to where
within forty five days actually
proving their residents and that
they're here and that that big
arrived so that's really the
process and that's really how
there's the accountability.
So the reason I say that because
I did have a student that was in
my class and we couldn't get him
place it took quite a few it
took a while to get his credits
put in and he was transferred
from one classroom to another
and it was a very.
Trying trying because he was a
senior and you came from
Colorado and I didn't want him
to have his credit jeopardize in
that manner to graduate and it
was
You know having him in one class
and then he goes into another
class right in the middle of the
semester.
At somebody there there has to
be some kind of other mechanism
to create between P. E. D.
another states that would say
within this time you know and
we're not going to hold the
student
In in.
Withhold their graduation
because they didn't meet the New
Mexico requirements and that's
where.
I'm can about where we are going
to.
That little gap there thank you
Mr.
Mr chair Senator Pinto
this bill specifically deals
with more the advance enrollment
and it sounds like there could
be some issues as far as getting
those credits from other schools
and what's happening you know
with communications during the
school districts what you know
maybe we can look at ways that
we can improve their on a
separate bill.
I think it should be
incorporated Mr chair members of
I think it should be
incorporated within this bill
because if we're going to go
forward with it and I'm continue
to think changes.
Have we really explored I really
talked talked it out to make
sure there are no gaps when we
move forward and the mother was
Being transferred at the time to
another state that's what it
student ended up coming in to
Where are the family could
support the child
without having that
Being so close to being done
with school and that's on site
within those supports to when we
have a student that is
you know it's not implemented to
supports not really there for
them to have that waste so
thank.
Thank you senator any other
comments from the committee.
I see none IAD entertain a
motion.
Mr chair I'm sorry can I just
close I just got wonderful thank
you I apologize no no no no
problem Mr chair once again I I
just want to you know as
mentioned a lot of this is
already done in within our
school districts but I think
it's important that we implement
this across the state we have
many of our guard and reserve
folks here and then there's even
instances where someone could
maybe be a military recruiter
that they're just totally away
from a military installation
school district that knows about
this so and Justice Senator
Brandt has mentioned the DOD
looks at how we treat our
military families and
independent so this is important
we get it done not only to take
care of these families but also
for you we want to compete for
future missions but keep the
missions that we have here in
New Mexico and with that I'll
call that out that's my clothes
Mr chair thank you.
Thank you of the committee
please.
German I would move to pass.
The past and Senator Brandt.
I will second seconded by
Senator the other hand if you
will call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes Senator Neville yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes Senator also
yes we have a due pass as
amended.
Senator very good you have a do
pass Committee again and for the
public you know you've heard it
several times Committee will
start at eight thirty on
Wednesday due to the floor
session starts at eleven thirty
in the bill they got rolled over
today are not in jeopardy of
getting slowed down we will hear
them in time that they'll get
read out on Wednesday which is
bills are going through for in
fact is that daily one at a time
and so any bill that wasn't
today is not slow down in the
process in any way we will start
with Senate bill two sixty three
adult what was program Senator
Brandt that will go to Senate
bill three oh three and Senate
Joint Memorial one eighty we'll
have several other bills on the
list at that time
any comments concerns questions
from the committee before we
move on Mr Chairman Senator
Brandt can correct me if I'm
wrong but I believe we have a
caucus on Wednesday morning is
that not correct.
You still own Craig Brandt.
I'll have to double check but
I'm pretty sure we have one
schedule.
Thank you senator and of what
that might mean we go that will
probably put a regular link
schedule together recognize that
we may not get to all of those
bills I we have four sessions
scheduled for both Wednesday and
Thursday so yeah will will
continue to to move through any
of the bills with things up
Senator Sedillo Lopez I know
you've been waiting for your
bill we are not going to get it
today because our twelve o'clock
stop did you have a question Mr
chair I think it's very simple
bill and we could do it the
problem with Wednesday for me
and then I'll manage to do it
but it will interfere with my
drive up to Santa Fe I'll have
to probably go the night before
in order to to do it so it is a
very simple bill.
Senator I made a commitment to
our committee that we end by
noon each day so the people of
afternoon committees have an
opportunity to it to get lunch
if you like we don't need to put
you on early we can wait until
you see the show up on the zoom
and what you want at that time
on on Wednesday if you if that
helps no I'll just go ahead and
drive up the night before thank
you okay thank you senator
off with somebody else got a
question I heard your comment.
Maybe not if not Senate
education is adjourned for today
we will see you Wednesday
morning at eight thirty.
