Our composition is gonna be
changing, so we're gonna try and
make sure we maintain a quorum
all the way through. We've got
some other members coming back
from, from over there, uh, just
an announcement on Friday we'll
have about a 1520 minute
presentation uh from Demi, who
is the executive director of uh
Wiy the Western Interstate
Consortium of Higher Education,
of which New Mexico is a part of
and our students go off to
professional schools, uh,
through the wiy program and the
wooee programs where they
uh, where we don't have
professional schools and
veterinarian and dentistry, and
they go over to those areas, um,
we also for anybody watching
Senate Bill 416 is not going to
be heard today, the sponsor,
there's a couple of things need
to get worked out and asked that
that not be heard until that
gets worked out.
Um, any other comments,
questions from committee and
again, I recognize we all have
bills over other places, so
we'll be, you know, popping in
and out as we get staff tell us
that we're up.
If not with that senator Brant,
if you would like to come up,
position loan repayment Act.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, so
this is a very easy bill.
Um, it, it.
I didn't say simple. No, I
didn't say simple can't use the
word simple up here. It's a
great bill.
That uh
Um
What it does is it creates a
different loan repayment program
for physicians. This is a 2nd
program, so I want to make that
clear up front that's one of the
questions that's been asked of
me.
Um, right now we have a, a
medical loan repayment program
for all medical.
Um, it's $25,000 a year up to
$75,000. It can be renewed. Um,
it really covers everyone but
doctors.
Right? I mean, doctors can get
it, but doctors average now
$300,000 if you're going into a
specialty like a surgeon, it can
go all the way up to $600,000
loans, um, most states are
actually doing full repayment
programs, um, anywhere between 3
and 5 years, so I took the
medal.
Went 4 years, um, this is a
4-year program up to $75,000 a
year, which would give that
$300,000 by the end.
The thing is they have to commit
upfront.
To a 4-year commitment to stay
in New Mexico.
Um, so that will be, um, that,
that's the
Uh, you know, the carrot is that
will actually help them pay, pay
back their loans completely. Um,
we kind of see that once
someone's been here for 4 years,
you know, this is the land of
entrapment, you know, they, they
fall in love with it after that
amount of time and they never
leave. I, I will tell you from
personal experience, um, and if
you do leave the, the land just
keeps calling you back.
So, um,
That's what this bill does.
Um, it has an appropriation of
$15 million. I am working on
that. Uh, it's one of my
priorities, uh, in, in finance
that I'm trying to get this
funded, so we're not taking it
out of the current loan
repayment program that's one of
the things that has also been.
a concern for some people who
talked to me. It is adding this
as a separate program with a
separate appropriation of $15
million.
That's what it does.
That'll yield for questions.
Thank you. Out to the audience,
those in support.
Anyone in opposition?
JD, if you'd like to come up and
say a few moments, few things
you have up to.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce that supports this
legislation, you all may know
that 30 of our 33 counties are
designated as health
professional shortage areas and
Senate Bill 411 creates a
lifeline.
To provide loan assistance to
physicians practicing and
designated health professional
shortage areas. Health care is
key for economic development,
the physician loan repayment Act
not only would give the ability
for New Mexicans to be cared for
across the state. It will also
be a positive move in keeping
New Mexico competitive in the
healthcare arena in the chamber
supports.
Thank you.
anyone else in support.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Nathan
Bush. I'm a staff at the
University of New Mexico. We are
here to strongly support the
senator's bill. really
appreciate the, uh,
Uh
Foresight that this bill has to
try to stem the tide of current
negative trends that by which
we're not keeping pace with the
need for health providers in the
state. Uh, we do view this as a
great bill and uh certainly want
to support the all hands on deck
situation we have with health
providers. Thank you.
Thank you, Nathan. Anyone else?
You went online?
Anyone in opposition.
It's not
Questions from the committee.
wrong, Mr. Chair, Senator, thank
you for bringing this bill up.
You know, Southwest New Mexico
is really, really struggling to
keep doctors, eating doctors,
um, we lost so many doctors, uh,
About a year ago and now it's
time to try and bring him back
and keep the ones that we do
have. So, thanks for bringing
this bill. Um.
I, I really do appreciate and I,
I support you 100% of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Mr. Chair and Senator ditto, um,
the great thing about this bill
is it's now competitive.
Many other states are putting
these kinds of numbers out. 2,
it will help attract
People who go to other medical
schools that don't have state
support. There are a lot of half
the schools are more private
schools, their tuitions can run
up to 75,000 a year. The great
thing about New Mexico, that if
you go here, that's 20,000, but
living expenses are so it.
It's a tractor in two ways. But
uh thank you.
I've been wanting to say this
for years, we're way behind the
competition in this.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, uh, for bringing
this bill forward. Um, I also do
think this is highly needed. I
do have a specific question, um,
on the, I'm not gonna reference
the bill directly, but um,
There is, I guess a a portion
right here where it states that
physicians must be licensed in
New Mexico and then it says
specifically US citizens and
residents and committed to
practicing in designated
shortage areas, um, would this
apply to a DACA recipient who's
a physician, um, who has a the
license to practice.
Senator, um, that's a great
question. I actually don't know,
and we just took the standard
language um that's used on the
other one and made this one
specifically for
Medical doctors. So I, it, it's
what we currently have with our
current medical program, um,
that may be something that we
look at and and address. I don't
have any problem because the
doctorCA recipients do have the
uh ability to work in the US,
um, so I, I, as you know, I've
supported many uh DACA programs
to allow DACA. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, I would love to
work with you on that just to
ensure that the language is
accurate.
I did forget to mention that
when I was talking about it
right now, I believe every area
in New Mexico.
would qualify as an underserved
area, including Albuquerque.
As we bring in more doctors and
it, and we fill up cause let's
be honest, the metro's gonna
fill first, right? Then.
It will no longer be an
underserved area, hopefully,
hopefully we can fill that
desert and then it'll start. But
the priority is really for the
small.
Send it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsor as you work with
Senator Nava, um.
Mr. Terence's sponsor, I'd asked
that you look at the page 3
preference to make awards to
individuals who've graduated
from New Mexico postsecondary
institutions, consider adding a
preference to folks who have
graduated from New Mexico high
schools because if they go away
to college and medical school
and we can draw them back. They
have some roots here and they're
even more likely to stay, so
it's another thing you could
consider as you work the bill.
It's a great bill.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Senator is out.
Then her Pope
Uh, Mr. Chair, I was gonna move
a due pass and before 11.
Senator is out.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much,
Senator Brandt.
I see that this only covers part
of the medical school debt
because the average medical
school debt is in excess of
$200,000.
Do you see that
With what you're proposing here
in the bill, do you see that as
being a problem?
Um
Mr. Chairman, I almost said,
Madam Chairman, so I'm trying to
think through that and make sure
I say it right, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Senator, um,
actually this will cover up to
300,000 in debt over the four
year period. So what they would
do, let's say you had 200,000
just to make it easy, uh, they
would look at it and they would
say, OK, we're gonna divide that
by 4, for, for us math people
that's 50,000 a year, so they
would pay $50,000 a year towards
your debt directly to who the
debt is owed to, um, so the.
By the end of the 4 years that
you've committed to in New
Mexico, your debt would be paid
off.
OK.
I appreciate that information
right there. I see that this is
a recurring expense.
And yes, well, I do live in an
area where our doctors have been
very short supply down there. We
either come to Albuquerque, El
Paso or Lubbock.
For a major treatments here and
so that gives me concern.
I do want to point out that this
money that we have available to
help these people out for our
doctor situation.
Uh, comes from, you know what
I'm fixing to say next, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Brandt.
Thank goodness for our oil and
gas industry, cuz that is what's
paying for it right now, paying
for all the expenses that we
have coming up.
Mr. Chairman of Senator Brandt,
is this included in the
executive's budget request.
Chairman, Senator, no, this will
be an addition. So we currently
have our loan repayment program
for all medical.
Sorry, that was funded at 20
million, which is an increase
from last year from 5 million.
Um this is trying to get another
15 million for this separate
program.
So when I talked to higher ed
secretary, that was one of the
things that we talked about, um,
eventually and as you know, as I
work with the finance committee,
I'd really love for this to be
one of those trust areas where
we actually build a trust for
this, um, so that's one of the
things I'm gonna work on during
the interim.
is trying to set up one of those
trusts to where this is one of
those things it's automatically
funded every year at this higher
level. OK.
Uh, is this Mr. Chairman and
Senator Brett, is this in the
LFC budget request, Mr. Chairman
Senator, this was uh I I didn't.
I didn't have the opportunity to
work with LFC during the
interim, um, and this was a.
kind of an addition, well, you
can see by the bill number it
was a little bit.
Later
OK, I appreciate that.
Oh, we know what.
We've, you've been through the
downturns just like I have up
here dealing with the state's
budget, you're talking about
setting up a trust in the
future, but if there is a
downturn in certain industries.
What will happen to this
program. I don't want to spread
doom and gloom, but I'm a
realist too.
Well, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I,
I think with, with
Everything and, and you and I
have both been through one of
those downturns, um, uh.
in our souls, you remember those
things and they're not fun, uh,
for, for all of you that haven't
seen one of those yet, um, you
know, let's just hope we don't,
uh.
I, I'm just gonna, you know, go
with the roses today and.
just hope that we don't, but if
we do, that's really why I want
to set up that trust, um,
because I want there to be that
that so this doesn't get cut
because one of the things we
really need our population is
aging.
In New Mexico.
And we're losing doctors, not
gaining doctors. So like I said
in judiciary last night, I'm
trying to stay away from the
Medal area. I'll leave that up
to the lawyers to fight over.
I'm trying to do everything else
that I can do to bring doctors
to New Mexico and keep doctors
in New Mexico. We'll let the
lawyers and, and the medical
society fight over the medal. I
do think that's something we
have to deal with, but I'm gonna
let them negotiate that, not me.
And Mr. Chairman and Senator
Brant.
I do want to keep our New Mexico
doctors in New Mexico. So thank
you very much for bringing this
bill. That's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. We do have a due pass
from Senator Pope, seconded by
Senator Ramos.
Marianne, we are ready for you
to call the no, no apologies,
you're fine. You ready for you
to call the roll. Thank you.
Sender Boone
Senator Isel.
Yes.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes, sender Hickey. Center Nova.
Yes, sent to Ramos.
Senator Thornton, yes, Senator
Pope, yes, send your souls. Yes.
You have a do pass.
not.
Um, just a reminder as we vote
so that it gets heard, if you
just tap your mic on for your
vote each time, that would be
helpful to make sure they get
heard. Uh, next up, we have uh
Senator Trujillo, the Education
retirement Board powers.
Yes, ma'am, we could start with
Senate Joint Resolution 11
school election timing.
And then we'll go back to Senate
Bill 421.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that. I have a
Lindsay here from the Secretary
of State's office and I'm quite
certain she needs to get back to
work.
Um, so thank you again for um
having this bill, um, come to
your committee.
This bill is, and I'm not gonna
say it's an easy one, but um,
it's not difficult. Let me put
it that way.
Um, all this bill will do, it's
a constitutional, it's a
proposed constitutional
amendment that will take out one
sentence.
That is all school elections
shall be held at different times
from partisan elections, and
the, the basis of that is that
back when uh we first got our
constitution in 2012.
Women were allowed to vote in
elections, but they were only
allowed to vote in school
elections and so those elections
had to be held at a different
time, and I always like to say
that they made it be at a
different time just to make sure
that we didn't inadvertently
vote for governor or senator or
representative.
So as you know, we have passed
um a few years ago and I had the
pleasure of working on the local
election law to put school
boards, not in the regular time
that they were elected, which I
believe was March, um, to put
them in the local elections so
that they would be with all
other um, you know, nonpartisan
elections.
The problem that this sentence
has caused is not that we want
to move school board members to
the general election when
governors and partisan, um, uh,
electors are on the ballot.
School boards want to be able to
have bond questions.
On the general ballot.
And what this pa what this
sentence does is it prohibits
that.
It prohibits us from allowing uh
bond questions to be on during
the general election.
And what that means is that if a
school board has a bond question
and they come up at varying
times in, you know, different
years because there's multiple
bond questions that the school
school board can go out for.
When the bond question falls
during a general election
period, they have to go out for
special election.
And the special election is a
male only.
And I've got confirmation that
it can cost anywhere from right
now we've got a bond question up
in Espanola.
It's gonna cost almost $200,000
for them to do that bond
question.
And each of you are good at math
and you understand that that
means two teachers, um, at two
schools, 2 nurses, to social
workers, it means at least 2
staff members are now not going
to be able to be hired, um,
because they have to go and pay
for an election that if it was
on the general election ballot
is paid for through the the
funding from the Secretary of
State's office. So with that,
Mr. Chairman, we stand for
questions.
Thank you. That was a great
explanation and a bit of
history, New Mexico, uh.
About how our elections and
women were allowed to vote
before it was allowed in at the
federal level and other things.
Thank you. Um, out through the
audience, those in support.
Those in opposition.
So the supporters would like to
come up. You have up to 2
minutes to speak.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
and I am here today speaking on
behalf of the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico and the
American Association of
University Women, which is like
the grandmother of the League of
Women Voters. It was formed in
1881, and the league was formed
right when women got the vote in
1920 to add to your history
here. Um, and, um, actually the
league sued the state of New
Mexico in
2015, uh, because school board
elections were being held
separately. There were other
provisions that um actually
disenfranchised a lot of people
and bond elections, um, um, you
know, we're something that we,
we didn't even think about, but
the whole point was to be able
to combine elections. Um, we
have very low turnout, uh, you
know, we used to have very low
turnout for school elections,
and they were
very expensive, and yet, um, you
know, people just ignored them.
So this is really important. I
mean, not only does it save each
election, each uh school um
district from having to go out
and uh have a separate election,
but it, it just adds, uh, you
know, efficiency and, you know,
increases the voter turnout, so
we really urge you to support
this and um um I would never
have known that it was a, you
know, why we
having the separate elections.
So I think the sponsors and the
Secretary of State's office, and
uh thank you very much.
Thank you. Yes, ma'am.
Um, chair, uh, Rose Angela
Ortiz, Santa Fe County Clerk's
Office, Bureau of Elections,
deputy clerk. Um, I'm also here
to support this bill, and I urge
you to support as well. Um,
right now, we get a lot of
questions from the voters
saying, what is this election,
you know, why am I, why am I
having to vote right now? Like,
where are the polling sites? So
it's an educational component as
well to the voters. And, you
know, as long as we can
consolidate the, the local
elections, you know, and not
force them to have to do a
special election. We're in
support of that.
So, thank you.
Thank you, Joe.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Joe Guian with
the New Mexico School Boards
Association also, uh, chair of
the Public school Capital Outlay
Council.
Um, Senate Joint Resolution 11
would allow an additional
opportunity for school boards to
pose bond and mill levy
questions at general elections
and even numbered years.
Uh, currently school bond and
middle levy elections can only
be held during the, the local
and partisan nonpartisan
elections held every 2 years in
odd numbered years or during a
special election has been
mentioned previously at their
own expense with the escalating
cost of school construction,
delays of any kind in accessing
local bond and middle levy
funding can be very costly.
And can also affect access by
local school officials to PSCOC
funding and other funding
sources. So we stand in support.
Thank you. Anyone online?
Anyone in opposition.
When in opposition.
If not, then questions from the
committee.
Ramos, Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I
don't have a question. I just
want to thank you for bringing
this bill as being a past county
clerk is just gonna make things
so much easier.
I, I just applaud you for
bringing this bill forward and
uh uh you have my full support.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much.
I do appreciate this bill
greatly uh.
That 1920
brutally we've come a long way,
baby.
That's all I can say. We've come
a long way.
Uh, right now the the county
clerks are currently required to
administer the special
elections, and I know how cause.
Prohibitive sometimes those can
be, and I would like to bring up
an instance that we had happened
in one of my.
Districts down there.
There was a school board
election for Hagerman Public
school Hagerman Independent
School.
And nobody voted.
And that turned out to be a
mess. It was a big, big mess,
and I know the Secretary of
State's office had to step in
and if they would like to make a
response to that over what did
transpire, I think that this
bill is greatly needed, so
Mister Chairman, with your
indulgence, can we hear a
response from the Secretary of
State's office.
Yes, and you know, I regularly
when I talk to high school
students, I talk about that
instance where the candidates
didn't even vote for themselves
because they figured somebody
would vote and so, you know, the
school board then had to figure
out what to do about appointing
member. I mean it it was it was
a mess and it's one of those
quirky things about elections in
New Mexico.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it does underscore
the importance of the
legislation and that, um,
bringing those election bond
questions into alignment with
other local public bodies who
already have the opportunity to
put forth ballot questions on
partisan ballots, um, that
that's really important and
already this year as of January,
we had 5 or 6 special elections,
um, from school districts taking
place. Um, so the example, as
you've covered it, um, just
underscores the importance of
them being.
able to do that.
And Mr. Chair.
I can't remember your name. I'm
so sorry, Senator, uh, your
expert witness there. I'm sorry,
I forgot.
Lindsay Bachman. Thank you,
Lindsay. Would you mind
explaining what did happen if
you were.
If you can recollect all the
incidents that took place, Mr.
Chair, um, Senator, that was
before my time as the Secretary
of State's office, but I
understand generally um what
took place.
Well, Mr. Chairman, it was a
mess and
For the longest time.
There was total chaos at that
little school, so I'm glad
things worked out and I see that
this would be a good, good fix
for such instances like that,
and I do see.
More people getting out and
participating if it's all
together like this, especially
out in our very rural areas, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, Ms. Bachman,
thank you for being here. Thank
you.
Will of the committee
We would do pass Mr. Chair
Senator
Figueroa,
seconded by Senator Azel, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Sender Boone.
Siriel, yes.
Cinder Figueroa, yes. er Hickey.
Yes, Central Nova, yes, Santa
Ramos.
Center Thornton
Yes. Sender Pope.
Yes.
Cinder souls, you have a do pass
on what are we?
80
7.
Oh, and 22 excuses, but you have
a due pass. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I will.
Point out that I won my first
votes in my school. That's
unacceptable. Thank you, thank
you, committee.
Thank you. And Senator, you are
still on with Senate Bill 421
Educational retirement Board
powers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you committee for your
attention. Um, I have with me
here today, the executive
director for the ERB, um, David
Archuleta, who will serve as an
expert witness if you have any
questions. Again, this is not a
difficult bill. I'm not gonna
say it's easy, but it's not
difficult, um, simply all we're
doing is adding to the ERB
language that they have the
authority to purchase, acquire,
or hold real property and build
or own a building and related.
Improvements located thereon.
It's a simple, uh, addition of
just confirming the power that
we know that they already have
this just ensures that everybody
else knows that too, and Mr.
Chairman will stand for
questions.
Thank you. Um, in the audience,
those in support.
Anyone in opposition.
I went online. Questions from
the committee.
Senator
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, Senator, thank you for
being here today with this.
Uh
Are there any primary changes to
the ERB board's powers and duty.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, the
only change to their authority
is nothing, um, we're simply
just clarifying sorry I didn't,
there really is no change to
their authority. This just
simply clarifies that they do in
fact have the authority to own
their own real estate.
And and purchase and build and
and acquire.
OK, no change.
And Madam Chair, I, I see the
change in the bill itself.
But you know how rumors
circulate, Mr. Chairman.
Right now is the ERB in a
lawsuit with Santa Fe.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
senator, the ERB is in a
lawsuit. This is not directly
related to that lawsuit. Thank
you for that.
Um
I've lost my paper now.
Mr. Chairman, I, I'm gonna stop
right there because I've lost
my.
My next question, so never mind,
thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Other
questions?
Mr. Chara we do pass on Senate
Bill 420 motion for a due pass.
Seconded by Senator Figueroa, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Yes
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes, sender Hickey.
Yes.
Yes.
In Ramos.
Senator Thornton.
Yes. Sinder Pope. Yes, cinder
souls. Yes.
Yeah
So you have a due pass with 7
and 2 excused.
Thank you, just have a
point of privilege. I don't know
if that's acceptable at this
side of the table. It would be
fine. I was gonna read, but if
you'd like to introduce the
number of guests that we just
came in and who they are and
where they're coming from,
absolutely you do have a group
of students here from Mandela
International Magnet School here
in Santa Fe. I believe that
there was another group that was
in here a few weeks ago, um,
they have returned, um, we've
got two teachers here with us
today, uh, Meredith Tilt, who is
an excellent teacher that
retired.
And decided to come back and
continue teaching and then I
believe we have the students.
Welcome to the Senate Education
Committee. I mean, we talk about
all things education and so
students are always welcome in
this committee. You know, it
kind of reminds us why we're up
here and who we really are here
passing laws for and about.
So, thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you.
I appreciate that.
Center Padilla
The Early childhood trust fund.
This sounds like what we've
passed before, but I think this
is more the enabling language is
that.
He's not paying attention.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Vice Chair and
ranking member Senator Michael
Padilla, and you are absolutely
right, uh, Mr. Chairman, we're,
we were in front of you on
Monday and this probably feels
like a deja vu, but uh this is
simply the enabling language um
or the Senate Joint Resolution
6, which passed through this
committee unanimously the other
day. Thank you very much for
that. Uh, this legislation is
simply um creates a fund
consolidation, um, expanded use
of the funds, as I mentioned the
other day, uh, it is contingent
on on the um passage by the
voters of Senate.
Resolution 6, so this simply
stays and sits and wait until
that uh the voters decide what
they want to do with that. Why
do we want to do this? Um, I
apologize, I have Shelly Strong,
who is the chief counsel for the
Early childhood education and
care department. Thank you,
Shelly for being here. Um, why
we want to do this is it
enhances our resource allocation
provides comprehensive child
development support, financial
stability so that we have a
place to get this rolling if the
voters choose so choose to make
this a part of our, of our
Constitution, um, and then
a legal, legal and structural
clarity to, to make sure that
the department knows exactly
what to do with this when funds
do actually reach them. Uh,
there is um
Little bit of an expanded use,
uh, the bill broadens the scope
of programs eligible for funding
to include uh prenatal services
and that's about the only
addition there, but
We'll just uh let you go
wherever you want to go, Mr.
Chairman.
I, I'll ask Shelly to just
respond if we have any uh
tougher questions that I
absolutely cannot answer because
it's not that smart.
or um those in support out in
the audience.
If you'd like to come
Come up and speak.
You have up to 2 minutes.
Uh, thank you, chair and members
of the committee, and thank you
to the sponsors for this work
and in the joint resolution that
precedes it. My name is Mike
Gabriel. I'm the vice president
of Program and learning at the
Lanno Foundation, the largest
foundation in New Mexico focused
on education. We strongly
support SB 167 by investing in
prenatal care, New Mexico can
improve maternal health outcomes
and lay a strong foundation for
children's future learning and
development. We must continue to
prioritize and invest in the
earliest stages of education for
the children in New Mexico. We
urge you to pass. Thanks.
Thank you. Anyone else in
support?
You went online? No. Anyone in
opposition.
You went online.
Thank you. Uh, questions from
the committee.
Senator
Chairman, thank you very much,
Senator Padilla.
Oh.
We did this last.
When was it seems like a month
ago, but I know it hasn't been
it was Monday. That's how time.
Flies up here guys checking
myself.
I wasn't that seemed like it
might have been last week, but
yeah, it was Monday.
The question I have in reading
all the analysis and everything.
One of the technical issues that
came up came from the SIC state
investment council.
Because you're changing the name
of the current early childhood
education and care fund.
You're trying to get
To the early childhood trust
fund, but it doesn't repeal the
existing ECECF. What are we
going to do there for this
little snack?
Uh, ask Shelly I'm so glad I
brought Shelly today. Senator,
uh, so this recompiles uh the
current trust fund that we use,
um, into the new fund, so it
does in that recompilation when
it occurs, if it occurs, um,
we'll then transfer to that new
trust fund.
And, and I understand this has
to go through all the committees
and everything to be signed and
all that type of stuff before
the name is changed.
I just did not want there to be
any sort of problem once this
does happen because of the
concern that the state
Investment council did have on
this.
Oh,
So it will now be called Early
Childhood Trust Fund, and that's
gonna be it right there, is that
right? So it's gonna be ECTF.
Mr. Chair senator, that's
correct. OK.
I just wanted to make sure
because that was a concern I had
read this and I wanted to make
sure that everything was going
to be if signed into law that it
that transaction would take
place there.
Mr. Chairman, that's all I have.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator. Other questions from
the committee.
And pleasure of the committee,
Mr. Cherry, who passed on Senate
Bill 16. I have a motion for a
due pass.
Senava this time.
But Du pass, you'll call the
roll, please.
Cinder Boom.
Cinel
Sure.
Yes.
Do you have a category for sure.
Look in the dictionary, it does
come under as being a yes.
Senator Figueroa.
Yes. Si Hickey Center Nova, yes.
Center Ramos.
Senator Thornton, yes, Senator
Pope.
Yes. Cinders. Yes,
you have a do pass 7 with 2
excused and one sure thank you
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee.
Got it.
Uh, we now are moving on to some
house bills, uh, Representative
Garcia.
And I don't know if
Senator Mijo is here with you,
but House Bill 24 community
governance attorneys changes.
Thank you guys the chairman, uh,
it's an honor to come before
this uh.
Distinguished committee
Mr. Chair
Uh
The
Judiciary sub or House Bill 24.
Uh, make some streamlining
changes to our
Community governance attorney
Act.
Established in 2020.
As a tuition waiver program.
Or 3rd year law students.
To engage
In providing free legal services
to our Spanish land grant.
Asea
And colonial communities.
Estimo.
Chairman
Ah, since 2020, our community
governance attorney program.
has gone through some growing
pains.
And uh
As the chair these growing pains
are resolved in our judiciary
sub.
Which is a collaboration.
By the community governance
commission, the UNM School of
Law.
And the higher end department.
And I yield to my expert for him
to introduce himself.
And to dwell on the specific.
Necessary changes that we're
making to the legislation, Mr.
Chair.
Yes, sir. Welcome to education.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh my name is Adrian
Oglesby. It's good to see some
of you. I, I thought you would,
Senator. It's good to see you.
Um, I, um, am the director of
the Utton Transboundary
Resources Center. We are your
research and public service
center at the law school that
deals almost exclusively with
water issues in New Mexico. And
I also serve as the chair of the
commission that oversees this
program.
Um, is, um, Representative
Garcia said we we're really just
doing a little bit of
housekeeping, trying to make
this program a little more
streamlined and efficient now
that we've had a few years to
put it into effect, um, and so
I'll just quickly detail the
changes that we're requesting
here. Um, first off, the
original uh law called for
advertising this program to be
done by the higher education
department and we found that
it's much easier for the school
of law and the commission to do
that because we're actually
dealing with the students on a
daily basis and can recruit
them.
Um, the initial responsibility
for administering the contracts
with our legal service
providers, those law firms or
nonprofits where we're placing
these lawyers um was originally
housed uh with the commission
itself. It makes more sense for
that to be housed with the
school of law where we actually
have administrators.
Accountants and folks who can
oversee those contracts and
enforce them.
The responsibility for actually
selecting the students is
currently with the higher
education department again, we
think that would make more sense
to be with the commission, with
the folks who are actually
interacting with the students on
a daily basis.
And um,
We also want to expand the
definition of who qualifies as a
legal service provider. So these
are the entities where we place
the students once they've
graduated. And um we'd like to
include state agencies as
eligible legal service
providers, um, in particular the
Department of Justice has the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
division that serves these
communities and um they're very
interested in housing, um, one
of our placements within um
within their division.
In addition, we'd like to add
municipalities and counties that
have colonia within their
borders, as you all are probably
aware, colonists are not
political subdivisions, they're
not really any kind of legal
corporate entity. And so it's
very hard to provide them with
legal services directly, um, the
county attorneys, the city
attorneys who deal with them uh
could use legal help and this is
an opportunity for us to provide
it to them.
Um, finally, um, the cost
requirement in the current law.
Is that the cashier be non-state
funding.
Uh, given what's happening at
the federal level, um, we would
very much like to see that in
change so that we could use
state funding as a cost match
for this program, uh, that would
allow the Department of Justice
to participate more easily that
would allow the law school
clinic to participate more
easily, those entities that
can't access philanthropy or
federal dollars could
participate really broadening
the opportunity for students to
participate in this. Um, and
then the last change is a simple
change, the original bill which
passed in 2019.
Call for a starting salary of
$50,000 for these young
attorneys, um, that may have
been reasonable in 2019, but
starting salaries for attorneys
right now are more in the range
of 7000 to $72,000. And so we've
simply requested that that
language be changed to reflect
that the starting salary would
be the starting salary of the
legal service provider where
they are going to work to
simplify that equation.
Um, that's all we've got for
you, so we'll stand for
questions.
chair with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
out to the audience first show
of hands, those in support.
And in opposition?
If you'd like to come and speak,
you have up to 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Enrique Romero. I'm the division
director at the Guadalupe
Hidalgo Treaty division at the
New Mexico Department of
Justice. Uh, the Department of
Justice stands in support of HB
24. The treaty division has
worked with stakeholders,
including the Mexico Land Grant
Council, the Consejo de las
Mercedes, the New Mexico
Executive Commission, and the
New Mexicoseki Association on
identifying the most meaningful
ways to protect New Mexico's
land grants, Mercedes and
Esequios. Based on those
conversations, we believe there
continues to be a gap in legal
services when it comes to land
grants and the secchios.
HB 24 has been successful at
creating opportunities for new
lawyers to engage with these
traditional communities and
advocate on their behalf. The
amendments to HB 24 will
increase the opportunities new
attorneys have to give back to
their communities and begin a
career in public service without
the substantial burden of
student loan debt. And for those
reasons, we stand in support of
this bill.
Thank you.
Peter, welcome.
Is it working? Yes. Uh.
Peter Kane, general counsel with
the Higher Education department,
also the designee for the
cabinet secretary for the
commission, um, this is a
critical bill for the livelihood
of this program.
Thank you.
Anyone else in support in the
room.
We have 2 online.
Santiago Maestas.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
members of the board. I'd like
to, uh, on behalf of the South
Valley Regional Association
of Asseki.
We endorsed this bill, uh, we
have been currently uh
protesting uh water transfers
from uh the ancient Asecas in
our community, and uh we have
found that the cost to uh uh
hire attorneys are prohibited.
Since uh we are unable to uh
collect any uh fees from the
Parentes Sonase, uh, due to the,
uh, overreaching uh effect of
the uh middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District. This would
allow us then to uh to have
legal representation in protests
over transfer of uh pre-1907
water rights from our community.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the
the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Maestes Jacob
Bacca.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name's Hakovo Baca. I work with
the New Mexico Land Grant
Council. The Land Grant Council
has endorsed this legislation.
Uh, we work with the attorney
commission, um,
Quite often, and this is a very
important program and the
council looks forward to
continuing to work with the
commission. We think the sponsor
for the bill, and we think the
committee for considering it for
passage.
Thank you. Anyone in opposition
in the room.
You went in opposition.
And when in opposition, so
questions from the committee.
The result.
Mr. Chairman's.
Mr. Chairman, I, I'll always
refer to you as it we we serve
them the House Labor Committee
forever.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
this, this is already in place.
Am I understanding that correct?
Mr. Charon and Senator I.
Uh yes, it is. Since 2020.
I'm 22. Yes. OK, it was part of
the uh rocket docket agenda we
were, we were in that rocket
docket agenda. I remember that
Mr. Chairman. I just couldn't
remember the year.
Mr. Oglesby, thank you for being
here. I didn't recognize you
because you've changed hats.
He used to
Work with me.
We argued more often than not
about water issues.
So anyway, glad to see you in
this new role right here.
Oh, the way I'm understanding
that these are.
And Mr. Chairman.
And uh
Representative Garcia and Mr.
Oglesby, I'm understanding that
there is a little bit of uptick
in the pay, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
yield to.
Mr. Ogle's beater.
You respond to that?
Hey, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Azel, um, yes, currently, um,
the statute, um, uh, calls for a
base salary of $50,000 that can
be slightly adjusted, but um
what we would find easier
because no lawyers, no one out
of law school is gonna work for
$50,000 nowadays, um, we've
changed the language so that it
simply says that they will be
hired at the starting salary of
the legal service provider where
they're going to work. So if
they're going to go work.
For Department of Justice,
they're going to work at the
base salary for a starting
attorney at the Department of
Justice. That takes the
calculation and guessing out of
the hands of the commission and
just makes it a simplified
number.
said, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Garcia, Mr.
Oglesby, is this?
Where are these funds coming
from then? Explain that to me.
I'm not quite clear there yet.
Mr
Chairman Senator is also.
At the funding for the salaries
for the two years that the.
Um, folks were enrolled in
Program practicing law.
Comes from the legislature.
Under the existing act.
The
Other half
to come from that legal service
provider. So again, if
For let's say, New Mexico legal
aid.
Mexico legal aid has to come up
with half of that salary.
The cost share.
The
Current law says that that cost
share has to be non-state
dollars, so philanthropy or
federal dollars.
And we're finding that to be a
real limitation on getting legal
service.
to participate because it's just
hard money to get nowadays.
So we're asking for that cost
share to be allowed to be state
dollars.
OK,
so.
He
And the base budget
Uh, I didn't hear the last part,
Mr. Chairman.
Senator
that the
funding for this initiative.
in the base budget
I
Cardinal area.
OK, well, that was gonna be my
next question. Where is this
going to be funded and it's,
it's already showing up then in
the budget.
That's why I'm understanding the
explanation. I just wanted to
make clear of that.
Um
I.
Mr. Chairman
Um
How, what type of, what type of
Oh
And how are you going to
implement what is going to be
successful in these areas. Is
there stipulations that are
going to be set out and that
they have to be met by these
people that are going out to
these areas.
Mr. San you to Mr. Os me.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Zeal, I
understand your question
correctly. Um.
The commission has established
criteria that
Um, the applicants have to meet.
To be accepted into the program.
It's a competitive process.
had 3 applicants, uh, selected
so far since uh 2021, 22.
Um
And um
Uh, those were all competitive
The
Of work if your question is
really about the type of work
they'll be doing once they're
practicing attorneys, um, the
intent behind the title of this
program, Community governance
attorney, um, originated when,
um, you know, we realized that a
lot of the Rakias, our land
grants, um, you know, we're
having trouble, you know, coming
up with um accurate bylaws with
meeting their uh accounting
requirements, their audits, you
know, complying with Open
Meeting Act requirements, um, so
the original
impetus was to provide them with
that leg up on governance
issues, um, making sure that
they were up to speed on how
they're governing themselves and
doing that properly.
Um
What we've seen is because these
are, you know, land grant
colonia Sania
communities that the attorney
who has gone to work for these
communities has been doing work
um related mostly to their basic
governmental functions, um, and
that, you know, has included
some land and water issues, um,
as well.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman,
Representative Garcia and Mr.
Oglesby, you said that there
were 3 applicants, and so it's.
Whenever you're talking about
the 3 applicants and you said it
was pretty competitive. Were
they vying for the same area
where they're going to be going
to different areas of the state
is preference given to colonius.
Mr. Charison or Zilla to Mr.
Oglesby to answer that. Yeah,
thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, we, we don't give a
preference amongst these three
types of communities and our,
our intent is the commission,
um, is to try to get them all
served through this program.
Um, and so, um, uh,
Currently, um, the legal service
providers that we've utilized
the New Mexico legal aid, um,
which has provided service to
all three of those communities
through this program.
OK.
Mr. Chairman,
Representative Garcia and Mr.
Oglesby whenever this is, if
this bill does pass and it's up
and running, how many of these
uh community governance
positions will be available.
And how is that going to be
funded? Is the, is the money
there in the budget from legal
aid.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator is to Mr.
Oglesby. OK, thank you Mr.
Chair. Senator, yeah, so we,
we've been getting a state
appropriation, um, since, uh,
20.
Let me just make sure I'm
accurate here. 2022, um, we got
our first uh appropriation, the,
the base appropriation for this
program right now is $96,000.
And um
Uh, just to make it clear, um,
we are enroll a 3rd year law
student and we pay off their
costs, their um their um tuition
and we provided them with a
living stipend. Um, so that
that's a package worth a little
less than $40,000 right there.
And then they go out into the
world commit to to work for two
years as an attorney serving
these communities and through
our program we pay for half of
their salary.
So that right there is about
$45,000 or so, um, if you
include benefits on top of the
salary.
Um, currently we have enough
money to have one student
enrolling in this program per
year.
The statute caps the program at
2 students per year, but we
don't have the funding to
actually enroll two students.
OK.
And Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna
follow up with that a
representative Garcia, Mr.
Oglesby.
Whenever these applicants have
you had the opportunity yet
whenever these applicants go out
to work in these communities.
You see them staying in those
communities.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator, um,
we, we, we've had one student
who's gone out to work within
these communities and we
actually have two students who
are in the pipeline right now
getting ready for this fall.
Um, the student who we had go
out into the community did go to
work for New Mexico legal aid
and unfortunately was part of
the layoffs that they suffered
uh a month or so ago.
Um, we're actively looking to
try to find a replacement
placement for that student if
possible and and of course, um
if they go on with their life
and find better employment,
we're not going to stop that.
Um, and, uh, actually just to
show that that we try to be
flexible with our students, um,
the reason we have two getting
ready to start as new lawyers
this year is because we actually
accepted one end of the program
a couple years ago that she was
offered a clerkship with um our
Supreme Court.
And we thought let's give her a
year of experience with the
Supreme Court before we bring
her back to work with Colonnius
and Eacus and land grants. OK,
that's very interesting, Mr.
Chairman, and Representative
Garcia, I noticed that in
reading.
The original bill and then the
committee substitute for house
house rural development land
grants and cultural affair, it
dropped all the way to 6. I'm.
Can you tell me why it was cut
that?
That drastically.
Mr. Chair, Senator, can you
repeat the question?
Your original bill whenever I
was starting to read it, it was
228 pages.
And this committee substitute
after it went through House
Judiciary, and I do understand
what judiciary does to a bill.
It's cut to 6 pages.
So I was
I'm kind of curious about why.
big change that took place in
house judiciary.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
It's, the original bill was a
six-page bill.
Um,
And then the
The House of Rural Development
was 6 pages and our current sub.
Mr. Chairman.
Senate a representative Garcia,
I apologize for this, I just
recently got an administrative
assistant and she has put 2
bills together at the very last
page goes all the way up and.
My bad. I apologize for that.
Um
00, here it is, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Garcia on the
last page of your bill.
Page 6, line 3 estate. Well, it
starts off a blind to the
contract shall be entered into
with the university, and this is
new material. Counties or
municipalities that have been
designated at least one colonial
within their boundaries, state
agencies, and then it goes on.
Why did you make it?
Because there are certain areas
of the state that don't qualify
for the uh clonius aspect of it.
Can you tell me why you went
that route, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I yield to Mr. Oglesby in terms
of thank you.
Verify that language. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Zel, um,
yeah, the intent here, um, as I
mentioned earlier, you know,
colonius are not political
subdivisions, they're not
corporate entities. You you
really can't represent a
colonia. It's just a community
of people, um.
And so what uh what we're
intending to do here is open
this program up to county and
city attorney's offices.
Um, who are in uh areas that
have colonia, um, so if you're
down in, in a southern county
and you've got colonius and
you're dealing with them trying
to help them, say trying to get
them some sewer lines out there,
um.
If you have your attorney housed
at the county that that attorney
can actually get out there and
work with those people as part
of the community. Um, but if, if
we don't have that arrangement,
it's really hard, other than
with a nonprofit to find folks
who will go out and represent
those communities of people
without them being political
entities.
OK. And Mr. Chairman, one last
question.
A representative Garcia and Mr.
Ogles before the audience and
for the members up here that may
not know, can you give what the
parameters are for being.
Where there can be the
designation of a colonies.
Cause I know that it's in a
certain mouth.
from the
Mr. Chair, Senator, I yelled to
Mr. Osby.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Azel, um, colonius, uh,
are, are generally governed
under a federal definition, um,
which states that they're within
150 miles of the southern
border. They lack access to
sewage, uh, you know, drinking
water systems and other, you
know, basic municipal
infrastructure. Um, so, so it
actually, uh, we actually have a
118 qualified colonists within
New Mexico. I think that's
within about 13 counties, some
of which may surprise you, um,
you know, I think we
ly think of colonius as, as, you
know, being very, very, you
know, beleaguered communities,
you know, sort of developed out
in the middle of nowhere, but
under that definition, a
community like Cliff, New Mexico
actually qualifies. Um, so, uh,
so it's, it's, it's very good to
be aware of the definition.
And Mr. Chairman, the reason I'm
bringing that up, I do have a
colonius in my particular
district, and that is like
Arthur.
That qualifies as a colonia. So
Mr. Chairman, uh, representative
Mr. Oglesby, thank you for all
your answers to my questions.
Thank you Senator. Other
questions?
House Bill
24. We have a motion for a due
pass.
Seed by Senator Thornton, if
you'll call the roll, please.
Sandra Boone
Yes,
Cinder Figueroa.
Yes, Hickey.
Yes.
Senator Nova, yes, Cinder Ramos.
Senator Thornton
Yes. Cinder Pope, yes, cinder
souls, yes.
You have a do pass on a 7 with 2
excused.
Thank you. Representative Baca.
Come on up and welcome to Senate
Education.
We are now moving to HB 157 as
amended the new school licenses,
and this is an LESC endorsed
bill.
And Annie, welcome to Senate
Education. You're usually over
on the house, I think.
Hi, good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
Senate Education Committee, um,
I appreciate you, um,
Considering this bill before
you. House Bill 157 is actually
dealing with professional
administrative licenses.
Um, with this bill really tends
to codify is that educational
leadership matters.
Um
The current system that we have
right now establishes one level
of license for our
administrators as a licensed
administrator.
Uh, and had my admin license
since 2005.
There was no further
requirements to advance or to
get other trainings, so the
license that.
Uh, would be the same license as
an assistant principal, as a
principal.
Even as a superintendent.
And so with this
House will attempts to do.
is to basically say that as a
administrator.
Who has met the requirements.
Um, moves through their career.
That there will be additional
training and or learning
necessary to complete the job.
Speaking for myself as a current
deputy superintendent for my
school district.
The, the information or the my
responsibility as an assistant
principal.
varied greatly in the depth of
knowledge, great varied greatly
to what a, you know, a cabinet
member person or a
superintendent who leads the
district would need to um would
know, so.
This, um,
Also says that once you become
an administrator and they hand
you the keys to the building,
your learning does not stop,
that there is additional
requirements and we should be,
as we preach to our students,
uh, lifelong learners, then we
should have different standards
and we should have different um
Learning that takes place in
order for us to play the vital
role of.
School improvement
You know, this also states that
And it's been through the
research of Marzano and others
is that
The
The relationship of a of a
teacher is impactful for the
student learning.
That's the most
But
Followed closely by school
leadership.
And as we talk about high
teacher turnover as we talk
about.
Some challenges in our school
districts we want to make sure
that our leaders are prepared.
And meet certain requirements.
So that they can take on the
much needed important task of
leading our schools, our
departments, and our school
districts. So, Mr. Chairman, I
thank you for that, and we stand
for, oh, my, my expert is uh
Annie right here and she will,
um, I don't know if she wants to
make a quick statement about
anything that um that I may have
missed out. So, Mr. Chairman.
Kenny go ahead.
Mr. Terry Representative, thank
you. I'll just add a couple of
things, um, one, I just wanna
know that this bill is a result
of 2 years of work from a wide
range of um, stakeholders,
including educator preparation
programs, LESC, LFC, PED, um,
funders in the community,
superintendents, principals, you
name it, they were probably
involved in this over the past
couple of years, so there's been
a lot of thought put into this.
Um, I'll just, I'll add also
that we have really high
turnover around principals and
superintendents and have for a
long time well above national
average levels.
And the final thing I'll say is
just to kind of highlight the
three main things this bill
would do to accomplish all the
things that represent
representative Baca mentioned
are one requiring principal
preparation programs to align
their um programs with national
best practices.
So that principles are prepared
before they begin their work.
Um, second, requiring
differentiated preparation for
principals and superintendents
who have very different jobs.
And then 3rd, providing on on
the job supports for principals
and superintendents, um, in
terms of mentoring, induction
programs and.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that uh as as was
stated that this is go through
the LESC process through the
interim and was part of the
endorsementors legislation for
uh the committee. Thank you Mr.
Chairman. With that we stand for
questions.
Thank you, uh, out to the
audience, quick show of hands,
those in support.
in opposition.
You'd like to come up and speak.
You have up to 2 minutes. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I think we all know
that it's virtually impossible
to try to turn around academic
performance at an institution
without the presence of a
dynamic, effective leader at the
helm.
Strong, effective, and better
prepared principles are
essential to driving the
academic change that we need and
this bill significantly raises
the standards for how we train
principals in New Mexico, which
the Chamber of Commerce has been
urging the legislature consider
for several years. Improvements
within this bill include
rigorous on the job training,
aggressive recruitment of top
teaching talent and school
leadership training and improved
tracking of graduates from
principal prep programs. Thank
you.
Thank you, JD.
Yes, sir. Uh, thank you, Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Mike Deri with the Lanel
Foundation, um, and we strongly
support this bill. Uh, we've
been uh working alongside LESC,
LFC and PED, um, to think about
what this bill could be part of
this, uh, part of the task force
that was held this past summer.
Strong school leadership is
essential for student
achievement. Second, to
teachers, school leadership has
the biggest effect on student
outcomes.
For the past 2 years, we've been
working um uh on this bill, um,
we worked with several other
funders including the Maddox
Foundation, Kellogg Foundation,
and Thornberg Foundation, uh, to
fund a task force that made up a
uh, as Annie said, um, of all
sorts of educators from around
the state and um union
representatives, charter
schools, tri controlled schools.
They're the heart of their
comments are in this bill. This
strengthens uh administrative
preparation programs by
requiring pet approval and
setting clear standards aligned
with state and national.
standards
Um, at the same time, the Bill
grandfathers in all current
principles and superintendents,
um, so they don't have to go
back through that process. Uh,
we urge you to pass. Thank you.
Thank you.
Then, Mr. Chairman, san rounds
at the school superintendents
and the coalition of Educational
Leaders. We appreciate the work
that was done over the last two
interims. We had a few rough
spots coming out here with the,
the waiver, or I'm sorry, the,
the grandfathering portion was
terribly important. I'll give
you an example myself.
I have been administratively
licensed in the state of New
Mexico since 1983, served as a
superintendent from 1984
forward. One of the questions is
what more would you be required
to do.
And how you would refresher
training compared to a novice
who's coming in fresh without
the background we recognize that
there is the need for continuing
education. That's a key element
of this last point I'll make,
I'm not, we're not sure this
solves the turnover issue.
We think that's oversold just a
little bit in this it will allow
good preparation.
Logically, that means less
turnover. In reality,
Many of the superintendents who
were turned over are more senior
and more experienced, and so
we're not sure this fills all of
those gaps. Mr. Chairman, we
support the legislation. We urge
you to pass it. Thank you.
Thank you, Stan.
And PED Good morning, Amanda
Debell, deputy secretary for
PED, um, many educator
professionals have met during 2
interims to think through how we
can support school leaders and
being well prepared to take the
seat of a school district
principal, administrator, or a
school, uh, I mean, a district
or a charter school leader.
This work we know will support
professional educators to
acquire licenses that have
specific skills that are
addressed to the role.
While this work will require the
agency to reorganize and will
require upskilling of our
current employees in order to
meet the needs of the new bill,
as well as rulemaking, we feel
that this is in alignment with
the agency vision and strategic
plan with more than 50% of our
state superintendents being
within their 1st 3 years, and
the average tenure of a
principal being 3 to 5 years, we
support this bill. We know that
a consistent leader, we know
that consistent leadership at a
school and a district level.
leads to longevity and is a
benefit to students. This bill
puts students first by making
sure that the adults who are
working with them are well
prepared for this position, and
we urge your support for this.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Chairman. Um, I am in
full support of this bill. I
believe, first of all, I am a
student of Mandela International
Magnet School, uh, I believe
that this bill will promote a
better way for teachers to
distinguish themselves and along
with the licenses made, which
gives mentorships to principals,
and it will also set a better
environment for schools and
Very much promote the education
we will have because I believe
it will be better.
Oh, although this will take some
time to accomplish. I believe
that this bill will be very
successful.
And though I'm a student, I
stand in full support of this
bill.
Oh, I'm Yang Chen, by the way.
Thank you and welcome. Nice to
hear a student voices.
Yes, sir.
Thank you, Chairman. I also want
to speak in full support of the
bill. I'm a student at uh
Mandela International Magnet
School. Um, I feel like it's
very important to continue
trading training after becoming
an administrator, um, I feel
like with training at such a low
level, I feel like not only you
won't be gaining new knowledge
but the knowledge you do have
may taper off before, um, fully
fading, and I think it's very
important to stop this from
happening. And I also think uh
we need to continue training
people in the newest
communication strategies, so I'm
in full support.
to this bill.
Thank you.
No, thank you
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Joey and with the,
uh, New Mexico School Boards
Association. We thank, uh, all
the work that has gone into this
bill, uh, the sponsor for
carrying it, and we join our
superintendents in supporting
the bill, we feel that it
provides leadership training and
certifications that are much
needed. You'll recall that you
did a similar bill last year
regarding school board
leadership training, and I think
all in all, it all ties
together. Thank you.
Thank you, Joe. We do have one
online.
Mandy Torres
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Mandy Torres, Education reform
Director for I think New Mexico
and a former elementary
classroom teacher. While pay and
teacher working conditions most
often top the list of why
teachers leave the profession.
Also regularly influencing that
decision is a lack of stable,
effective leadership in schools
and at the district level. Well,
I was lucky enough to have
principles that allowed me to
innovate and thrive in the
classroom during my time at
Borna Leo Public Schools. Many
of my teacher colleagues did not
have
that same experience. Many of
them regularly expressed
sentiment that they're just
writing out the storm until the
next principal or superintendent
comes along. When that is the
climate and culture in our
schools, and when our teachers
do not have confidence in
leadership, our students cannot
thrive. While we support a new
licensure system, we believe
that the preparation, training,
and mentorship for that licenser
are the most important pieces to
this bill, allowing candidates
to focus solely on learning how
to become an administrator with
daily hands-on experience with
the skills they needed.
each level. We cannot
underestimate the importance of
quality leadership within our
LEAs and our schools, and it is
an issue that needs addressed
with urgency. We thank Reps
Garrett and Baca for bringing
this legislation forward and
also thank all those who have
worked on this issue. We urge
the committee to vote yes on HB
157. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Anyone in opposition.
No one in opposition online, uh,
we'll go to questions from the
committee.
Senators out.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. It's good to see you
representative Baca.
And his heart is with the
education of our young children
throughout the state, and I
truly, truly appreciate that he
has brought many good things to
the house education committee
and I applaud him for his
efforts there.
Mr. Chairman, I have been
reading over again.
Uh, your bill that you brought
forward.
And any, I, I'm sorry, I did not
catch your last name, did you?
Sure, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator A,
it's Armitage.
Thank you very much analyst for
LESC.
OK. Thank you very much, Annie.
Oh
And this goes back, it, it
brought to mind whenever
Representative Garcia was in
here earlier.
Whenever he was the chair of the
House Labor Committee.
And we had
There was some changes that were
needed to take place in our
education system over hiring
principals or superintendents,
and one of the changes.
That they were wanting to take
place and I can't remember. I,
I'm not seeing it.
T
In this bill or pertaining to
any section of it yet.
If any, maybe you can help me
there.
Whenever you go out searching
for a superintendent to come
into a school district.
You have lots of applications
and then you go through the.
Um
Process of trying to say, OK,
we're gonna write this one over
this one and you might come down
to 5.
But
What we were hearing a long time
ago, and I do admit it was a
long time ago in the House Labor
Committee.
They could not run a back
background check on these 5 say
its last 4 or 5.
Uh, applicants until they reach
that stage, is that still in
place?
And could.
Answer that question. I know
that was one of the things
because it would be a violation
of that person's private rights
and stand if you can help a
little bit, I don't think that's
really within this bill, but a
little bit of quick
clarification, please. I would
like that.
Senator Diesel.
They're kind of two parts to
this question, the background
check is not forbidden. In fact,
many, uh, searches do the
background check as part of the
search process.
The issue is whether when it
becomes public knowledge.
I believe the legislation I've
seen over the last several years
has to do with when do you
announce finalists?
How many of those?
Thank you.
Thank you. It's time for
recording, but so it's, so the
real issue is when does it
become public, not when is the
background check done we support
the fact of cloistering that
until the final 5.
Um, because what happens in
Superintendent worlds.
I once you are named as a
finalist in in another district,
your current district.
Finds that they uh have question
about your sincerity to stay
with them.
Chairman, I appreciate that
clarification there and I do
understand that in case the
superintendent might be wanting
to make a change that that
information is not made public
until then. Thank you very much
for that.
Mr. Chairman, uh.
Representative Baca, I'm seeing
on page 7 of your bill.
Under T line 11, it starts at
state institution means, and
this is new language. Can you
tell me why this was added
juvenile detention centers
operated by the Children, Youth
and Families Department.
And then it goes on down to talk
about the John Paul John Paul
Taylor Center.
Can you tell me why the juvenile
detention centers operated by
the Children, Youth and Families
Department was added.
And Mr. chair Senator is well,
that's a great question. This is
just updated language, it was
just clean up language during
drafting.
Just clean up language then, OK,
thank you very much for that
response.
Uh, let's see, page 9.
Well, we've already gone over
this, so I'm gonna skip that
one.
Now let's go to page 15.
And Mr. Chairman and
Representative Baca starting on
line 13.
Um, we're talking under E, we're
talking about a superintendent
license.
Can you tell me why that like.
I thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. I mean, when we
talk about as far as with the
admin licenses and we talk about
the three different levels of
license.
Uh, at this current start under
this bill that a
A superintendent's license would
be.
As far as the license that would
be the highest license for an
admin license and so.
This, uh
This this language and they
really just talks about, you
know, when we talk about the
responsibilities of the district
that we would.
Um
You know
Prefer, and I was here that the
administrator.
Uh, would have such license.
Uh, before they could be.
Um
hard for that job.
OK.
No, I will say, and I thank you.
I did hear, uh, and Mr. Chairman
and Senator, but there could be
an option to actually get a uh a
temporary license if I didn't
currently have one. So as a, as
a person.
So I may have a, uh, uh, you
know, level 2 license.
If there was, I was a successful
candidate. It could be, I could
be granted an opportunity.
To be hired with the
understanding that I would go
out there and I would pursue the
next level of license for
superintendency.
OK,
You, you
along with where I was going on
this, OK, so thank you for that.
Mr. Chairman and representative
Baca on page 16 following up on
that though.
Line 5,8 says all school
administrators who hold a valid
level 3B license and have worked
as local superintendents prior
to July the 1st, 2028.
Shall be granted to
superintendent license. Can you
tell me why that date was put in
there. What, what is the impetus
behind that?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Senators. Actually,
that this House Bill 157 was
amended and that date was pushed
to 2029, and that is regarding
the grandfathering in process,
OK, so that if I was currently
serving as a superintendent.
Then the fact I would be
grandfathered in if it were
prior to that date, that is, uh,
now 2029.
OK.
Thank you for that explanation.
Oh
Has to work
Mr. Chairman.
Let's see.
Uh, Senator Representative Baca.
On page 19, my next question is
going to start at the very
bottom of page 19, it's new
material and it's talking about
online 24, it's talking about
the provisional superintendent
license.
Continuing on to page 20.
And it's a one-year license.
And it can be renewed up to 33
times. Can you tell me why the 3
years is in there, why, why the
renewal process can go as long
as 3 years.
Senator and so.
We wanted to make sure that
there was sufficient time for
any one say there's a situation
where a principal needs to start
serving as a superintendent
before they've completed an
aspiring superintendent's
Academy. Those, uh,
superintendents academy.
I've not really been totally
created yet, to be honest, there
are some that could become
superintendents academies, some
programming that does exist.
Um, so with the 3 time 1 year
renewal, we wanted to make sure
there was adequate, adequate
time that that, um, essentially
a principal who's serving as a
superintendent to complete the
requirements to get that
professional superintendent's
license while they continue to
serve as the superintendent.
OK, thank you for that
explanation, Annie.
Uh, but I'm
On page 2 is well new material
line 17.
Superintendent licenser,
Superintendent license is a
five-year license granted to an
applicant who meets the
qualification for that license.
So once this provisional
superintendent license.
If they decide to renee for 3
years, they can go ahead and
make an application here.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman Senators, so just
like with any other licenses.
Um, they are valid for so many
years and I have to reapply or
for my license, uh, to basically
update it and to get it renewed.
So, um, that's, that's a current
practice that we have with the
licensure and
Um, it's consistent with what
they do for teaching licenses or
other licenses through PED.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, along the
same lines, you said that you
have every so often, every 5
years, you have to reapply. Is
there a test? Is there?
Some sort of
Questions that have to be
answered by you to maintain this
license or to renew it.
Mr. Chanin said, as long as I am
currently employed and have
renewed my license before it
expires. I am a reissued a
license. Now, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Rozelle, if I let my
license lapse and have not
renewed it and choose to go back
into that there may be
requirements before that license
is quote unquote renewed, Mr.
Chairman,
Senator Madam Chairman
and Representative Baca, I was
wanting you to say that.
Because trying to get it.
If it does expire, it poses a
pretty big problem.
My last question, Mr. Chairman,
on page 23 going on to 24,
you're talking about emergency
hiring there.
Tell me why there might be an
emergency.
Mr. Chairman and Senators,
that's kind of what uh.
situation where Annie had kind
of mentioned that if there were
something to happen as far as uh
administrator or superintendent.
That for whatever reason health
otherwise or a change of
employment was to um
create a vacancy that under this
clause that we could um that a a
person um or an employee could
be put in that situation. So
that would be um
Part of the, you know, the
requirements.
And if they don't have the other
requirements as far as an
administrator. That's what it is
as far as an emergency that if
we create a vacancy.
That we would have this
emergency to make sure that we
Have are able to put somebody
into that position.
For the consistency and
leadership of that district is
uh senator and Mr. Chairman, and
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Buck, I can understand that, and
it would especially be effective
in our smaller school systems
because right now at the very
bottom of your new material
there on line 12, it does say
certificate of Superintendency
waivers are one year waivers and
are not renewable. So they are
really acting as the interim
until.
The search can be made to
replace it.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes,
ma'am.
I truly appreciate, Mr. Chairman
and
Representative Barker and Miss
Armitage for being here today
and answering these questions. I
think it's very important that
uh.
Everything is.
On the up and up here.
Appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Other questions from
the committee?
And I think you
We've heard this through LESC
for the last couple of years,
and so it's, yeah.
I, I don't have questions as a
result.
and we do pass on House Bill 157
amended. We have a motion for a
due passed by Senator Figueroa,
if you'll call the roll, please.
Ciner Boone.
Senator, yes.
Figueroa.
Yes, thiner Hickey.
yes, no, yes, Senator Ramos.
Senator Thornton
Senator Pope, yes.
Senators souls. Yes.
You have a do pass on a 6 with 3
excused.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you esteemed senators.
And, and welcome to education.
Remind your committee over
there, we've been hearing House
bills, so we're ready whenever
they ready start hearing Senate
bills, Mr.
Chairman noted rivalry between
the two, the two education
committees. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Um, and good work
today, committee. We moved right
through our, our bills. Normally
we would be starting at 9, but
we do have a presentation coming
on Friday, which will take the
first half hour or so, so we
will be meeting at 8:30 on
Friday. We'll hear a
presentation from uh Wiy about
the Western Interstate
Consortium of higher education,
uh, we've got about an hour
until the floor and many of us
are off to other committees to
present. So thank you very much.
We are.
adjourned until Friday at 8:30.
