In virtually four people and
will hopefully see how that
works to start off we're going
to do interject introductions of
the committee members and then
the very staff people and so so
if you'd like the figures often
remind everyone members right on
off when you're not.
Good morning everyone senator
Craig Brandt the
Have the.
Town of Rio Rancho.
And then on this committee since
I came to legislature with our
souls the.
Just to I came from the.
We are came from the Rio Rancho
public school board.
To the Senate and so education
is one of the areas that I'm
very interested in my wife was a
teacher until last year the she
hung that up for awhile.
But to enjoy being here to and
it's an area that we have a lot
of work we need to do our state.
I hope that we can set aside
partisan differences and
actually do something for the
kids of the state for once thank
you.
Thank.
Was the.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Who are.
How's that for.
Okay very good Senator Martin
Hickey Representative the twenty
eighth district in Albuquerque
that's the east side of
Albuquerque and I came to this
committee because when I was
running for my seat and New as
of last year education was one
of the top priorities in my
district.
Thank you Senator.
Good morning chairman vice
chairman and colleagues my name
is Brenda McKenna and I
represent district nine which
includes a little bit of Rio
Rancho Albuquerque Corrales
proceed to us and really please
to join this committee I'm
coming over from the Indian
Affairs Committee and
as my colleagues have said
education is so important to me
and I I am honored to serve with
you thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Bindow.
I think I get to my.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
it's great to be here I'm
Senator Pinto from Senate
district three McKinley San Juan
and this is my.
Second I don't even know how
many sessions we've gone back.
but it's great to be here thank
you for joining us and the
people on soon thank you for
joining us thank you.
vice chair.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members of staff in those
watching on webcast helpful
junior Center for district
twenty three northwest
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county I I don't know for
consider freshman anymore second
year maybe sophomores in a
second session but we're just
happy to be here at the big
table now we were doing
everything zoom now we actually
get to sit in the committee room
so it's a new experience for us
so
you know echo a lot of what's
been said here in this happy to
get to work we know we have a
lot to work to work to do here
in the state thank you.
Thank open I'm bill soul the
state senator from Los crucis
area I tell people I represent
the beautiful organ mountain
desert peaks national monument
area in Los crucis
late long educator they've done
almost every job position in
education from elementary
principal middle school
principal high school teacher
community college teachers
school board member was on
leadership New Mexico school
board association
and taught in the college of
education and was academic
adviser college of arts and
sciences New Mexico state lots
and lots of education I'm very
pleased to be able to the chair
of this very important committee
and appreciate all of the other
people who are here
just for introductions we will
not have with us this morning
senator Candelaria is a new
member of this committee and
this and you will not be here
this morning Senator Kernan and
senator I think we are watching
on the webcast hello wish you
could be with us and I hope that
you're able to join us in a
couple of days and then also
senator Neville had a morning
commitment in the Farmington
area and asked if he could be
excused if we were not hearing
bills this morning and so he is
not going to be here also
Senator Kernan and senator
Neville join this committee last
year Senator Kernan it there on
in the past and I think this is
a new funding for Senator
Neville from last year senator
bill is the ranking member to
join us if I could at this point
I'd like to introduce the staff
that is going to be working with
this committee.
and first.
And I'm not making this up.
Marianne is coming back to join
us she's been a long time
committee secretary and so she
will be back again and she's the
one that keeps us on track to
make sure that if we're voting
on an amendment on the billing
page one of a health worker and
does all the filing in the we're
very fortunate to have her with
the committee so there's more
yeah then we got very little but
not need who is my assistant
this year.
We also have very that Brady one
of the M. with.
Back here who's going to be
working as a major analyst and
we have more G. Thomas.
The those stuff over here so we
Mary and Mary Lou Mary Beth and
Mary Jane all in this one.
The Senate.
We do make it up we do have
someone just goes by Marion and
then to make it happen that way
they all use both of these all
the time so the twist of fate
that yeah we we have a one of
the most interesting line ups of
people home very people
wonderful people who work with
the other committee analyst we
have offered is almost that
appears to have a long history
of working in the pen and part
of the legal department in the
pet is my other the analyst
would you like to introduce your
committee those thank you we
have a Richard Condit joined us
this year and
we are glad to have her on
board.
She's not my merry and we're
not.
We also have if you want to
introduce yourself
Act is our surgeon the arms that
you're in the back to make sure
that we have what we need is.
Melbourne mon from Espanola this
is my fourth year here with the
Senate sergeant at arms
to need anything no.
Thank you Sir for being here and
then our wonderful attentive.
Honorable chairman and the state
which members of the committee
ladies and gentlemen my name is
either yes even.
Moderate the federal New Mexico
for thirty seven years in Las
Vegas New Mexico million here I
mean the education director
probably years and I love your
awesome that the state
legislature here for a lot of
fun.
We were moving around.
It is a pleasure to be here
working with you all Senator the
anything if you needed help.
Thank you very much thank you
senator and we have a number of
new members and so he certainly
yeah we're in the middle of the
day.
If you copy it can help if you
need a pencil and just whatever
you do the you will help we're
gonna get in touch with with
anyone's
the administrative assistant for
a particular something you need
we need to do is here to help
and and run but
this point I would also like to
reduce the acting director of
the L. E. S. C. and seven you
introduce yourself and your
staff who is here we're learning
thank you chairman falls
Senators it's great to be here
of the NASA Hawker acting
director of the LFC you will see
my father myself for Julie Simon
at every meeting he is the
acting deputy director he's not
here today because he's covering
house education along with two
other of our panelists I family
Hoxie.
And Holly Duffy who many of you
may know we stole her away sorry
but.
Not really.
You will see one of our analysts
all of the meetings the rest of
the analysts we have allies of
William's.
Jessica halfway.
Dennis to beyond.
Joseph Garcia one anything we
can do to help thank you Senator
solve thank you Chairman would
you want to introduce yourselves
or start as the analyst.
Is all this is actually not a
full analyst work for Senator
Stewart but she used to be a
member of this this committee
and she loves education and so
part of your Representative.
I see.
Thank you it.
There is Mr chair.
This is my sixth year as a major
analyst for education and back
and for off four to five six I
was an analyst for this is the.
And I'd like to introduce our
new major US having faster use.
Faster this is my first session
as of the jury analysts here.
a new attorney and Albuquerque
and I've been a mediator I
worked on mediation programs of
course for the last.
Six years out so if I want to be
on thank you.
This.
Hi.
There is a one all those who
were in the you're just forces
of our usual.
I just.
no
injuries were.
okay.
We have an issue with that link
thanks committee provides for
okay he's not there.
It started some of the other
days that we have some of them
in the room the from here
usually from the school board
association stand rounds yeah
just several of the the people
that are right all Matt Paul who
are regulars with us so that
others get to know them the.
The only other thing that I have
on my list is just some of the
procedures protocols and stuff
is mass are required in your
less you are in the active
process of drinking though food
is allowed in the committee room
and so kind of follow what the
airlines do is your love that
massive takes a copy or whatever
that would write back up these
try and out in the audience if
it gets to where we have a full
committee rooms will last
sergeant of arms to to limit the
number of people who were can
come in if that becomes a
problem we'll find another space
where they're able to watch
what's going on where a lot of
them in particular bills that
they're interested in so that we
can maintain some of the social
distancing within the committee
room
this is education education
tends to start with the bell and
then with the bill we will try
to start at.
The proper time at nine o'clock
I appreciate the.
from committee members to get
here on time so we can do so and
then I always make a commitment
to the committee also that we
will end here with a hard stop
fifteen minutes before the
scheduled for session yeah we
know the four sessions getting
pushed back we can continue on
but that's a commitment to all
of us that we have a chance to
get our office get ourself and
the on the floor on time and not
run on I usually try and mention
to people if we're on a bill and
it's looking like it's going
house that that we will stop
that bill rolled over because of
this at the start of the next
one and not try and push it into
the end because we want to make
sure that there's a chance for a
full hearing professionals and
other kinds of things that seems
that's worked very well for a
couple years every once in
awhile as the chair I have to be
able to reserve the right to
change that on occasion I try
not to do we have a every once
in a while we had to change
those also we try to make sure
we get the agenda is out on time
and not do last minute additions
to the agenda things could get
pulled off of the agenda again
occasionally there are
situations where that's not the
case but we try to avoid those
loans cams of the people have an
opportunity to to fully read all
of the the pieces.
For any other questions about
appropriations within the
committee.
Obviously and try and go through
the chair we all forget that now
and then and I will trying to
gently remind.
Thank you god
for back on track but if we need
to
we'll try to do that in terms of
zoom operator.
Or or somebody knows and
understands is very salty.
Questions.
The senator Graham thank you Mr
chairman and and.
I I do have some concerns with
the fact that.
More of first in our zoom isn't
working
you know we we changed our rules
to make sure that if someone has
COVID that they can still be
part of the committee meetings
obviously we're hearing bills
today so it's not a huge problem
today we just need to make sure
that that's available for
members if they're if they're
sick
the the other issue is I don't
have a competing committee that
I'll have to leave early for so
my only question be if it's a if
it's a built very.
Contentious if we could your
early enough that I can build on
within reason let me know and
I'll try to schedule those I'm
not promises divorce but what I
have to decide whether or our
bills are germane or not so.
It's kind of the.
very well together to make this
committee.
The less partisan maybe than
some of the other other
committees and I appreciate that
you did try to do that as as
were so thank you.
Questions the other questions.
What will the.
Okay
if not thank you over attending
or organizational meeting we do
have those scheduled for
Wednesday I think there are
about five we've got maybe about
six more on Friday we typically
try and put it up on their to do
keep us busy and get ahead of
things so that this committee
doesn't get backed up on on
hearing bills we also are often
one of the first committees to
start hearing health bills when
they come over so that they're
not languishing in the Education
Committee and I appreciate this
committee working twelve to do
so that we move things forward
and have our debates here and.
The majority of the majority
group but the majority both
with.
If not then Senator education
is.
This.
And has.
Doctor you don't have the.
Yes yes.
Region have for that of the.
Last.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And.
Right now.
Yeah.
To find a time.
You have that.
There's all those
responsibilities I used to go.
Until this year I said the.
Hi systems which.
Bills.
Actually
I.
From.
I'd rather.
The.
Katie.
So.
Senator.
Right here.
Thank you very much.
Yes.
I think.
