Have two very short.
Relatively short bills today I
think
I would like to as we get
started this is aldone is my
shadow for the days from
wastrouses very interested in
government and politics and
campaigns in just how everything
functions and works up here so
being the teacher that I am I
get to teach him and tell him
about everything happening and
showing on so showing.
Going on around here so but with
that representative sunchest if
you would please I think this is
your first time in senate
education welcome are very
pleased to have you and yours
we're going to do HB two seventy
first which is the higher ed
technology enhancement fund
provisions.
Thank you mister I think I might
have been here four years ago
but it's been a higher
mister chair members of the
committee house bill two seventy
as basically a bill that puts
money in their technology and
had smith fund.
And what that fun does as it
provides state funds to match
federal grants and in some cases
from what I heard we why intend
to one match.
So it's a highly successful or
fund it's also a kinds up
language on.
The existing statute that
created the fund the fund was
started over twenty years ago in
two thousand three.
Um.
There's ten million in hospital
to already
and the with that I stand for
questions mister chair also want
to introduce my two experts are
need them bush from your name
and mister sorry who also works
with higher it.
Either one of you have anything
you want to say at this point.
Mr chair nothing to add we
appreciate you hearing the bill
and feel this is a really good
collaborative effort between all
the higher education
institutions that have research
programs thank you
mister term members of may march
whether the mexico country
university presents and I
represent these have a for
universities which is our three
research schools that are for
comprehensives this is also you
hired unified priority so this
is also working for me colleges
which in house or two also
provides money sixty million
dollars for the next two years
for community colleges and our
regional schools for inter chips
actorships and work force
training so both these two um
these two initiatives do
compliment one another as well
mister chairman members
committees of sensible voice for
the spell
thank you out to the to the
audience those in support of the
bill.
Then if ebay would like to come
down talk on the microphone.
Getting the signal nope not
necessarily everybody's good.
The new ready online
okay anyone in opposition.
No one in opposition questions
from the committee.
The.
Sir under my estate thank you
mister chairman
represents that just thank you
misses mister with the um not a
great idea I mean it it's up for
just reading the language in the
language that's crossed out in
the language that's included
it's just.
It's just a better written bill
and it captures any particular
scenario
using the magic words you know.
You know matter you know arm.
Applicant research institution.
You know federal are private
grants money
but but real quick just on page
two mister chairman of
representative the
we want you to check signed by
the sector of hijack higher
education as opposed to the
executive director of the
commission who who is the exact
director in what commission was
it referring to currently.
Uh mr chair center my stuff I
believe those strike outs were
for two eight and earlier
iteration what the higher
education department used to be
called which is the commission
on I reducation that was from a
prior decade and were finally
doing the clean up thank you
mister chairman because I have
this is when the higher
department went into place when
governor richardson back in two
thousand three credit the higher
department so this legislation
pre
runs at that that change into
their forces clean up language
thank you mister german
president I think.
It goes like this that move our
state forward I think I believe
we're about a thousand bills
behind terms of stuff like this
so this is great we've got to do
as much as these is possible
every every session we can so
appreciate the leadership of.
Of the cop and mister savadron
standard support thank you.
Thank you center center in the
bill
thank you mister only had one
follow up question I think you
said it was h.
Is mister church center yes.
Thank you
thank you mister chair thank you
representative for bringing this
do we have.
No I think this is great.
Are there any stories you can
tell us where any successes from
this fund mr chair i'm sure my
expert have a some stories but I
am the previous hearings the
director secretary of higher
actually had about three or
four.
I can mention one was attempt to
unmatter.
We've gotten I think hundreds of
millions of dollars from the fed
says a result of this but i'm
sure these guys can not give
specific examples.
The.
To answer your question there is
a review committee that includes
all these participating research
institutions also the higher
education department also the
economic development department
so there was for instance we
received some questions there
was a very important
match fund that was provided for
a
pedestrian safety out of
technology oriented grant and so
we were received some questions
about that how does that relate
to economic development well a
lot of that federal grant that
was a multi million dollar grand
I think two million dollars
total from the feds we put up a
small amount of matching money
to this one
with everybody support that that
pedestrian fatalities can have
indicator that we're trying to
bring down for the state that
affects world communities so
this is kind of a collaboration
between the research
institutions and the world
communities that have a lot of
pedestrian deaths as I
understand it around a railroad
tracks and other kind of high
speed vehicle and person
interaction so
that's just one example and
another example I could give is
federal what's called
congressional directed spending
these days congress has money
that they put up that they can
directly allocate to these
institutions but more and more
some of that funding is
requiring a an express match
from the universities in order
to even apply for the funny.
Great thank you mister chaired.
A great
not only for those matching
dollars but more importantly
just to be able to do that
restr.
Thank you
thank you senator anything else.
Mister german looks interesting
just a mobile dupass thank you I
was gonna make a comment or two
and so no problem that you're
motion can can sit on the table
there this is why the areas very
proud that for our state in the
areas of research research
begins research those who do
lots of research and get lots of
research money get lots more of
additional research money and
this now allows new mexico state
to start playing with the big
dogs by making sure that our
universities have the matching
money all of our
vice presidents of research I
mean their the acronym use the v
p r's all have stories of where
they've had to tell their
faculty that you can't go out
for that big grant because if
you get it we can't make the
match and now this allows us to
do that and we don't have to
turn away large research grants
and I think some of the day out
of epscore and other places is.
That already the the matches
that we've made to the tune of
about thirteen million dollars I
think has been pushed out his
brought in over a hundred
million dollars of additional
money back into the state with
the opportunity to bring in lots
lots more and as were moving to
an economy away from oil and gas
as you that start will start
declining into the future new
mexico as an opportunity really
just switch to an information
and a technology in a research
economic base that I think this
very much helps help start with
all of that so.
Just kind of my comments
anything else.
Senator representative I just
missed mister chair and
committee I just want to thank
you for hearing this I myself
went to an attempt got my best
was masters and engineering and
it's it's a very important that
our schools get this money to be
competitive with other states
and other research universities
in other states so thank you for
your comments thank you
committee.
Thank you we have a motion for a
do pass second by senator pope
if you'll call the role please.
Sender brand.
Sender guy goes.
Center hiki yes
yes
sender pinto.
Sender poe yes and her soul yes.
You have a do path
chairman members company.
I'm gonna switch down to the hot
seats in her pope if you will
take over.
The.
The.
So for everyone in the room in
those online we're now going to
senate bill to ninety seven.
And senator soles you have the
floor.
Thank you
this is a bill that came very
late to the session and so it is
one of the emergency bills and
so the title starts off with
relating the peace public health
but in reality this makes an
appropriation to the higher
education department for
implementation of the so works
program at san one college
this program is as program that
is working on training
additional social workers up in
the four corners region
some of the information that
i've gotten about it the short
social workers in new mexico's
been well documented over the
last decade we know that it's
important for
building up healthy communities
healthy societies and when we
have too few of them then we
aren't getting the services that
we need this session there's
been lots of discussion about
cyfd which is usually staff by
social workers and there's a
shortage across the state the
up.
There's been a task force though
that these particularly work
with vulnerable populations
there's some of the other things
the sand one college and new
mexico's western new mexico
university agree that there are
students who begin their studies
at san on college and then
transfer to western new mexico
for a batcher's degree.
Need experience in a smooth
transition
what this doesn't support the
that two year program that leads
into the four year program over
at western.
The appropriation we know that
the budget already been there
that it's not going to go
anywhere this year it's only on
the senate side so we know it
has no chance to get over but
this is for discussion for
people to start to be aware that
this program is going on there
and so with that I i'm open for.
For potential questions.
Thank you senator so do we have
any support for senate bill to
ninety seven in the room anyone
want to speak on behalf of the
bill.
What about
all right do we have any
opposition in the room.
How about i'm on you know.
All right so I don't have to go
back to you for any comments on
the public comment because there
is none we will now go to the
committee mister center novel
thank you mister.
Someone cause in western.
The.
Highlands has a very ex- uh
involved social program sound on
college how does this inner
relate with the highlands
program you know.
Just this is from my own
information that necessary
before against the bill
mister chairman and senator to
build my understanding is this
is another agreement with the so
works program for social workers
because some of them may find
that a better fit than going to
highlands from san one college
and so I think it's very similar
uh these kinds of programs that
start to fill the pipelines for
the four year universities I
think are is the point of this
in and our important okay.
There is some comments and I
block lost the page but that
they're the software whatever
might have some limitations do
you know anything about where
they're
we're there add on developing
all of this program.
Mr chairman and senator I do not
that's all mister thank you.
We have any other questions
comments from the committee.
Motion from.
I just need the motion from
someone else just because
senator ville.
I think once he is initial is on
the german part of that then you
can ask you their motion now
it's wide open so it doesn't
work so we have emotion for do
pass for senator bill and we
have a second from center guys
my apologies.
The.
Senator.
Yes
sender pinto.
So that a power yes senator soul
yes.
And you have a new pass senator
congratulations and I will let
you come back up again and take
control.
The.
Thank you
and again
because this may be our last
meeting just one of our
incredible staff certainly our
zoom operators think things have
run incredibly smoothly all of
our attendance the various
analysts that we have on the
minority side on the majority
side to keep this running smooth
certainly mary anne who keeps
keeps me
on tracking there that is me
when I don't get the motion
right or other things and get to
the paper work down on time
certainly the majority analysts
are regulars from the less sea
from the PED
the school board associations
usually here stand with their
superintendents association that
poll with the the charter
schools that are regulars in the
room thank you all
i'm always honoured to to be
allowed to chair this committee
that we have such good
relationships on both sides of
very respectful always and get
our work done on time and so
just want to tell you I
appreciate so much than her
hicky.
The.
Probably for the fourth year in
a row thank you for running such
a.
Type but open an organized
committee at you
as I observed and learn still
being a freshman
year late the west so thank you
sir.
Thank you mister terman thank
you members want to think the
chairman even involved the last
been an honor to serve on this
committee the last two years I
think when we looked back mr
german on the fifty six
legislature this may be the most
impactful in terms of education
higher ad really childhood and
then the new curriculum is just
amazing sold just one out of a
shout to your work the last two
years and probably be a part of
it.
The.
And I and I just want to thank
everyone who comes every day
folks that dial in on zoom.
You know the staff started our
arms really taken care of us so
that we could just focus on
these bills these very important
policies that we're doing making
her new mexico and I personally
want to think the chair for
allowing me to step in and in
kind of run the meeting and and
learn.
We'll do it again
I too want to thank the chair
communications great and that's
the best thing about all these
committees and we work out any
conflicts issues whatever at a
time and that's i'm not going to
be back but I appreciate the
opportunity to serve here and
it's been it's been furniture
and gets make sure my coffee's
hot
thank you sure.
That many of the education bills
are going to be discussed in
depth through the interim and so
people landline watching it home
or others you know hopefully
we'll see you at some of the
interim committees around the
state dealing with education
issues public school capital
outlay ones always lots of
issues in higher education and
this committee also gets all of
the early childhood type of
things so we've got lots of
things going on very important
committee for our children going
into the future again it's my
great honor to be allowed to to
do this in deserve in this role
and thank you all for what you
do committee pay attention and
i'll work through the ranking
member in particular if we need
to to get together for you a
quick bill or something that
that sort will try and get it
out to the public as soon as we
we've got date times and things
are that sort.
The.
I get the credit they make me
look at.
Thank you all then with that we
are journal.
