Experts are running behind so
we're gonna jump down to Senate
bill one seventy seven today I I
think we're gonna be able get
through most of the agenda today
or we should be able to let's
things get hung up somewhere
along the way.
The but we're going to do Senate
bill one seventy seven then
Senate bill two twenty seven and
then start back down through the
the list of on there or at least
that the plan at this point
Senator Hickey welcome back it's
nice having you back you've been
off on COVID protocols for a
couple of days and joined this
by zoom for one of those well
you're getting set up I would
like to introduce my shadow for
the today so if you have had
this is the Senate pro tem for
APS and image you the student
government at New Mexico State
University and former student I
had in AP psychology a couple
years ago so it's such a
pleasure to see someone doing
well they get to come back in
thank you for joining us and see
what goes on up here she's
studying communication disorders
at New Mexico State University
that accurate Mr I would like to
report I used to be the student.
Did not Senator Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning colleges and folks in
the audience and online
I am glad to be back and not
remote
anymore the.
I and I'm seeing people wear
masks and highly encourage you
to do so this virus is still
around deceased coast version
and a lot of us just don't have
any munity to that so
we'll probably be seeing more
and also report my wife got it
that she fortunately had very
few symptoms and and were as I
was knocked out for about three
days and then started putting
one foot in front of the other
but I'm definitely feeling
better and glad to be back
particularly to be able to
present this bill today because
this is such a critical bill of
fellow senators and and Mr
chairman
why is this a critical bill when
I came into the legislature as
many of you know I came because
I have a lot of experience in
health care administrative
clinical and what have you and
felt that I could make a
contribution but as I.
We got to know my constituency
and as a I I got to understand
the finances of the dynamics of
the state it became very clear
to me that the absolute number
one problem underlying health
care is poverty drives the
social determinants that drive
support health and the focus
that I have on mental health and
mental health trying to increase
mental health staffing in the
state
They're kind of treating
treating the horse after it's
out of the barn and we can keep
the horse in the barn so to
speak if we can really focus on
what that the court and the
court is and the court is is
property and the only way out of
poverty is to develop high
paying jobs in the state we all
have taxed oil and I want to
express my gratitude to those of
you who represent the southern
part of the state
how much you contribute to the
state and we have great
regulation around it but without
that we would be in misery now
but the the laws of the market
are basically going to dictate
the fact that in time renewable
energy is going to be a lot
cheaper than oil and gas space
energy and we don't have a
substitute and the only way to
get a substitute Tax base to
deal with all these terrible
issues is to develop economic
growth particularly growth that
leads to high paying jobs
because the taxation of income
is what is going to have to
substitute for the oil and gas
revenue that we're getting today
and so I'm I'm trying to portray
this even though it's very far
off in the future it is a
fundamental thing that we can
work on today and what is that I
am here to present the CNM
venture studio today and
increase funding for that
studio.
I have the honor and pleasure
this summer of visiting the
ingenuity Center at C. N. M. and
for those of you who haven't
been there and and down there to
I really highly encourage you to
do it
it is to basically.
Comes down to the following
someone with a high school
degree and as I was told really
only need to do addition and
subtraction which is good
because I could never get
through trigonometry or any of
that other stuff I'll defer to
was a challenge but just
basically with those basic
skills in a ten week course.
They can take an individual with
a high school graduation degree
in in some proficiency some in
math and teach them how to code
and create a code that also run
some sort of robotic entity of
whatever sort B. B. at
A an airplane in the sky a drone
robot on the ground a machine
that does particular things they
constantly learn how to build
that machine and code for it and
at the end of ten weeks.
They will be able to walk into a
job that pays seventy five
thousand dollars or more that is
phenomenal but they're only ten
students right now purge ten
week course.
That is not near what we need to
be able to do.
the other thing I learned when
it C. N. M. in the venture
studio is that there are a lot
of really great ideas a I think
we heard the president talk
about how many millions of
companies small startups have
started well a lot of them start
here in New Mexico but the
people with the good ideas don't
have the mentoring to learn how
to get the money I mean it and I
do is an idea that is as they
say it's the jockey not the
horse and it's learning the
skills of being able to put
together an entrepreneurial
enterprises well as the idea the
product the marketing the sales
that is so critical so what's
the NM is proposing in this bill
and now that Kylie go over some
of the details is a five million
dollar proposal million dollars
a year to be able to expand the
experience that I talked about
some affect I thought maybe I
should quit this job and go and
do that ten week course because
it is so cool at least for a guy
if you did model airplanes in
the past to be able to know you
can build something and program
it with the very basic education
but would expand that capacity
as well as the mentoring that is
needed for these entrepreneurial
start up so it's a million
dollars a year for five years to
expand this capacity and to
relate it back to where I
started again thank heavens for
the oil and gas industry in the
state and I wish in some ways
that would continue to to
dominate the market place
because we have such an
incredible reserve from and
we're also learning the
potential of geo thermal energy
we're that wells have been dug
and also the re use of the water
but the market you know at
advances is is the market and
renewables are going to produce
a much cheaper electron we have
to have a tax base we have
awful.
Albums in this state and without
a tax bases substitute what
comes from the the revenue that
comes from the ground for the
state in the state budget we're
we are going to be a world of
comments for and in ten years so
I'm asking for a long term
vision here and for your support
of this bill and Mr Deputy if
you'd like to add a few other
key points.
I'm thank you Senator Hickey
thank you for sponsoring this
bill chairman members of the
committee it is my honor to be
here today
My name is Kyle Lee time a
member of the executive team at
the central Mexico community
college and I'm the chief
executive for CNM ingenuity
which is a research park entity
at central New Mexico community
college.
Senator Hickey had on some very
key components associated with
this bill
that I'll that I'll follow
through with.
One of the key elements in
growing and economic base is the
entrepreneurial base within the
communities in the state this
bill proposes creating a venture
studio
a venture studio is.
Is much like venture funds that
exist today where you find
companies and accelerate them
but the distinction for venture
studio is as you look at the
many companies you distill them
down to the very best ideas and
connect them with experts that
have successfully grown
companies.
The outcomes of interest to DO
let companies are significant
their time to additional capital
Is a more than.
Twice as good as a traditional
venture company
That's right it's seventy
percent faster to their first
funding round and is half as
long for them to hit an accident
an accident being they went
public where they were purchased
by a much larger company they
tend to grow at a rate almost
three times faster than
traditional new entrepreneurial
companies.
And the nature of inter studio
company is to provide those very
high growth hi excel right
companies and the create a
tremendous amount of jobs this
particular venture studio
proposal
so I don't miss quoted.
from the council of governments
analysis of our current venture
capital fund will create
additional thousand and sixteen
indirect jobs and over four
hundred and fifty direct jobs as
part of its creation.
I think I think it is I agree
with this committee one of the
more important components is.
there are a lot of folks that
don't recognize they have an
opportunity to participate in a
high tech high resilient and
high skills workforce.
Madam you raised extremely
successful over the last eight
years and identifying those
individuals who maybe yesterday
we're working on a wonderful
field in retail or perhaps food
services recognizing really need
something that they can change
it has high resilience such as a
role in coding for such as the
program that Senator Hickey
discusses our internet of things
program.
We're in you can learn skills
that are part of the future
technology advancement in the
state and create a long term
economic based job the can grow
significantly there are a number
of very successful companies
that have started in New Mexico
but ultimately had to go
somewhere else either find that
expertise and leadership or
management to grow and with it
if they take those jobs and
opportunities
where they take our students who
could very well grow within
those rules here within the
state
and we take them with them to
somewhere else I have with me
actually in the audience mark
Fidel who's a.
Who is a member of a company
called risk since the grew
significantly within the state
of New Mexico was founded at New
Mexico tech
And had the opportunity to work
with the venture studio would
have grown much more rapidly
with in New Mexico until it's
point of exit.
There are.
There exists with this an
opportunity and in partnership
with the college to create a
pathway for students to
participate in advance technical
learning have those jobs within
entrepreneurial activities that
are
Really part of the the future
opportunities for individuals in
the state
and have a higher potential for
success than traditional venture
capital opportunities.
I I appreciate your time and the
opportunity to speak to you
today and should you have any
additional questions I'm happy
to answer them Mr chair if I may
just one last concluding comment
This morning's been a little
rust this on my notes here that
a dollar invested here produces
another ten dollars of
investment member I said it's a
jockey not the horse
this particular race tracks is
packing some of the best
Jackie's in the country and
that's the value of that the
probability of success from this
investment is much greater than
in some other kind of
independence they have the track
record they have the reputation
I myself spent some time in the
financial world and health care
and again people put that the
ideas are great you know Google
with the tenth search engine
invented but it was the folks
that they brought in to run it
that allowed them to really take
off and that's what we're seeing
again here in New Mexico so we
have a jam we need to grow into
a time in mind and that's what
this bill proposes to do thank
you very much Mr chair.
Thank you will go out to the
audience first show of hands
those in the audience in support
of this legislation.
Anyone in opposition.
In opposition.
If the person support if you'll
come up if you'll hand them the
hand might they're just come up
how would you like to speak in
the Halford.
And in education we are allowed
a maximum two minutes you don't
have to use the full two minutes
but please go ahead.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you my name is
mark Fidel and as Kyle indicated
I am one of the co founders of a
company called RiskSense which
is a cybersecurity firm we
exited in two thousand twenty
one Salt Lake based company
called Avanti acquired us we
were at this job from two
thousand six until two thousand
twenty one and quite honestly
after reading the details of
this this proposed legislation
had we had access to something
like this I think we would have
had a probably a more successful
exit and sooner with a larger
employment base we had to go out
of state for capital for capital
funding
but we exited with a hundred and
ten employees from our New
Mexico operations secondly in
full transparency I'm the
incoming chair of CNM ingenuity
effective July assuming I have
the vote and so this is
something that I will have the
opportunity to work with Kyle on
going forward thank you thank
you anyone else in support.
If not in opposition senator
like come up please.
There's anyone else in
opposition please going to line
up behind.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is John
Chavis and I've read have a
company called the New Mexico
started factory which is similar
to the startup studio concept
described today we've been in
business since two thousand and
thirteen created fourteen
companies that would later still
operating New Mexico surfactant
has three goals create
investable companies educate the
community about the start of
fact ecosystem and connecting
people
just a couple things about this
US start up studio model a
couple things that haven't been
answered in the presentation is
the typical startup studio gets
anywhere from twenty five to
sixty five percent of the
company's at the start and so
the question that would come up
with who's going to own that
equity is gonna be the higher
education department the
taxpayers in New Mexico State
University ingenuity
and then the other thing we do
investing we say we're somebody
going to go and you know from
million dollars a year is really
cool but where's it going and so
from out investor perspective
are they gonna hire people
reading it creep by stuff those
kind of things and Mr chairman
members of the committee if it
is the policy of the state in
Mexico to fund the startup
studio.
This substitute the bill with
the legislation that would
provides five million dollars
the state economic development
department and then put the
start up studio concept out to
bid for those reasons above and
the answer questions we propose
but thank you thank you Sir
thirty one online either for or
against.
Health okay.
Senator any comments we go to
questions from the committee.
Chairman and members of K. if I
may I appreciate the comments in
opposition
And recognize their merit there
is there is an advantage in
doing this bill with C. N. M. in
addition to Senator Hickey's
comments which is we have run
and manage to venture fund of
which we funded thirty two
companies and created over two
hundred sixty job to that
activity.
by virtue of its relationship
with the college we have a
pipeline for students to go to
work with in this entity and the
use of these funds is to
establish this model as a
working model within the state
given the lack of capital and
given the expertise that resides
within the institution itself
those advantages help create a
higher potential for sex success
for the venture studio given the
current working experience
knowing the success adventure
studios in finding and
cultivating the best companies
and getting those opportunities
directly to students that have
the potential to participate in
these types of programs.
Mr chairman I may also just make
one last comment to
in regards to the
the opposition number one I
would encourage a the gentleman
to do as we have done and also
put forward a bill for five
million and I hope the number of
other communities do that as
well in order to get this
outside of Albuquerque I think
it's critical and here's the
good news last year and that the
last minute myself Linda Serrato
and more is Dicks and proposed a
thirty five million dollar
venture capital fund that is in
the New Mexico finance authority
that is just waiting for you to
come there and that money is the
going forward I think you're
right at.
I'm still getting my bearings
that thank you Sir
and so hi there is there is
additional money for venture
capital ideas for other areas
other places in the state to tap
into and I will be submitting
another bill this year to double
that money and to loosen the
reins a little bit and how it
gets invested thank you thank
thank you questions from the
committee.
That's all I have Mister thank
the other questions.
I have a question a I think
Center pope was referring to the
legislative budget was this
requests into the C. N. M.
operating budget that is rolled
into the General provided one
why is this not part of that
budget already.
I'm for it is not it is not
rolled into the general CNM
budget this is a separate bill
proposed because of the unique
nature of establishing the
venture fund in partnership with
the research park entity
ingenuity.
Mr chairman if I may answer that
question as well I was actually
at the LESC meeting and
basically
not being critical of the
process that I've always said
we'd never have enough time to
do things well basically this
CNN's pandemic budget and so
forth was worked into like about
a three minute presentation in
front of the LFC they never got
to be able to go into the detail
on it was all rolled into a P.
E. D. and then it all happened
whatever happens happens behind
the curtain and I know the
request was there that you know
once once it goes behind the
curtain cannot only knows what
happens to it in terms of house
bill two so we were stuck with
this.
Thank you and and I was asking
more about whether this was a
request of the overall C. N. M.
budget you'd indicated the
ingenuity.
The thing is this part of this
is this the site is this an
extension of where does this
meeting compared to what's
already there in Santa.
So CNM ingenuity is a research
park entity founded by CNM so
this is a request of C. N. M. as
all employees of CNN ingenuity
artifacts UNM employees seem
ingenuity because of the nature
of research parks is the best
capable in two D. aligned with
C. N. M. in order to oversee the
management of the team that will
establish the research park I'm
sorry it was Abbas the venture
access to what that life is like
and having that opportunity for
juniors and seniors it's just a
great way to just jump start
their career and to hire at and
I've seen the program serve over
a thousand students so just that
program alone just shows the
kind of impact that CCS had on
the state of New Mexico for
their students and I'm also a
student myself and it's like a
home for me and I I mean that's
the place I spend the most time
on campus they've also through
the faculty help me become
professional students so I've
gone to conferences national
presentations that I have gone
to I've also been able to
publish and kind of just undergo
what it is to be a student and
in general and that's just
coming one aspect of the very
diverse and dynamic approaches
that CCS has for helping of New
Mexico students so I'm in favor
of it thank you.
Yes Sir.
And please no one else join the
trying to keep track of how many
I can have other people come in
on to that the back of the line
please go ahead.
The good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Michael Trujillo on the the
associate chair of to go to
trial studies I'm gonna
associate professor of American
studies New Mexico Mexico
studies and I've been in this
involved with this well I've
been going to go so especially
since two thousand and seven and
as you've heard our program has
grown a lot in those years and
the reason that we've grown so
much a part of the reason is
because we feel the need we feel
the need for our state it of the
students at the university
Mexico but also for the state
and I personally have seen some
of our students my students go
on to success in many places in
the state in terms of education
it also well in education in
government including as
legislative staff and in non
profits and a lot of other
places we take seriously the
needs of our students and the
needs of the state thank you
thank you.
Yes ma'am.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee good morning my name
is actually.
Pushing that button down.
Hold it can okay I'll start
again Mr chairman and members of
the committee good morning my
name is Ashley Martinez I'm a
PhD student in the department of
Chicana and Chicano studies my
area of focus is northern New
Mexico the place I was born and
raised.
Several years ago when
testifying for the addition of
an MA PhD program we cited the
need to provide for the study
development and implementation
of educational systems that
affect the educational success
of Hispanic students to close
the achievement gap increase the
ability for New Mexicans like me
to represent an uplift the
state.
Today I'm happy to say we're
doing just that one example is
me.
I was sought out by the
Smithsonian Center of folklife
in cultural heritage and
Washington DC to be the program
coordinator for the.
Twenty twenty three Smithsonian
folklife festival program titled
living religion creative
encounters in the United States
my team and I coordinate the
entire program however I am
curating it The New Mexico
portion.
And large part I have this
position because of the
education I have gained from
this department UNM's Chicana
and Chicano studies is my
intellectual home.
By investing in US Mr chairman
and members of the committee you
find further mechanisms for all.
From institutions like the
Smithsonian to the young minds
of our students at UNM to work
together to take the next leap
to further propel.
Educational opportunities for
even more students thank you so
much thank you.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair members the committee
my name is Mike pulley on with
the government relations office
for the rest of New Mexico I
just want to stand today and say
that the leadership in New
Mexico you M. is very aware of
the rich history and
achievements and growth of this
program and wanted to speak in
support of any additional
funding to help them continuing
their success so thank you.
Thank you.
Yes Representative good morning
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Anna rose
and I and the statewide
representative for the United
graduate workers we represent
twenty five hundred graduate
assistants teaching assistants
research assistants statewide
including sixteen hundred at UNM
here to speak in support of
additional funding for the
Chicana and Chicano studies
program at UNM department excuse
me and and you know just in my
time working with with graduate
students statewide I've seen how
the CCS Department is the
beating heart of graduate
education at the university of
New Mexico it is a home for so
many people outside of not just
the students enrolled in that
program and an investment there
is really an investment in
making graduate education making
undergraduate education and more
at increasing that impact for
everybody so just want to
express our support as they
graduate you for increased
funding for CCS.
Thank you online I believe we
have two people Loretta
Trujillo.
Thank.
Okay those rural system is not
working right now so with that
we'll go to questions from the
committee.
Their master's.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez Representative Roybal
Caballero and I'm sick could you
say your name professor.
Less this okay thank you I think
you introduce me and say your
name but I just want to think of
thank you and particularly in
the leadership of the of the
department but let me just kind
of refresh my memory with regard
to the Department as was
fascinating Mr chairman which
kind of studies of movement to
Swiss bond out of the the
Chicano movement in the sixty
seventies and university
Wisconsin had to gonna studies
in nineteen seventy six up in
Madison
and I I and I
Of course I was a committee
organizer in Seattle Washington
at an organization there of the
that was founded from and
occupation of abandoned school
building I don't think that
occupation could have occurred
in New Mexico or or close seems
like the further you are from
make or the easier it is to
organize certain things when did
you and Jim
When did when did you and the
first one is Mexico city's it
officially become a department
with for a program at UNM.
He's.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to got into gonna
studies was founded in nineteen
seventy the organizational
effort started in the late
sixties.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
up professor by cause but wanted
to become like a department or
or a or a a degree program Mr
