affirmative consent there are
numerous different evidence
based curriculums that
teach affirmative consent school
districts will be able to choose
which version they they want to
use or they'll be able to
contractor haven't imho you're
not contracted have an MO you
with a community based
organization that is already
providing that education and
their community
but it has to be the standard
that has to be taught is one of
affirmative consent Mr chair and
some communities probably do not
have contracts with anyone so
they're gonna have to come up
with very small school district
in in the
Tatum in my area of the you know
they don't have a program like
that outside of the district so
they're responsible for
including that in I guess health
is required and so can parents
opt out if they don't want their
child to to be exposed to
whatever is in that can they
signed off and said we don't
want our child despite yes Mr
chair Senator parents already
have the option to opt out
nothing changes with that.
I guess the bottom line is you
can have two people in a room
and they agree yes is yeah I'm
fine with all this and then
there could be a regret later
have you have you account for
that when when one of them says
no I really didn't say that.
We don't know because no one was
there to witness at so how do
you resolve situations where
that someone might change their
mind and say well I didn't
really say yes so then you've
got a person that's kind of.
In a difficult position because
now there's an accusation that
can't be substantiated to
provide how do you handle that.
Mr chair Senator this bill is
not about punishment after the
fact this bill is about teaching
what the standard is in so Mr
chair have would you teach that
how would you how would you
wouldn't want to try out when
people are these young people
are being educated and someone
asked that question what's the
response based on the education
that you're proposing.
Mr chair Senator I apologize
when someone ask what question
exact well when when Mr chair
Senator when you've got two
young people and they both
consented your teaching that
you're teaching the young people
About this because through this
program what do you say when one
of the kiddos ask you well what
if someone agrees and then
changes her mind later how do
you handle that what's that have
what is the purpose of.
Percent to kids on that topic.
Mister chairman Senator one of
the issues right now is that
because young people aren't
given the information about what
that affirmative enthusiastic
yes is.
That.
They aren't given the
opportunity to imagine whites.
What clearly communicating yes
would look like and.
In my experience in teaching
this that young people are far
more likely to I.
Understands that saying yes in
that moment saying yes
affirmatively is coming from an
empowered place that I think
what you're what you're getting
at is that regret later and that
without affirmative consent
where young people are coerced
into going along with sexual
activity that they don't want to
do that more often than not
where that request comes in for
they say gosh I didn't say
anything but it didn't feel
right and now I feel like this
is really harmful and is this
affirmative consent education
helps them give that
enthusiastic just so Mister
chair and and in Senator you
talk about this is just
education but in the bill it
talks about procedures which
include initial response I the
institutions person is already
in statute.
Mr chair Senator so there are
schools both K. through twelve
and higher ed already have to
follow title nine standards for
investigations and so what this
bill does is add that they that
this universities have trauma
informed responses and that they
hold the standard of affirmative
consent and so the
investigations process are on is
already in federal statutes
so Mister chairman in I don't I
don't think I really objective I
don't know probably need this
because with with our programs
that are already being provided
to the health classes
you're saying that many of those
already include this I'm not
sure why the PED are higher ed
can't maybe through rulemaking
or direction just.
Thank you to you know this
should be part of of what you're
doing I you needed in statute.
Mr chair and senator the problem
right now is some districts get
this education but not all we
don't want this education to be
depending on where you live so
Mister chair how do you know
which ones are not doing this.
Mr chair and senator our
relationships with our programs
are prevention programs across
the state let us know what is
able to be taught in which
districts we have many programs
who are ready and willing and
quite capable of teaching
affirmative consent and other
sexual violence prevention
strategies that are not let into
the school district so Mister
chair and so those programs that
may not be teaching to what
you're suggesting are those
decisions being made by the
local school board that they
have chosen not to to maybe
include the kinds of programs
you're promoting I don't
understand why
Thank to say more about that Mr
chair Senator often it's not
even at the local school board
level it's often at the
individual school level and
sometimes the individual tier
level so I began providing
services in Valencia County many
years ago and it was often
school by school by school that
determines what level of
prevention education we were
able to find in the schools
within the same county and
within the same school district
and so often times those
decisions are being made at a
really individual local school
level and so for us it's about
really equal access to education
that all students in New Mexico
have a baseline of what they're
being taught and what the data
shows us what the evidence shows
us is that when students are
taught affirmative consent prior
to entering into secondary star
post secondary school incidents
of sexual violence to actually
read reduced at college and
university campuses and so right
now my hometown is Alamogordo
the education I got in
Alamogordo was vastly different
than the education my child is
receiving in Albuquerque and so
we just want all of New Mexicos
children Mr chair and senator to
have the standard baseline that
the basic standard that's being
taught all across New Mexico is
one of affirmative consent which
is proven to be a preventative
measure.
Thank you Mr chair I you know I
am.
I don't disagree with with many
of the facts I mean we know of
that
Very sad examples of of both men
and women young men and young
women going through situations
that we wish no one would go
through
I I do think we're going to get
some push back from some
districts and some schools and
some parents and the fact that
parents can opt out of that I
will tell you I'm not sure
you're starting early enough I
know I heard someone say my
fifth grader well I will tell
you for my power in Hobbs I
don't I have participated in
talking to those fifth grade
girls are listening to some of
their concerns and I think we
would all be very amenities at
the fifth grade girls and boys
are aware of and so I mean we
can we can pretend like that's
not being discussed among them
but I will assure you it is and
so I'm a little I'm conflicted
on this are alike local boards
to be able to make these
decisions are locked parents to
be able to make the decision on
when they have that conversation
with their peers.
It does.
but on the other hand
I do think sometimes.
People.
Don't face reality so thank you
that's all I have a list of.
Service the.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks
pope so I I have concerns of
much in line with what Senator a
colonel's talking about but
you're saying this is just
teaching but on page three
starting section the you're
talking about these procedures
that are going to take place
and these procedures.
include investigations.
Is is the way I'm looking at it
Can you help me with that
portion of this and I have a lot
of concerns about due process as
we've looked at some of the big
cases around the country you
have you know what happened to
do with the across team
and you know they were
considered guilty until proven
innocent and that's one of my
concerns if it was just the
teaching might be okay but this
section concerns Mexican help
with the section please.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
that question so this portion of
the bill on page three addresses
higher ed higher ed institutions
are already following title nine
investigations which are which
the due process and
the process for the claimants
and the respondent are already
well laid out in federal statute
this does nothing to change that
what this bill is asking is that
universities are already
following the title nine
standards for investigations
this is asking that universities
in New Mexico at policies that
ensure that those investigations
are trauma informed so that all
parties involved are not tried
by the media we're not releasing
folks names when they're not
supposed to be released all of
those types of things so that
folks have access to healing
services while they're going
through this process but nothing
about the investigation process
as it is RT stands through title
nine is being changed by this.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
I just not sure that the.
Universities have the.
Proper training.
To do that.
So I don't think that there.
There are law enforcement
officers on the universities
have the right training to these
types of investigations.
and we're putting this into law.
In in New Mexico so there.
Should they be referring this to
local law enforcement officers
if it's a complaint of rape.
Mr chair Senator so there's two
different processes currently
under title nine when there is a
sexual assault that has occurred
in it it falls under title nine
under universities purview the
person who is bringing the claim
have the option to participate
in the criminal legal system or
not it does not automatically
mean a report to law enforcement
happens the university under
federal statute title nine has
an obligation to follow the
investigation process regardless
of whether a criminal complaint
is made or not so every college
and university and actually
every K. through twelve school
district is supposed to have a
title nine officer who oversees
these investigations and at our
coalition are legal director
works with coordinating title
nine coordinators all over the
state to make sure that they
have the resources that they
need these are investigations
that are colleges and
universities and R. K. through
twelve schools are already
responsible for providing we're
not adding anything to what they
are already doing other than
ensuring that the process is
trauma informed they have access
to resources and our policies
reflect that.
So I I still have concerns about
the training
I don't think yeah I was on the
Rio Rancho school board I don't
think that the
resource officers have the
training there to do a sexual
assault investigation.
Nor do I really think it's their
place to do a sexual assault
investigation that that's a law
enforcement function so help me
understand why you wouldn't
bring law enforcement Mr chair
Senator I think two different
things if we're talking about a
K. through twelve situation
where we're talking about minors
if there is a sexual assault
reported to a school official
that's most likely going to
trigger a mandatory report right
which is going to then involve
potentially CYFD and law
enforcement that doesn't change
the section of this bill on page
three where we're talking about
policies that affect the
investigation adding the trauma
informed processes that's for
higher ed institutions that
title nine process these are
adults and does not require a
mandatory report to law
enforcement as an adult you and
I have the choice of whether to
report a crime committed against
us to law enforcement or not
that is true for students who
are adults at higher ed
institutions the school though
still has the obligation to
investigate the claim and follow
the title nine process.
Thank you Mr chairman
And so if the school does their
investigation.
And but I don't know their names
I'm sorry miss the introductions
but you were talking about that
this has nothing to do with
punishment so they do their
investigation and they think
that the accusations are worked
I think there are.
Correct.
There's no punishment given.
Mr chair and senator the the
bill does not have to do with
punishment in that it does not
change what title nine already
requires in the investigation
and process so this does not
change or prescribe any kind of
punishment it just prescribed in
the university level that the
investigation itself not the
outcome of the investigation
itself is trauma informed so
we're basically taking the
federal title nine.
Correct me if I'm wrong Mr
chairman but the federal title
nine and putting into state
statute.
Mr chair Senator no we're not
putting th title nine in state
statute what we're doing is
asking that universities who
already follow title nine create
policies to ensure that those
investigations and their
responses want to clean it comes
forward our trauma informed and
that they are following the
standard of affirmative consent.
So and then help me a little bit
Mr Chairman help me understand a
little bit more what this
affirmative consent is so
You.
Is it is it.
You just help me understand that
a little bit I I'm I'm not
completely sure that I
understand we talk about with
the written contract and what
what are we talking about.
Well and the basis Mr chair
Senator I I like to say you know
when we're when we're first
talking to our younger children
and they reach their hand over
for my fries and I'm like you
ask for consent to do to to
touch my food right like there's
age appropriate ways to talk
about this and so what we're
talking about the curriculums
that we are using all over the
state which are several are
really talking about healthy
relationships and open
communication when we talk to
young people all over the state
which over a hundred of them
were on the steps of this
capitol last year asking for
affirmative consent to be taught
in their schools what they tell
us over and over and over again
is that no one is talking with
them about how to have healthy
communication in their personal
relationships and so they're
beginning to explore behaviors
through imho Jeez they're
beginning to explore behaviors
without having the language to
nab a what it is that
that they are already navigating
that they are already beginning
to have conversations about so
the curriculums include lessons
on on how to have conversations
about what healthy conversations
look like about nonviolent
communication how to healthily
express your feelings and and
how to healthily express the
things that you want and the
things that you do not want.
And so Mister chairman so how to
healthily not being pressured
into doing something you don't
want to do basically.
Mr chair Senator yes affirmative
consent we we define it in many
curricula not all curricular
exactly the same
as non coerced as reversible as
continual as honest as
enthusiastic so someone saying
come on come on come on come on
come on and someone says no no
no well if you really Love Me
you would that is not consent
even if the person at that
moment says okay fine so the
reality is is young people are
already having these
conversations with that without
us and our choice now is whether
or not we get to be part of the
conversation and framing it and
giving them context for how to
do those how to have those
conversations and healthy with.
Thank you Mr percent thank you
other questions.
I have a question or two more of
a COVID.
Need seo the public school
insurance group some of the most
expensive claims they have are
around this area certainly staff
student is always wrong but
there are also numerous claims
where the districts did not
take.
Preemptive action to ensure that
students are being taught or
told or given policies or for
looking the other way is there
any data research as to is does
this help schools in their
insurance claim concerns or
reducing rates.
At Mr chair thank you for that
question I don't have that data
I haven't looked specifically at
that data but what this bill
also allows is for there to be
training right and so when
there's a resource issue it
allows for there to be training
of school officials and we know
working at on prevention from
the community level and and the
policy level that many
institutions schools churches
many institutions when they have
policies in place which this
bill requires when they have
policies and rate place that put
protective factors in preventing
sexual violence in place that
often does assist in their
insurance premiums.
Thank you I remember several
years ago it was more aware
there then Senator lab hi dollar
lawsuits about sexual activity
that it occurred at schools that
people should have known or look
the other way type of things
that was required for all school
early school personnel to go
through some training I would
think as this moves through with
training that this would would
look favorably upon school
districts that do this because
even in elementary when the
teachers are informed and aware
and as you indicated you start
with us before you touch my
fries are just take one that is
the beginning of training of
only yes means yes you know that
you have to ask permission to
invade other people's boundaries
and space up and so those kinds
of things help prevent the
lawsuits that are very high
dollar against districts that
keep but our insurance rates
very high and so I would think
putting in policies of this sort
would be very helpful I've often
told the story I used to teach
AP psychology in one day we have
a whole discussion about this I
show the video and had the wrong
one on the momentarily quickly
was getting
is to turn it off to put the war
school appropriate video on the
didn't have the language the
students so they all giggled and
laughed because they use that
language all the time the
teachers of schools to do that
but many of the students were
very pleased that we were
talking about it open
when I went on talked about how
alcohol is the weapon of choice
of sexual predators now and the
responsibility of both the the
males and females to protect
each other in those situations
and to be able be aware of of
the situations and what's going
on but also about affirmative
consent and the the students I
appreciate it because there as
adults were somehow afraid to
talk about sexuality as being
taboo which makes it almost more
exciting or interesting for the
kids and the more we can to.
Talk about it straight up the
better I think all of society
is.
Certainly any comments if not I
think we're ready for a motion
from the committee help semi
Estes thank you senator thank
you senator thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator folk
gently all the all the work that
you do
so real quick just up so section
one and section two is roughly
the same Webster street section
one section two section one is
policies addressing affirmative
consent section two is
additional department duties.
Regarding sexual assault.
Do they track each other or or
just or not not a hundred
percent.
Mr chair Senator a section to
addresses so the first section
is addressing higher ed
institutions section two at line
fifteen or thirteen isn't this
addressing K. to twelfth
understood and then thank you Mr
Senator pope the Senate of
course the crux of the bill for
young people is.
Is up.
Putting in statute more specific
requirements.
for health education on page
twenty one.
Mr chair Senator it is requiring
that in the one credit of health
Education that's already being
taught that the standard on on
when they're doing the sexual
health unit the standard that is
taught is one of affirmative
consent and so right now school
districts all over schools all
over the state teaching
different things and so we're
trying to create a foundation
and a bass line that the
standard at a minimum B. one of
affirmative consent that Mr
Chairman generally that baseline
was determined by home and and
how did how was it derives is
this the like cutting edge.
Regular on this topic or.
Yes Mr chair Senator it was
based on several things one that
the evidence in the research
that shows that affirmative
consent is a preventative
measure it is also one of the
priorities of survivors of all
ages what survivors have put in
there pass their agenda is is
that affirmative consent to be
taught and as they feel like it
would have created safer
environments for them and I
don't know if you have anything
that thank you lastly Mr
chairman generating center put
the
You know you gotta get the
incentives right you know and so
on page three there's some great
incentives that
You know those who participate
as a complainant or or a witness
will not be subject to
disciplinary sanctions provide
Lucien of the school's student
conduct policy in other words I
was drunk I was doing this I was
doing that I'm not testifying
I'm not participating so you
want folks to come forward so
you're not you're not
sanctioning these violations but
you're dealing with the reality
of of those situations so that
folks come for the
And then also up.
On that same page on on line I.
You know provides the
appropriate protections for the
privacy of the individuals
involved the it privacy is key
and it's.
And it's should be the
determination of the
complainant.
whether it's private or not not
the media or for those who want
to find out about stuff I think
this body lost lost focus on a
similar allegation were the
media wasn't smart enough to do
things to in the the allegations
in the complaint.
And the allegations on the
internet and kind of confuse the
readers as well
so that is some good good policy
there thank you Mr.
Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chairman thank you so tell me
who will be responsible for
follow up if this ship has
become law whose responsibility
is it to check on school
districts to see where they are
on this.
Mr chair Senator be the
responsibility of higher ed and
PED so thank you Mr chair I
think that's really important to
clarify because remember we did
a really good bill about feeding
kiddos breakfast then all of a
sudden we had people from
Albuquerque come to Hobson.
Thank sure that we were doing it
correctly and they weren't part
of the PED and that really
concerns me so as long as it's
within the department I'm I
think that that's appropriate
and I just think we need to be
really careful about those
outside of that the wording
would would have any right to
come in and say what we're not
doing it correctly so thank you.
Thank you other questions if not
motion from the committee.
Motion for two passed second by
Senator Kernan if you'll call
the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan center Maestas yes
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto yes.
Senator pope yes Senator yes.
You have to pass.
Representative Thompson.
Of and credit.
That that just sort of the reps
here but please make sure that
the house knows that the Senate
is hearing house built and so
when our bills get over there
that that.
They not hold up any of our
bills as they're coming through.
Mmhm built in there well we
broke in the eyes of so we're
ready for for them to start
hearing Senate bills.
Next up in Center pope if you I
think you're up Senate bill one
fifty one.
We have a committee seven yes
yes Mr chair.
Thank you.
Ready for me to begin Mr chair
percent yes please whenever
you're ready and out and I think
we need to have somebody who
the.
Do not pass well that that
formal language
do not so one fifty one if you
pass on the results to percent
over two point one four
discussion purposes thank you
senator.
Point of order before we.
We need to explain to our new
senator that the dress code in
the Senate is to wear a tie.
Everywhere.
Maury.
The weekends were allowed to
wear jeans but.
I thought it was three piece I
thought it was three pieces but
it's.
What you're trying to up the
standard Senator.
What modeling is one of the best
ways of a.
Of teaching.
Please go ahead Senator thank
you Mr chairman I'd like to
introduce a few of my experts
are joining me I have the GPS A.
president from UNM Sheikh Ahmad
is joining me as well and also
as a a Taurus from GPS say who
is the lobbying chair I believe
they worked with us and me on
this bill and I will be logging
in to make a few short comments
after the intro.
Senate bill one fifty one that
the committee substitute of
course up and what this bill
does is it it amended graduate
scholarship act recipients
most of the the earned a
bachelor's degree for New Mexico
state of New Mexico State
University with a GPA of three
point OO.
Or hold to pay teaching research
support position recipients must
at least enroll a six credit
hours they must maintain a three
point oh GPA.
candidates for doctor medicine
doctors doctor or nurse and
agree other than a practice.
The other then a doctor of
nursing practice degree do not
qualify for this scholarship.
I can only be awarded for four
semesters and the amount of the
scholarship is no more than one
hundred percent of the cost of
tuition fees.
Removing the previous cap of
seventy two hundred.
The changes in the substitute.
We are requiring students to
work at that if that would
require students to work after
graduation extend for tuition
forgiveness is termed a loan for
service by ATV and ATV reports
that the past Luna service
programs have had it comes
really concerning track record
so what we decided to do is
we've actually change that and
and taken that out in the
substitute.
And we believe that graduate
students already making
significant contributions to the
institutions as grad students
some of them are teaching some
of them already done research
assistantships.
And
Really the reason for this bill
is really just to support our
grad students here in the state
we hear so much about.
positions and jobs here in our
state that we don't have the
workforce or we don't have the
folks with the education field
these positions and just like
the opportunity scholarship we
want to make sure that folks are
going into debt and have the
opportunity to get that higher
education for those higher
paying jobs that help our
economy.
with that I will pass it over to
the G. P. S. A. president to say
a few words.
Thank you senator pope thank you
and good morning chairman sells
numbers of the committee this is
an honor to be able to present
this bill today and on behalf of
the fifty five hundred graduate
and professional students at the
university of New Mexico thank
you for everything you do for
the state.
So with that I'll try to share
with you a few highlights of the
bill first of all it will
simplify the existing bill
creating a strong support for
this support system for graduate
education in the state of New
Mexico.
Prevent brain training and
strengthening their current
workforce of the state of New
Mexico.
The bill has the potential to
change the landscape of higher
education in the state of New
Mexico.
The amendment supports all
discipline with with that with
the exception of J. D. D. M. P.
and M. D..
In order to reap all the
advantage up and out of the
advantages of the opportunity a
lottery scholarship we feel that
there is a need to create a
robust support system for
graduate students in our state
this will not only ease the
financial burden but also
facilitate critical research and
exceptional learning
environment.
And according to the U. N. M. so
basic needs survey nearly
seventy two percent of the
students who are non white
experiences food insecurity and
sixty one percent and
experiences shelter and security
so we're trying to address this
problem through tuition support
so that they have additional
funds to address some of the
other needs while you're
attending graduate school so
with that look like to introduce
our political director I said
our insurance some more data
thank you.
Good morning chairman sold
members of the committee it is
an honor and a privilege to be
here today I'm talking at the
New Mexico state legislature I
was here last year with the
college Democrats with my group
and chairman sold actually was
able to host us so we really
appreciated that and it was such
a amazing experience and to be
here.
And being able to be here to
advocate for a bill to help of
graduate students is really some
of them honored and privileged
to be part of is born raise here
in Albuquerque while entire life
the possibility of me going to
graduate school wasn't in my
cards my mother was a graduate
student from highlands
university here and at Rio
Rancho Center Branson District
and you know and she told me
that anyway to further education
is something that could benefit
my future and I understand that
and I'm here for any questions
phone for the committee if they
have any we've been working
really hard and diligently to
get this some bill as far as
possible so and again thank you
for your time.
Mr chair just like to close by
saying this caller ship is not
just for you on them this would
be for all of the higher
education institutions
throughout the state of New
Mexicans that would be pursuing
a graduate degree.
Thank you of I want to the
committee the audience those in
support of the races.
Anyone in opposition.
You both like to come in and
come to the middle with the
microphone you have to hold the
button down.
That we've got one on the line
for that as well Mr chair
members the committee my name is
Mike pulley on the chief
government relations officer for
U. N. M. I want to thank the
sponsor and GPS safer working on
this bill beginning for the
session over the interim working
with other stakeholders and we
fully support their efforts
thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee claim every with
New Mexico State University we
also want to thank senator pope
and the students for their
efforts on this bill
we I I do want to point out that
we just saw the committee
substitute today so I I do need
to have that reviewed but we are
certainly in support of
everything that the the students
and Center pope or attempted to
accomplish
we think that any is they
spelled out any effort to expand
the the number of graduate
students in the state and and
provide them with supports full
as mentioned prevent brain brain
drain and keep students and
economic development here in the
state so we thank you thanks
again Center put thank you
Clayton and online we've got Dan
Williams.
Hi good morning Mr chairman and
committee members yes my name is
Dan Williams I'm a retired
Daniel last engineer and a
fellow of the society of women
engineers I want to speak in
favor of SB one fifty one during
my career at the lab I recruited
and hired many students with
master's degrees in technical
fields especially mechanical
electrical and computer science
it was a challenge to provide
enough MFA candidates in those
degree fields were eligible for
national security work and there
were very few from New Mexico
School Furthermore I observed
that many of the recruits from
other regions of the United
States tended to leave New
Mexico after a few years return
to areas where they grew up
grant family leaving gaps in the
workforce committee to recruit
all over again I spoke to many
engineering undergraduate
recruiting event urging them to
continue their engineering
studies through the masters
level most just couldn't justify
waiting another year to to start
earning money because they
didn't have financial support to
obtain an MS degree Senator pope
Bill will make that decision
easier for all New Mexico
students who want to pursue a
graduate degree including much
needed stem disciplines critical
the full five point at our
national laboratories in related
industries the STTC heard
directly from the directors of
both national level after
November about the difficulty in
recruiting retaining candidates
across all job I ation despite
very attractive wages this bill
will help generate more New
Mexican graduates who want to
stay in New Mexico and make them
better prepared for the
workforce needed right here in
New Mexico thank you thank you.
Anything else for we go to
questions from the committee
senator I I did mention before
so we are asking for a five
million dollars appropriation
but at the same time there is
already in the budget for the
current scholarship fund the act
for four hundred eighty eight
thousand that is currently in
the budget so just wanted to
clarify that thank you so
questions from the committee.
So the bill.
Destry I got a master's degree
and I was working on a
assistantship for I taught
classes and graded papers swept
floors were they had to do but
what is different from ancient
history to now that we need this
bill that we didn't need it back
a couple years ago when I was in
grad school Mr chair Senator I
I'd like to allow at the current
grad students on one right now
but a my G. I. bills cover money
right now so I think they build
us a question thank you chairman
souls and also thank you Senator
Neville for the question so
right now the way the bill is
structured it is the last line
of defense for tuition and fees
and will cover up to a hundred
percent but if you have an
assistantship already that
covers your tuition and fees he
will not be considered for the
scholarship Mr chairman and the
expert.
This is the you will work as an
assistant ship on on the system
sometimes that effect
agrees to serve eligible
institution during the academic
year in an internship persistent
should by working what's
different coming thank you for
the question again check
chairman souls in the
Centerville so what we're trying
to address here if we look at
and M. S. two specifically more
than fifty percent of the
classes are taught by teachers
assistants were also graduate
students and often times they're
not covered they're they're not
offered any tuition support so
this will try to address you
know that Greg really Crisis
noted we're experiencing
throughout their graduation
population in the state because
some assistantships cover
tuition some assistantships
don't so there I think that
there are different ways that's
you know institutions could
actually come up with that
structure but then again we want
to have something robust so that
if in any case it is not covered
they at least have some form of
support to the state of New
Mexico Mr chair Senator I I
think the staff of size I think
that's your question is what
we're hearing from some of the
students that have teaching
assistants are sister ships
the support they are getting is
not covering the tuition so I
think that that's maybe a change
and there isn't a standard what
happens that you want and what
happens and amendment issue
we're hearing in NMAA you folks
are not they it's it's very
minimal support that they're
getting in those positions I
honestly don't remember my
tuition was very expensive back
then but
Honestly don't remember if they
covered my tuition or not but I
got a three thousand dollar
paycheck or something if you
would very much for the they pay
the rent that's one thing that's
all Mr.
Thank you kind of along those
same lines of the if anyone else
has questions but I also was on
a I think they were called State
General assistantships somewhere
in that they do get paid four
hundred dollars a month and did
not cover tuition at the time
but also tuition at the time was
about four hundred dollars or
something instead of the
thousands that we're looking at
now we're vessels are pretty
close.
Senator Brandt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
will discuss when you guys went
to graduate school
first I want to say and which I
appreciate these two young men
coming to see me in my office
Overall I support the idea.
I I thought there was a
condition of service and hearing
on it did that get removed are
my just messing it Mr chair
Senator Brandt it did in the
substitute
and I will what about that sure
thank you for the question Mr
chair and senator brown so what
happened is you know we reached
out to our peer institutions and
our constituents throughout the
state and it seems like you know
there is concern even with ATD
as far as how this will be
administered in terms of you
know how the contract is drawn
out because oftentimes it's
dependent on the department
itself at the at different
institutions and we just felt
like it is constraining not only
ATD but departments as well when
we're doing it and therefore we
came up with an alternate way to
provide or to give back while
they're in the program in form
of critical research
assistantship and teaching and I
I agree with you that that's why
there was an element you know
that we talked about however you
know after talking to our
constituency since we reached
out to you know New Mexico state
highlands university New Mexico
tech it seems like you know it's
actually something that's that
may have the potential to hold
people back so we kind of wanted
to make it a little more
flexible for all graduate
students and Mr Chairman
gentleman we talked a little bit
about any kind of workforce
needs assessment that's not in
here correct.
Yes chairman souls in our center
back yet so we haven't been able
to really do a comprehensive a
workforce and now this is but
then again just based on the
general idea I think also there
was a element in the public
comment the that there's
increased need and like science
mathematics engineering and this
also like nursing and teaching
so those are the general areas I
think you know we will try to
focus on through this bill Mr
chairman
Sir appreciate that but you
actually excluded nursing it's
one of the ones you can't get
yes etcetera chairman Sozin's
Center brand the degrees that be
excluded it's the doctor of
nursing practice doctor of
medicine and J. D. because they
have a different robust support
system to institutions in the
state and that's the reason but
we did not exclude master of
science in nursing so we can
still support nurses you know
with this bill I appreciate that
and we should never find any
support from the state for for
jurisprudence we have plenty of
lawyers there is no need to to
encourage more turns the lawyers
with with any and if it works
yes actually.
Present company excluded I'm
sure center.
Plants this.
and I do appreciate for that tie
on thank you very much
So and I know sometimes there's
get that shift from the house
the Senate.
So the the other
concern I have and it's.
Is an Ms probably just a
philosophical difference between
us right is the affirmative
action that's in the bill of the
bottom of page two
I actually have no problem with
the greatest financial need.
and that probably will encompass
what you're trying to couples in
in the next.
Lines.
but I have a real problem and
actually we're gonna have a
Supreme Court ruling in June
most likely
that's gonna dress this directly
and so I I just I think that I
could support the bill if we
remove that section not the
section but you know the
affirmative action because I
think the financial needs takes
care of that because from what
you know you guys have told me
what we've talked about is you
know those in minority classes
usually are the ones with the
greatest financial needs but I
will tell you to someone who who
grew up in abject poverty I can
go to college because I can
afford period so in the military
so it had nothing to do with
race it had to do with the fact
that I could afford it
financially
and so I I just don't believe in
affirmative action I don't think
that it's something that we
should be doing in our
universities
and I think that probably in
June that's going to be affirmed
by the Supreme Court.
and the the issue then becomes
if the Supreme Court comes back
in June rules that affirmative
actions unconstitutional this
entire bill becomes law
unconstitutional and so either
you take that out are you need
to put a severability clause in
in this bill one of the to just
protect the bill but with I
think you're getting to the need
just with the financial need and
absolutely have I think that's
the right direction to go.
So what do you think about that.
Thank you chairman children also
thank you Senator brand for that
feedback we really appreciate it
and if you say yes we're also
willing to make that change so
that would be considered a
friendly amendment.
Senator pope I just say
something sure
someone and so
Chairman souls and Senator
Brandt one of the things why we
included that part into the bill
itself was because of the amount
of graduate students who are not
that are not unlike a minority
class forty seven percent
according to our research to our
university was at a racially or
ethnic minority students so what
we're trying to do is encourage
ethnics and minority students
like myself to actually have
opportunity to go to graduate
school we feel light with the
implementation of the
opportunity scholarship this
would be a great segue into
encouraging those first time
college students to pursue that
masters degree and also have
that that commitment to service
type service while other
graduates go other yeah so
essentially that.
And and Mister chairman Senator
Brandt I know we probably
philosophically disagree on this
issue and I think separate from
what happens with the Supreme
Court if that happens there's
gonna be a bunch of things that
we're gonna have to look at in
the state besides this bill I I
think we're taught we talk about
equity talk about a lot of
issues in the state and of
course many of us
dealt with poverty and what
we've done we have a similar
story where we joined the
military and got are are we got
ourselves out of that everyone
doesn't have that opportunity
though physically or they can't
serve that's just one way to get
out so for me I I would like to
leave that in there because when
we look at the numbers and our
state.
And we look at marginalized
communities and access to
education I still think that is
a problem and so I would push to
keep that in their
understanding that what happens
in the supreme court's gonna
happen and it's it's gonna be
more than what's going to happen
in this bill that we're gonna
have to deal with in the state.
And I appreciate that and and
philosophically I won't bill
supported because of that
I just I think that's wrong I
think that you pick up all those
with the with the minority
classes with the financial needs
you know so so basically for me
you know if if I'm in abject
poverty and someone else that is
rich but they happen to be a
minority minority class and they
would get scholarship and I
wouldn't and that's my struggle
we want to actually help people
who have the financial means
that's that's who were trying to
help by giving state money tax
dollars to help people get
through graduate school is to
help those with the financial
needs
not the priority being what
whatever race so I can't support
with that thank you well I would
just say Mr present a rant if
that's the case and if it's a
minority student that is wealthy
they would qualify for this
anyway and would have been the
so I don't see the conflict
there.
Mr Chairman center I don't think
that's what this says.
I think it it it has financial
need and students from groups
underrepresented in graduate
education so
It's it's it's it's typical
affirmative action language so
which would say again that.
If.
I'm white was just let's be
honest
and I'm for.
the scholarships going to go to
someone who may be more fluent
than I am.
because this isn't ranking at
this isn't saying that the
greatest financial need
considered first and then then
you would that would be a
different story
but I think you're actually
encompassing who you want to
encompass and you're getting
those under represented
communities in there because
they traditionally have the
greatest financial need so I I
just don't think it's necessary
thank you.
So Mister.
I'd like if I can spawn Mr chair
Once again the scholarship is
only going to cover the need
Students are gonna have to fill
up their fast.
So if you're wealthy students.
Minority students you're not
gonna you're not gonna qualify
for this and so I understand
your concerns but I I don't
believe that's what's going to
happen in this region
disagreements on some.
Thank you Mr chairman and as as
I'm reading through that I have
to agree with with the Senator
Brandt that
that does kind of.
Make it difficult for me and I I
I'm just wondering
The end on page two one twenty
two.
If you change it to or then.
That discounts the need for
financial help so I don't know
how you can fix it.
To a to make sure that all
students that have a financial
need are considered for this.
Because that's really what it
should say I mean when we do the
opportunity scholarship and all
the other scholarships we don't.
They don't select just one
particular group.
Mr chair Senator Kernan on that
I agree I think the or.
Is that what does that just open
it up to the the I.
If I could I think the or makes
it worse for what you have I
think it does to the front here
and keeps it open for people
with financial need the or says
CEO wealthy minority students
can get this regardless without
any financial need it worse but
that's actually how I read it.
The and a bit right like.
So so Mister.
Chair I mean.
Let's just say students that
have the greatest financial need
in that includes everybody ins
maybe.
I think you'll find that most of
the students that are in
greatest financial need probably
are the under Representative and
so I think you're you're
complicating that I mean if if
people have a need
I don't think it should matter
from which group I come from.
Senator first can't get any
comment Senator Pinto is that
alright Senator Kernan yeah okay
thank you for looking at the
floor I did want to cut you off
the.
Yes and I think a long those
lines to because we are in a day
and age to in which
categorizing certain even from
the sexual orientation down to
we have trans gender we have all
these other
People in our area that wish to
be identified differently and
even for my area to you know to
say minority the way you can be
identified as Navajo but yet
you know what we have you know
half we have other ethnicities
mixed in with the Navajo so it's
a big melting pot now so I think
there is relevant see on what's
being brought up here as far as
trying to target the group in
the manner of labeling them it
it's a tough thing because there
are some groups that are
underrepresented but why are the
higher education institutions
not.
Trying to on their own
Help increase the diversity of
the institution instead of
having us to us to have to do it
it that's truly what they
believe thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Kernan and senator.
If if I might I think what's
being proposed is essentially
striking one twenty two and in
the financial need with the
period.
Deals with the issues that I'm
hearing but yeah we did your
bill Senator in your experts Mr
chair kind of can for four
minutes of course.
Mr chair.
So we would be would be friendly
to and at greatest financial
need and straight line twenty
two line twenty two and the
first word of twenty three.
Correct.
That and that would be a
friendly amendment of you from.
Thank you Mr chairman that we've
been seconded any other
discussion on the amendment.
You'll call the roll on the
amendment.
Senator Brandt thank yes Sir
thank you thank you.
Do you think you'll Cephas
Senator.
Yes Senator Kernan.
Center my Estes.
Yes moved to explain.
Third of L. yes Senator Pinto
yes Senator pope yes Senator
full yes.
So if you are muted.
because it's for the Mr chairman
of thank you thank appreciate
the the compromise.
Thank you.
And where were we center Kernan
okay Senator Pinto or anyone
other questions.
I have.
Yeah I have one question or
world quick fix on that same
page and there were questions up
under pay line seven through
nine.
As the the nursing ones and this
is a weird thing and that sort
of a double negative because
you're defining graduate
professional field and then
these are the ones that don't
fit in it but then the nursing
degree would be ones that don't
and I think if we change online
eight after nursing degree and
make it plural degrees that it
makes it clear that nursing
degrees are still in but doctor
of nursing practice is out.
That's convoluted it's a little
weird language does that make
sense.
I think it makes it clear
because these are ones that are
excluded from the definition.
But you don't want to exclude
nursing degrees.
And and that came from your
analyst as they were trying to
to make that.
Language work as kind of a
double negative all.
Yeah send that over and that's
very.
Maybe she's not she here is like
wait wait maybe that doesn't fix
it.
So.
We're trying to exclude all
nursing because they have a
right forces so so in our should
allow the trial.
Okay.
Because Mr chair it's just that
one degree that we don't want to
exclude the the other nursing
degrees are covered by other
programs and so that's why we're
doing that that that we don't
think they're important but.
So it doesn't get solved by
putting an S. on their minds
explanation was wrong.
So.
And so we're the work by taking
out nurse degree other.
Those four words if you remove
them it would read and a doctor
of nursing practice.
Okay because of services or
center Brandt the doctor of
nursing practice is actually one
that we want to cover it's all
the other nursing degrees that
we don't so I don't know how the
language.
Now.
Because that battered sentries
other than the doctor and so
putting the S. on does fix the
problem that.
I believe so.
So that would be friendly yes
and that fixes it okay I would
make a motion that we add an S.
to degree on I think this.
And that's from the strip.
Moved and seconded discussion on
that particular.
We need to have a voter.
Except that is the technical
fix.
We'll put an S. on the end of
the three etcetera Mestis thank
you Mr chairman center pulled
down increases the leadership
that would be a state and U. N.
M. the up this is peculiar to me
Mr chairman and on page one.
That the word agree that the
word three quarters is in
statute and we're going from
three quarters to.
To two semesters.
As I went to college with that
was in on a quarter system it's
awesome system so I had a bill
drafted to move you and the
entire state to quarter systems
but since you guys are going the
other direction I won't do that.
But also I just want to make the
point of the universities are on
semesters here and are going on
which is why taking that out.
Yeah and then but just a quick
comment the the you know we did
the lottery scholarship back in
the day we did the opportunity
scholarship but the the most
bang for the Buck is the the
graduate degrees you know to the
graduate degrees and to keep New
Mexicans want to get advanced
degrees but also keep those
events Reese here in the state
that that leads to greater
economic growth per tax dollar
than than those others and I
think we made it in on that on
that point we may brief we may
have reached a point in our
state where we no longer need
the lottery scholarship we no
longer need to self scratchers
to ladies to fund higher
education so hopefully that
conversation continues but thank
you gentlemen thank you Mr
chairman center for.
Thank you other questions.
My last question is the five
million dollars resides in
higher ed how does that get
moved out to the universities is
that based on the number of
students that they have is that
a sufficient amount is that in
the budget somewhere.
Mr chair all answer to those
questions so that would be in
the budgets and HEDT under the
Gulf graduate scholarships Act
is it already there Mr chair it
is not there's only in the
budget right now for four to
eighty eight thousand so part of
this is the appropriation to get
up to five million.
And I'll let is that sufficient
for the number of graduate
students who are who are in need
Mr chair it is not but I will
let him thank you Mr Mr chair
for that question and it is not
because of if we look at to see
you and them the number of
graduate and professional
student body is fifty five
hundred I think it NMAA to its
nearly thirty eight hundred and
and I'm state is around four
hundred and eighty eight so and
the the way we're trying to I
guess kind of like make this
list short is to the New Mexico
state residency so hopefully
that will cut down the number of
students eligible for this
however we don't feel that five
million dollar is enough but it
is a start and I think it is
about time that we consider
investing and graduate degrees
as Senator Maestas mention thank
you if that's not sufficient or
enough who decides who gets it
and who doesn't is that is that
allocated based on a percent of
the graduate students at each
university the first ones to
apply I mean it is a lottery
system first wants to apply to
get it out of how is it
distributed.
German cels from flow from our
understanding that this is gonna
be identical to the New Mexico
lottery scholarship where the
management disbursement will be
done by the higher education
department and with in tandem
with the school's financial aid
department as well.
So the.
Higher ed department will inform
New Mexico state for instance
the students are supported
through this program and
financial aid and everybody's
happy and.
Yes yes yes to Mr okay.
Claims going no that's not.
Clayton.
Mr chair my understanding in the
I'm sorry that higher education
department isn't here but I
believe what sort of like the
opportunity scholarship we would
I have sort of an understanding
of a an amount of money that we
have to dispersed to our
students and like the
opportunity they would have to
go through an application
process and receive this through
that application process I'm not
a hundred percent sure I do wish
they were here I want to speak
on their behalf but that's my
understanding currently and the
are alternative ideas and how
that could be done by perhaps
proportionately distributing to
the universities and allowing
the universities to decide a
system and and who they'd want
to target with their proportion
of the money so that's my
current understanding but the
manager that higher it's going
to have the staffing to manage a
scholarship program applications
and all of that and then telling
the university so.
The idea that makes a little
more sense but that is thank you
chairman shows for that feedback
and that is a valid concern and
I think you know to some extent
it would be up to the
institutions and we could go up
talk about some of those in the
ruling as well as you know when
we get at the opportunity to
work on this with a to do and
state we have we totally
understand that they may not
have the staffing to administer
the scholarship of of this kind.
Thank you and and I suspect that
can be done through rural at
higher ed but it makes more
sense that the university's
indicate which students and then
go to higher ed yet reimbursed
for that funding of the students
that they're doing and I see
that the U. N. M. nodding his
head in agreement that that's
more likely what's going on with
it so.
Senator just to forewarn you
your appropriation on section
six on the back page will if
it's not in the house to which
is coming over next year to that
will be struck in finance.
I mean just just so you know
because there's no spare money
is I understand it's Senator
moon yo's stated that on the
floor yesterday and
What this will do is we'll set
up a program and then you'll
have to come back next year and
provide the five eight just FYI.
Thank you Mr Representative.
Other questions did not motion
to press motion for a new passed
by Senator Neville thank you bye
Senator Brandt.
You'll call the roll please.
Senator Brandt yes ma'am Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan yes
center Maestas yes Senator Nobel
yes Senator Pinto yes Senator
pope yes Senator so yes.
Do pass and committee I think we
we made it better I think it's
we we've got a couple of things
make it a little bit clearer in
some other understanding so
thank you and appreciate you
chairman working with us really.
Time.
Thank you so hoping you'll come
in chair and I'm gonna be
putting on the bill or Senator
Stewart Mexico tuck Water
leaders workshop.
This.
It.
We're now on Senate bill three
twenty nine and Senator sold the
of the floor thank you I'm
putting this on for the Senate
pro tem Mimi Stewart this is a
straight appropriation bill for
two hundred thousand dollars to
New Mexico tech to put on the
water Conference they've done
this in the past
It's been very successful this
is.
Expected to be a no wreck on to
finance committee I'm done.
All right anyone in the audience
in support of this bill.
Anyone opposed.
Do we have anyone online we do
not Mr I move no Representative.
All right to have a second have
a second from Senator Pinto.
if you could contact us.
Senator Representative just a
really quick question Senator Mr
Chairman
how's it funded now and is that
funding going away.
Senator I don't know I think it
was funded out of New Mexico
tech for the two hundred
thousand I don't know that
whether it's in their budget as
it is and I don't know Carmen
you have.
I know they've done it in the
past and they're looking for who
have more stable funding through
the legislature and maybe it was
through the Four Thornburg
foundation I just don't know if
the funding is going where I
don't know.
And
did you did you give any of your
junior money into this I'm just.
Mr chair and senator I could try
and channel center stored but I
don't think she put our junior
money Torrez.
Senator Hickey.
Excuse me thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator sells are
bringing this forward this last
the end of November earlier was
early December New Mexico tech
did put on a
basically half day day half day
course in Sapporo a number of us
legislators attended I have to
say it was one of the best rapid
courses in something I knew
absolutely nothing about the way
they put it together in ten
minutes aliquots mated
digestible as well as the field
trips that made it real and so
you can put your mind to the
concept
again I have to say of all and
I've taken gazillion courses in
my
post graduate career this is one
of the best that I've done and I
hope that we passes so that
others will have the opportunity
in the future to learn about one
of the most critical crucial
issues facing our state but
absolute kudos to them for what
they did and that this will
allow them to do more I think
that it has great merit thank
you.
Thank you any other comments
questions all right we have a.
No rec center Pinto second if
you could call the roll more.
Senator Brandt.
That.
Senator Hickey.
yes Senator Kernan yes Senator
my S. yes.
Well yes Senator pandemic yeah
Senator pope yes in the back to
Senator Brandt no.
And then Senator yes.
That that the.
You have a
Seven you have an overactive to
visit a do pass on a no record
just in our system no wrecks and
wreck.
All right.
Thank you that is what we would
do that.
That is distracting with
beautiful view out the window of
the.
Just for three years no it is
going to yes No never exposed to
be ending here soon so but
getting cold that I agrees to
the.
Okay Center pope in misuse them
plus center three forty seven.
Also a at appropriations bill
but a little more content to it
than just the.
Straight one pager.
Thank you Mr chair just want to
check on then we might have a
doctors told and from NMSU
online I might give her an
opportunity to say a few words
and answer some questions as
well instead I want to remind
you that we are closed down at
ten forty five so you only have
about fifteen minutes to present
okay thank you.
It's making a real stressful.
Mr chairman committee members
Senate bill three forty seven
we want to establish a stem plus
center of excellence for
teaching and learning at New
Mexico State University now this
is a pilot program and it's
something that we want to extend
to all of our higher education
universities and we're asking
for five million dollars
appropriation for this this is
something that we've talked
about in LA Essie.
the discussions with transfer V.
so a lot of the great work that
they've done in the past and
school district
so what we want to accomplish is
we want to.
Have some of the best practices
and stem learning statewide the
specific emphasis on improving
opportunities for low income
students native American
students and English learners
and students with disabilities
want to align and expand it
expand our stem education
opportunities with the needs of
the workforce and promote
economic development.
One study promote stem in the
relationship between education
career options of social
mobility I want to collect and
maintain data on stem programs
and activities in New Mexico to
determine their success an
important educational plumbing
needs in the future.
I also want to recognize
a person that made a comment
earlier Janet Williams in my
district who is retired from
Sandia laboratories has been a
big advocate for this this is
something that we were looking
into and during the
presentations and LFC the
presentation from professor B.
so we decided to go in this
direction because it meant a lot
of the needs of.
That we saw it here in the state
and we felt that having this
type of program statewide would
be very helpful to the students
of New Mexico but also our
workforce with that I'd like to
also introduce claim Abbey to
say a few words and if doctor
Solman is online on soon I want
to give her some time so first
I'd like to allow the state
Senate Dr Sullivan is one of
your experts not just public
comment is that correct should
be an expert this and also Mr
chair we do have Dr Booker time
as from New Mexico State
University is an expert on line
also and I would like to
highlight her in particular
because of her affiliation with
collaboration we did with kids
guessing Independent School
District that specifically
demonstrated the effectiveness
of a collaboration between New
Mexico State University and the
school district and and
enhancing stem programs and
improving in particular math
scores within that district
dramatically and I don't want to
be redundant but I will point
out that this is very much
I would call a three pronged it
is addressing K. through twelve
education a professional
development for teachers and the
workforce economic development
so if I may plan to.
Dr Solomon our doctor will get
them is if if you have any
specific questions just in the
interest of being brief.
Mr chair and I don't know if
she's online Janet Williams is
also one of my experts and if I
can allow for two minutes to
make a statement.
There is there your experts of
call on him as you need.
miss Williams if you like to
make a comment for two minutes.
Yes thank you very much Senator
appreciate it very much
I had intended this statement to
be after doctor sold and
statement because I think she's
covering most of the points
about the bill but I'll have a
go Mr chair committee members of
my name is Jen Williams you've
heard earlier in retired lab to
engineer and a fellow of the
society madam years speaking in
support of SB three forty seven
of the center of excellence and
simplicity to learning is a
concept that I've been working
on for several years actually
that I was inspired by providing
women junior colleague who told
me about the centralized in
program the other states with
the goal of improving math and
science outcomes and
transforming math and science
education to prepare our
students for technological
future but involved in bringing
it forward through Senator pope
to I'm very grateful for his
encouragement and sponsorship
New Mexico needs a centralized
repository for all things damn
many of the reasons this bill
should be supported will be
covered by doctors comment but I
wanted to focus on remarks
delivered by senator Heinrich to
the joint session the
legislature money that actually
touched on several points
relevant to this bill he said
from the New Mexico roundhouse
United States capitol our north
star must be the future of New
Mexico that we are building for
our children this bill is future
focused on better outcomes for
children he said I want this
rising generation of New
Mexicans to receive an education
they give them a fair shot at
the jobs of tomorrow this bill
aims for education to help
prepare our kids for higher the
stem job.
Up what you do with these
resources during the legislative
session will be measured over
the long like kind of a child
not election cycle this means
investing in one time money and
things that will last this bill
is a one time strategic
investment to transform stem
education over the long term and
finally we need to align our
public schools or community
colleges or universities with
growth industries like
healthcare biosciences are
facing clean energy New Mexico's
major tech employers already
have a major source of
candidates to fill high paying
jobs at the national labs and
other Indian cities despite
offering from the best wages in
the state this bill will make
the connection between
employment needs and the
production of graduate at all
levels prepared to fulfill those
needs I urge your support for
this bill thank you.
And thank you Mr chairman I
don't know if doctor Segura
someone.
And Dr so then I just want to
know if you wanted to say a few
words about this bill.
Senator Paypen Mr chairman thank
you for allowing me the
opportunity to speak today I am
associate dean of the college of
engineering at New Mexico State
University and I also have been
in over thirty nine years
working in stem education in New
Mexico so I'm very passionate
about the focus of this bill and
the opportunity what this bill
actually does is bring focus to
a lot of stem efforts taking
place across the state and it
isn't intended to centralize or
or or manage programs but what
it is intended to do is bring a
shared vision to all the
programs that are taking place
across the state and start
exploring things from a case
study and research perspective
of what's working why is it
working and how do we scale it
to other schools the stem center
of excellence in teaching and
learning is actually the plus is
intended to address some of the
issues or or areas that Chand
mentioned earlier which is you
see often steam use these stem
H. U. C. Stamm AG you see a lot
of things of the plus is
intended to capture all of those
additional sectors that stamp
industries are stands of skills
actually important encompasses
the center of excellences in
teaching and learning is
proposed as the statewide
opportunity to elevate evidence
based practices to support both
students and teachers while
growing up quality stem skill
talent pool to meet current and
future employment opportunities
the current challenges facing
schools across the state are
often based on access to teacher
professional development
training and access to
exponential on out of school
programming for students these
challenges are further impacting
student retention and student
graduation rates I know for a
fact the access to out of school
programming is impacting some of
our students as we find a
program called best robotics out
of New Mexico State University
that basically gives students or
schools at a can of part.
It's they get I would and
plexiglass and bicycle to send
some robotics pieces and they're
asked to build a robot to do a
of a specific task and every
year the game changes.
We provide the opportunity for
students to participate in the
the best robotics through
industry sponsorship so we give
funding to pay for the kids and
materials and we in turn can
off of the program schools at no
cost this year we had three
native American schools
participate in the program and
we asked them why they have not
participated in the past or if
they have participated in
robotics and the teachers told
us that it had never been
offered to them or they weren't
aware of it or some of the
programs are too expensive for
them to get engaged so then I
turned around and asked them why
did they participate this year
and they said you reached out to
us you provided us teacher
training and you gave an
opportunity for our students to
participate and engage and you
find is that the support to be
successful so we know that if
those opportunities are provided
to the schools the students will
thrive building on a model of a
partnership between animation in
the Gadsden Independent School
District the stem center will
focus on identifying identifying
intervention strategies that can
be readily integrated and school
districts and prove that they
can change the outcome of the
school I'd like to turn it over
to Dr Wanda boulder comments and
she can talk specifically about
the Gadsden programs and how our
partnership with them can be
scaled across the state.
If we can never.
Thank you good morning
Mr chair members of the board
we're excited about this
opportunity to have the stem
center and it does bills from
really decades of work with the
Gadsden school district where we
worked in partnership with the
district to think about what are
the needs of the teachers in
terms of professional
development what are the needs
in terms of curriculum changes
that need to happen to better
engage students
And also what is just around
opportunities in terms of out of
school time programs that can
build on the work that's
happening in this in in the
initiatives with the teacher
professional development I think
the key point is that we work in
collaboration with districts we
work in partnership it's not a
the university come in and and
having a
a recommendation from the ivory
tower but really working in
partnership finding out what are
the needs of the districts how
do we work together how do we
leverage resources for the
district and from the university
in this case the stem center to
to elevate math and science
teaching from the elementary
level all the way through high
school we're currently working
on some projects with gaps in to
think about career pathways for
middle and high school students
having students up Billy study
what are the opportunities that
are available through the for
them through the ACC through an
agency you bringing kids on
campus.
so that they can see that the
higher education is really
accessible to them and that stem
careers are could be an exciting
place and they have it's it's a
place that would
that they can thrive and so
this work isn't kind of pie in
the sky of opportunity but it's
really built on establish
partnerships that we have that
we know work that can support
student learning and teacher
learning.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair before we go
to to questions and move on with
the support just wanted to
stress how important this is and
I understand we don't have this
in the budget right now and if
anything will get in over at but
I just think this is so
important.
A bill like this my background I
just want to talk about it
you know I'm I have worked in
the stem field for the last.
Eighteen years.
but I never thought I would ever
have that opportunity growing
up.
I didn't have the background I
did have parents that worked in
these areas and fortune I was
fortunate enough to go in the
military and you know get a stem
degree in biochemistry and for
the last you know fourteen
eighteen years of my military
career I worked on satellite
programs and worked as a chemist
these are opportunities I never
would have was never even shown
up before I went to the military
before I went to college I think
about living in Albuquerque in
Kirtland Air Force base where I
worked at at the space test
program but yet two blocks down
the road there's kids going to
school they don't realize the
work that we were doing in the
building we were actually
launching.
A research modules and
satellites that we're actually
going to be.
Pushed out of the international
space station and we were
working on that in the building
so there's so much work that we
do here in New Mexico.
That our students and our people
here in New Mexico could be
working on and that could be
involved in and we hear so much
about our labs.
you know a for are basically
having to recruit folks from out
of state to do these jobs.
And we could be filling those
jobs with New Mexicans and so
that's why I think this is
important to me and others that
we get something like this done
to provide opportunities for New
Mexicans here with that Mr chair
I wanted to let the mystery be
one brief point to make Mr chair
members the committee is that we
did submit a special request the
department of finance and
administration in the amount of
five million I believe that
would have been in October so we
do believe we follow proper
protocol there and also
submitted to the research and
public service project process
that goes on throughout the
summer we do an internal review
of all our reserves of public
service projects and we present
to the legislative finance
committee higher education
department and department of
finance and administration on
those reserves and public
service projects including this
one so it was not recommended
for funding to either of those
mechanisms but we did I believe
do our due diligence and at
least in terms of going through
process thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you first
show of hands of those in
support in the room.
There any opposition.
we've got one online so it
supporters with if you would
like to come and speak come up
and speak with the microphone so
that people can hear if you just
want to be in noted in support
that's going to.
The.
Thanks bye.
The.
Good morning Mr chairman members
committee Mike d'antoni with
Xcel energy we serve electricity
to the eastern part of New
Mexico we have many hi res from
from Mexico State University and
we find out that find that folks
that go to schools in New Mexico
are are tend to stay in New
Mexico more the the
opportunities in the electric
utility industry we are leader
in transition to renewable
energy and.
We really want to get the bride
best and brightest working for
us in this damn Education and
and just supporting this bill is
important for I think all
employers in New Mexico that
have a lot of technical related
jobs we fully support this this
bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
room if not Camilo Romero.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members Camilleri are within
Mexico State Land Office the
land office all students in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you that was nice insured
I can how to get started that
questions from the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman F. certain
going to support this cause I
know it is important for stand
but just wanted to to mention
something that maybe the rest of
the the body might not be aware
of that something maybe for New
Mexico state to follow up on
that in southeast New Mexico of
the cal Ripken foundation if
you're not familiar with that
Google it because I go all over
the country and they establish
stem classrooms in districts and
schools and and in Eddy and Lea
County every single school
elementary school in those two
counties
they have a stem classroom this
was funded not with public money
it was funded with a
contribution contributions from
the cal Ripken foundation and
they partner with industry and
so together it's paid for
through a partnership and the
the foundation provides
materials that are replenished
answer you step it's it's a
fascinating program in something
you're going to hear more about
next week I have Representative
Representative from the
foundation it's going to come to
the legislature and is open to
this thing with any district
Representative because they want
to expand throughout New Mexico
they want to go to communities
where they can find partners
such as you know around of Rio
Rancho or even in with with the
the large industries that are in
that area but I think it's just
a fascinating way to get stem
classrooms up and running
without any cost to the state I
mean we've got a five million
dollar appropriation you're
going to put together a group of
people that I'm sure going to do
great things the bottom line is
we need these in our schools now
and here's an opportunity if you
have an interest
you know seek me out next week
when I have the representative
coming from cal Ripken and now
they want to do this in New
Mexico they under.
In the so I'm I'll support the
bill but I sure would encourage
Mexico state to reach out to
them maybe let them be one of
the partners and show how it can
be done very easily in our
schools and these these
classrooms are amazing and no
cost to the state so there are
opportunities out there that
don't cost a penny and we need
to take advantage of those but
again if any of your districts
are interested haven't get with
me and I'll introduce them to to
that representative thank you
thank you senator the comments.
Madam I have as I look through
this never mentions the college
of past which is the teacher
preparation program doesn't
mentioned PED public ed
it talks about higher ed reports
going to higher ed into finance
yes as I understand this it
looks like it's very much.
Working in K. twelve spaces why
is that are why are those not
part of transforming the teacher
preparation program the college
of Heston New Mexico state as
being a partner being part of
all of this it seems like it's
in the engineering and science
areas instead of hello
collaboration with the teacher
prep programs.
Absolutely Mister chair I may
ask doctor sold and also time
and issues very much been the
architect of the bill in the
language and and that the stem
center concept I do think that's
a a good recommendation and I I
in particular engagement with
the public education department
legislative education study
committee so I I think those are
things we would rightly
entertain if doctor Sullivan is
prepared Madam also I think that
would be welcome.
Mr chair members of the
committee of it is actually the
intent to New Mexico State
University that this center of
excellence would be housed
within the college of yes and
the new dean has been very an
overly involved in the
development of this bill in the
center so if if we left that as
an oversight it is our
politicians but it is intended
that we would leverage the
outreach center which wanted as
part of this in the college of
past and also that this would
actually be in out I guess
housed in the and the college of
passed with broad statement
application.
Thank you and and that was as I
had first heard about this from
the chancellor over the summer
or or earlier that was my
understanding yet it's never
mentioned in here K. to K.
twelve colleges of education or
anything of that sort it looks
like almost outside of that
whole mechanism up and certainly
the more we can get
collaboration and on the front
and the teacher preparation
programs so our teachers are
well prepared for teaching
science and technology that's
the easiest place rather than
and certainly I understand being
able to reach out and do
professional development for
current teachers that that's
retrofitting after the fact as
opposed to the building it on
the front end.
So at.
I think it'll it's gonna move
out of this committee but as it
gets over to finance you might
want to look at some wording or
some other things to make sure
that it's clear that this really
is geared toward K. twelve
education and preparing students
to go into the science
technology fields at higher
education not just support for
higher education to prepare
people for industry or other
things in in tech areas if that
makes sense.
The committee.
For the past motion for do
passed by Senator Pinto.
Right and it felt the the past
all right I know REC to finance
as we done with the other
appropriation bills and that's
by no means disparaging of any
of that the bills I understand
Mr.
The motion for a do of for a no
Representative to finance.
Second and seconded if you will
call the roll please.
Senator Brandt.
Excuse me.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator my estimates
this the bill is Senator Pinto
yes Senator pope yes Senator
souls yes okay The Hobbit the
past the a no record to finance
committee and for committee
thank you we've got a little
time for we go down to the floor
I think that was passed we have
to do that of the.
Planned for Friday we've got
looks like for bills that are
more content bills there are six
that are straight appropriation
bills that hopefully will be
able to manage and in fairly
short order those getting those
off of the calendar the bills
from today they got rolled over
will look at putting those on
for Monday if the sponsors are
still interested in doing it at
that point.
The question comes deserve.
At eight thirty.
We'll see how we do are getting
that those appropriation bills
but I would want to get those
off the calendar.
