You well I I know it's hard just
keeping up with page link to
which committees and now that
things are going to be switching
over to the other side trying to
make sure we have the right
place for the students for House
committees and other thing gets
even harder.
I think this by secretary put it
on my calendar so I just go to
the calendar and get it I don't
have to go back through.
Your emails because get the
email might become two days
before people thinking there are
helping out but I can't scroll
through fifty emails that you
sent and try to find it
difficult.
Senator souls we're up and
running on the webcast now and
we do have a quorum center
Brandt has joined us and Senator
Pinto is joining us.
Wonderful good morning everyone.
Welcome to the Senate Education
Committee on Monday March eight
a couple of announcements on
some bills thank is we were in
the middle of house bill thirty
two on Friday and I worked a lot
with the sponsor and they are
off working on a committee set
up on that bill so we are not
going to pick that up that is
going to come back to us on
Wednesday
with some I'm fairly happy your
major changes to it so if
anybody is here for house bill
two thirty two it will be on
Wednesday not to date we also
have house bill one twenty eight
and representative Sarinana and
we have a rather extensive
amendment which really is the
entire bill and I've had some
concerns for people that just
about the amendment and so what
we would plan on doing here is
have you present what the
amendment does what it does and
then just hold it so we all have
a chance to fully read and
understand that would you back
on first thing on Wednesday
morning when the whole committee
is have an opportunity to fully
understand what the the changes
to if that makes sense our that
our new business we've got house
bill six with Representative
Lundstrom on state equalization
guarantee distributions house
bill forty three is amended the
Representative Stapleton our
house bill ninety three as
amended limit out the state
suspensions with Representative
Lara and house bill one thirty
eight increase fine arts
education program units we have
our floor session is scheduled
at eleven so wherever we are we
will stop at and the we have a
hard stop at that time
any other comments or questions
announcements from.
from members and we do plan on
going in that order in so just
trying to.
The let people know that are
further down the list you're
welcome to stay and watch Senate
education we're happy to have
you but if you've got other
things to do for a little while
will we'll see how quickly some
of these get.
So.
Committee anybody have any
anything before we get started.
Not representative that will
take us through house bill one
twenty eight in the committee
set up and what does it do what
it changed what that means that
I thank you Mr chairman so I
have a few expert witnesses you
want me to tell you the are or
are they are however you would
like to do it Representative
it's your time right now okay so
I have expert witnesses and
Richard bill Larry Larry and
Marty ask about permit Sierra.
And Julie Garcia from homes and
Rachel gradual and Chelsea
Canada from L. E. S. C. so what
I'd like to do Mr chairman is go
do an overview of the bill and
then and then tell you what the
amendments are is that what you
want me to is that okay.
I'm.
But I make sure I get out we
want to help us understand so as
we get a chance to read it in
detail we know what we're
looking at what we're looking
for what are the highlights in
the main topics we are not going
to have committee questions or
debate on today okay thank you
all right during the twenty
nineteen Mr chairman during that
twenty nineteen legislative
session the legislature passed
house memorial fifty seven
directing the PED to convene a
task force to identify issues of
concern regarding investigation
reporting and documentation of
ethical misconduct in the public
school system house bill one
twenty eight as a result of the
work of the task force
stakeholders and feedback as the
bill moves through the
legislative process is at the
core misconduct by employees in
the public school system has
been a priority as behavior
continues to happen in public
schools across the nation and in
schools in New Mexico.
I'm this is not
not only a safety issue for
students but it's also costly
issue since nineteen eighty
seven the New Mexico public
School Insurance Authority is
has reported eighty million
dollars in insurance payouts
associated with claims of
improper touching and have
received an average of nine
point five claims per year from
instances happening within New
Mexico public schools this bill
addresses current hiring
loopholes for school employees
under this bill applicants for
school employment including
school volunteers and
contractors are required to
disclose reports of child abuse
or neglect or FM misconduct tied
to their past employment with
the applicant was in a position
that involves unsupervised
contact with children.
The bill updates the definition
of ethical misconduct currently
in the public school in the
school personnel act to make it
more specific to include what
constitutes ethical misconduct.
The bill creates a specific duty
for all employees in the public
school system Report ethical
misconduct in child to please
abuse or neglect.
The bill includes processes that
happen after report is made to
ensure the investigation cross
agency collaboration and
tracking occurred to stop
ethical misconduct with a
student.
The bill the bill puts forth
efforts in emphasis towards
investigating reports of ethical
misconduct in a public school
system by superintendents PED
and law enforcement but
appropriate.
The bill also expands the
training programs to include
more individuals such as school
volunteers and contractors and
it expands the concept of
current training programs for
employees so a big part of this
is training is everybody in the
school system understand what
they need to do if the if if
they believe they're some kind
of ethical misconduct the
training required in this bill
aligns with other provisions of
the bill and makes sure
employees are aware of their new
responsibilities the training
will also explain ethical
misconduct professional
responsibilities investigations
and procedures among other
elements.
So you have the amendments and
in the amendments the first
thing it does is this version
strengthens and clarifies the
process for reporting and
investigating ethical misconduct
within the public school system.
The main changes reflected in
the amendment simply create a
process for those employees in
schools.
And interacting with children to
report ethical misconduct
through the PED it retracts
responsibility vested getting
these types of reports from C.
CYFD as proposed in the original
bill.
On page two section one of the
bill represents a new section to
the bill that creates a duty to
report for school district
employees school employees and
contractors to superintendents
or the PED.
If the department or the
superintendent receive report of
ethical misconduct the office
receiving the report must take
steps to investigate the report.
If the allegations of ethnic
ethical misconduct is criminal
in nature PED is required to
immediately notify law
enforcement.
This section also lays out the
process by which school boards
are required to internally track
reports made through this new
establish duty.
Recognizing that PED
superintendents and law
enforcement have control over
public school staffing licensing
criminal acts against children
outside of the million unit we
created the sections provided
detailed process that has
similar characteristics to the
C. white empty process but is
very specific to public schools.
I'm second the version of the
new version of the bill
integrate all public education
employees so everyone throughout
this throughout is everyone has
to report throughout the bill
since school employees only
target staff working at public
schools school district
personnel was added to capture
all public education employees
and finally this version of the
bill required PED to track
ethical misconduct reports
specific to those who have been
found to have committed at the
committee on that instead of all
reports that may include
individuals who have allegations
against them that were
unsubstantiated.
So that's pretty much the
overview of the bill and the
amendment I could go to the
amendment step by step if you
want through every change.
Is that what would you like Mr
chairman.
I think so I think most of us
did read to the initial one and
a bit more as to what this is
actually but looks like it does
is it takes out all the sections
of the first bill and put that
all new sections with changes on
it so it's essentially just
above the fob right.
But yes if you could quickly
take us through any of the main
ones and I might point as I look
at it this is full of type of
graphical errors.
You know it's.
Well let me just let me find a
couple of them very quickly but
it's trying to read through.
We just where they are well it
on page one I mean the very
first page on number three
school district is run together
there's not a space in there.
And I want to
requiring a report since and
granted conduct on to yeah.
Yeah so it's just one of a pipe
of wares like that as well okay.
Okay all right so it's it's
skews me set up I'm sorry
Representative and Sanders
Sauls.
This is a PDF copy of the
amendments.
And what happens Sir is that it.
When we go through it and you
adopted then it comes down from
Legislative Council in the
correct copies so if you see
some of the typing errors those
will be corrected when we get
the real copied from Legislative
Council okay so that's an
artifact of it being a PDF that
was printed that what you're
that's correct okay I won't
worry about that so much will
make sure.
Those are our picks I think it's
readable but it kinda hangs me
up every time when I see one of
those that had stopped my
thinking from all the.
Okay Mister chair it.
We'll get the approval when will
we receive the.
I guess the next copy.
May not I would like to have
that before we.
Meet again.
Very and are we able to descend
one that doesn't have all of
those will run on and.
Space.
We are not allowed to have that
particular copy until this one
is adopted into committee.
But I can get with Legislative
Council and see if there's a
possible way to do that but the.
As a rule rule no.
Okay.
Maybe they are are we able very
and and again this gets into
some of the technical things
that I know you need to do is
part of your job are we able to
read this in for discussion
purposes does that clear that up
and.
I guess as far as reading this
amendment in committee now.
Normally normally what we have
something we make a motion for
to remove the the amendment for
discussion purposes yes you can
yes every amendment that you've
been getting in committee has
been like this there just
haven't been as many
at these unusual airs and I I
think this has to do with I
don't know what they do and they
choose a drafting modular
something that ultimately when.
The real one comes out.
All of the steps that you're
seeing words that are should to
have a space between them all
corrected.
That okay.
Mr chairman my copy doesn't have
those areas you were saying so
I'm not sure.
I believe it's the same topic
but.
Hopefully we can get it fixed.
Yeah it it sounds like it's just
an artifact of it being printed
off of the PDF that was on the
computer that Germans up facing
yes Senator Padilla
you know in in the respectfully
to the representative I think
there's a couple of processes
that happen before we get these
the setting through approving
they may have just simply send
us the the draft of the draft if
you if you get my meaning I I I
don't think that they maybe they
sent her the final version but
they sent us.
The item that went the document
but prior to going through
probate and.
That might help that might be
all it is.
And Senator Padilla that's
absolutely correct what happens
is the drafter because of the
nature of the amendments now in
this setting process is that
they send the draft the from the
PDF copy to the committee
secretaries to disseminate
amongst the committee members
before it's gone through all the
other processes to.
When I actually we adopted in
committee and then ultimately I
get the.
the press copy and able to put
it into the committee reports I
do wants to build moves you Mr
chairman I want to say this
happened to me with that public
private partnership though I had
about four five years ago it was
the committee received the final
I I'm sorry the committee
received the draft and I got the
final and it just looked really
really you know challenging
thank you.
Mr chair.
Senator that the final copy that
we receive quote what we have.
Numbers lines I mean it's it
it'll be really difficult if we
don't have if I can't reference
that particular page in a line
number.
So that when you're Marian knows
that that's how that would look.
Very and yeah well it have that
we can reference by line number
on each page yes and well.
And you know when we're finished
with this I will get with
Legislative Council and see if I
can't get that word processing
copy that they do that has all
of the
the changes graph you know that
grammatical errors corrected and
and etcetera etcetera and see if
I can get that to all of you.
In Mr Chairman I'm sorry to keep
interrupting
Mr Chairman yeah no problem go
ahead yeah so so maybe if the
Representative wants to request
for the committee Mr chairman
the in context version what
they'll do is they'll drop your
amendments into what the
document but what the the the
measure would look like with all
the amendments and it
or or or you can go the route of
a substitute.
Mr Chairman
Senator at we'd like to stick
with this version the amendment
and not a substitute
And in if it in context so it
doesn't I don't know the numbers
so I'm not sure
But I would like to go over it.
Step by step I really believe as
we go over step by step you will
understand the bill.
Right.
Yeah it will let's go back to
doing that and we'll work on
trying to get committee members
the copy that then has page
numbers before we get there
committee questions and stop on
Wednesday.
So that we can discuss it fully
that.
Some of those so if you have
questions just let me know thank
you Mr chairman
first the pages that changes on
page one of the amendment
amendment change the title to
reflect the changes made within
this ammendment so page one line
eleven after the semi pro insert
requiring reports of ethical
misconduct by school district
personnel school employees
school volunteers contractors or
contractors employees you're
very reported to the public
education department or a
superintendent.
All right.
So we're just changing the title
on page one line fourteen
attributes for in six inserting
and ethical misconduct.
I'm paid for.
Resented we don't have one
numbers on our so that doesn't
help us we're.
Okay so let me just kind of do
an overview okay yes this
changes on the title and makes
if you as an ethical misconduct
and requires districts person so
we've gone from school personnel
to everybody in the district has
to report okay.
All right.
Page two.
The amendment adds a new section
to the bill.
So what we've done is on page
two we we
Line Barker here on line one
line one point.
Right so I'm on page two line
three three line thirty five
line to strike section one
through eight strikes the bill
in its entirety and inserts it
in lieu of and the new section
so we've we've dropped the rest
of the bill and input are
amendments which is essentially
the bill with changes in the
section I'm page two and three
three the amendment added new
sections of the bill this
section creates a duty for
school district personnel school
employees contractors and
contractors employees report
ethical misconduct to the
superintendent for the public
education departments.
The section then requires cross
reporting between PED and the
superintendent if the department
or the superintendent receive a
report of ethical misconduct the
office receiving the report must
take immediate steps to
investigate the report.
The allegations about the
mechanical was conduct this is
criminal in nature PED is
required to immediately notify
law enforcement this section
also lays out the process by
which school boards are required
to internally track the reports
made through this new establish
duty.
And though this new section to
the bills so this is a new
section to build this section
was modeled after the current
duty to report child abuse
neglect in the child's coat.
In the original bill the duty to
report investigate child abuse
and neglect to CYFD was extended
to include instances that
included acts committed by
adults other than parents
guardians and go or guardians
currently outside of the purview
of CYFD so CYFD is taken out of
this part and it's it's
recognize that PED
superintendents and law
enforcement have control over
public school staffing licensing
in criminal acts against
children outside of the million
unit we created this dissected
provided detailed process that
was some of that has similar
characteristics to see why FTEs
process but is specific to the
public schools.
Eight any questions.
Okay.
Page three.
Through page six in section two
changes to their.
We have Representative yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee is there gonna be any
reference to that tribal nations
on how of these are going to
mesh together are how what it
very exist currently with the
on.
On the nation on the
reservations and the the federal
lands the way they handled this
is different but is there gonna
be a meshing of these two
entities or is this going to be
we're just talking about public
schools in our in section one on
paid to top of page three in
section II.
It says upon receipt of a report
about the misconduct pursuant to
section a of this section the
department shall immediately
notify law enforcement if the
allegations of ethical
misconduct discriminate Jr
provided that the department
shall notify tribal law
enforcement or social services
agent for any Indian child
residing in Indian country so
they have to go the tribal
please at that point.
Four investigations Mr chair the
reason I say that because
they're already has something in
place but I would I don't know
our analysts are who would be
able to kind of.
Currently currently on how this
this would affect some of those
some of the actions because I do
know tribal police's notified
but they're only notified to the
extent of the however the.
Administrator is if there is an
administrator at that point.
With that Mr chairman Senator we
could report
you want.
At this point yeah that's kinda
getting into some of the the
more questions from committee
and things that will hold until
Wednesday but certainly will
have our analysts look at that
separately senators so that are
there may be a better
clarification.
Beginning on page three through
page six in section two changes
were made to clarify that
applicants in this section
referred to applicants for
school employment contractors
and school volunteers and this
is essentially just cleanup
language.
Eight.
All right I'm beginning of P.
six.
This section now only focuses on
require child abuse and neglect
report coordination similar to
but is already in statute this
section previously added ethical
misconduct report coordination
by local school boards this is
still required by the bill but
this specific element was moved
to section one of the bill.
This section also requires that
policies to create this
coordination should include
measures to protect the identify
identity of the alleged victim.
the only changes in section four
was to ensure school district
personnel are also included in
ethical misconduct definition
essentially prohibiting this
behavior for school district
personnel as well.
Then we jump to page.
Thirteen.
Okay speech thirteen.
In need clarifies the
superintendent needs to report
to PED a finding of ethical
misconduct of a former employee
instead of just allegations so
they have to have.
A finding of ethical misconduct
of a former employee instead of
just allegations.
In this particular section it
Towards the end of need it says
no agreement between the
department school employee or
the governing authority or
superintendent shall diminish or
eliminate the responsibility of
investigating and reporting the
alleged ethical misconduct to
the Department.
So even if it even if you have a
school employee who's been
alleged and resigns or just
leave that still has to be
investigated.
Okay.
All right.
On page fourteen.
the proposed amendment requires
PED to coordinate Reports
individuals who have been
convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or has been found to
have committed ethical
misconduct in the previous
version PED was required to
track reports of all those who
have been subject to a report of
ethical misconduct so this these
ones are convicted of felony or
misdemeanor we have to track in
their database.
Okay.
On page fourteen section J..
It allows PED to take licensure
action I'm not only
superintendents and license
school employees but also
licensed school district
personnel when one of these
individuals is not report child
abuse or neglect or ethical
misconduct.
Section six and seven there's no
changes to the current version.
So you're gonna jump to section
nine.
On page twenty.
Right in the.
Actually paid twenty section
eight is to clarify the
department can take licensure
against employees for ethical
misconduct as reflected in other
areas of the bill.
Section nine in page twenty.
The training section is the same
but the training now must
include school district
employees.
Sorry.
Page twenty two section ten.
This section requires school
employees to report child abuse
and neglect instead of only
teachers and school officials
which is currently in the bill
rest of the changes in the
section reflect bringing the
child could back to its current
state.
As I mentioned previously the
bill report report that was
added to this section was taking
out of the purview of CYFD and
is included in the first section
of the bill.
Mr Chairman those are the
changes made by the amendments.
And I'd like to just defer to my
expert witnesses for additional
comment we do that.
Your muted sorry.
This is Mr thank you.
yes please go ahead.
I I Mr chair members of the
committee I heard you loud your.
We this.
I did want to just make a very
brief statement that yeah we
consider this some of the most
important legislation terms of
protecting children are quite
some are this is the result of
some house.
House memorial task where
students are really included a
number of folks in education and
our in addition to the pay outs
here.
You know what what last year's
in terms of use network basis we
just this really does a great
job and I are of report are self
reporting applicants coming it
schools are also for schools to
investigate.
Very seriously so I cannot
overstate how important this
legislation years and everyone
who's been involved and they're
going to quite a few to name.
I have excellent excellent job
so we look forward to
presenting.
Thank you.
Great thank you.
Representative anyone else.
Just comments today and again
the plan is tomorrow when
everybody had a chance the
public had a chance no more to
to see what changes might be
there is yeah we'll do that the
whole hearing that.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure Julie
and Garcia's on.
And she also comments.
I am the bill and it did not
change the amendments but the
bill has has language about
Missing information to potential
employers.
So that someone who has an
allocate someone who's found to
have committed ethical
misconduct the superintendent
can now tell a future employer
that they were disciplined or
terminated for ethical
misconduct it was a section of
the person act that's been
deleted it was deleted in the
original copy and that has
maintained throughout all of
this.
The the US representative.
I'm I don't think there's
anybody else as far as experts.
Okay so what we'll do is this
gives us and our analysts on
both sides an opportunity to
look through all of the changes
and everything will come back on
Wednesday we will put you on
first on Wednesday to go through
kind of a an overview of the the
entire bill but then we'll go
out to the public at that point
and I'm and questions from the
committee before taking action
that that makes sense yes thank
you Mr chairman thank thank you
and thank you for being here.
The next in for the public it
we're in Senate education house
bill two thirty two is not going
to be heard today I believe
there's a committee subcommittee
coming back to us on Wednesday
on two thirty two we did not
take action on house bill one
twenty eight today
to give our committee and
Annalise's opportunity to go
through rather extensive
amendments that were made to the
bills will here those two on
Wednesday we are now moving to
house bill six state
equalization guarantee
distributions are chairman wants
from if you would please I saw
the draw earlier.
Thank you good morning Mr
chairman good morning Education
Committee I believe Mr chairman
that speaker Egolf is also
supposed to be part of this
presentation today I'm not I'm
not saying his name but I'm not
sure I would be able to see is
that.
Are you with us also today.
Senator souls he is not on the
zoom meeting at he was sent a
link though too okay it looks
like you're so right now all
righty well thank you and Mister
chairman I also have LFC staff
available to get into any detail
that we may have thank you very
much house bill six removes the
seventy five percent impacted
local half mill levy and federal
forest reserve credit from this
public school funding formula
requires school two budget the
newly on twelve revenue for
capital outlay capital
improvements community schools
and implementation of the Indian
Education Act the bill also
requires head to report how
school budget all schools budget
this revenue on the statewide
online financial reporting
system.
The bill would effectively
find eighty three million
dollars to schools sixty five
excuse me sixty seven million
for impact aid districts sixteen
million for all districts based
on their share of local and
federal revenue credits in this
formula the LFC and L. E. S. C.
recommendations included
sufficient funding in the SCG
for this bill.
So Mr chairman basically we have
made room for that in House Bill
to.
And at at this time Mr chairman
I'd be happy to get into
questions and certainly if we
need Sonney or Charles Lee there
ready to help.
Thank the gentleman Lundstrom
and did you want any of them on
as experts explaining it or go
out to the public and.
Mr chairman I think just tuned
in recognition of time and as
you mentioned earlier at the
beginning of the meeting you all
have a floor session coming up
in a hard stop don't want to
take any more time than
necessary but certainly we have
sunny and Charles online if we
have questions and we're ready
for the public Mr chairman great
thank you chairman of your car
you will take us to public input
please.
Your house bill six those
members of the public speaking
in opposition will go directly
to those members of the public
here today if you wish to speak
in opposition to house bill six
please raise your hand.
The hands we will now go to
those who registered to speak in
favor beginning with more and
ramming.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee on behalf of Zuni
public schools in Gallup
McKinley county schools we
support this bill all this
effort by.
Representative Lundstrom and the
other sponsors of the bill
speaking for Sony in particular
being the only one hundred
percent native American district
in the state of New Mexico this
bill will give us the
opportunity to enhance education
for our students by offering.
A wider variety of losses
especially we will we are
interested in in the beginning a
robust vocational technical.
Portion of the education
currently achieve our students
want to participate or
vocational type curriculum have
to ride a bus forty miles each
way to UNM Gallup we will be
able to get them back home be
able to use that full hour and a
half currently they're using is
travel time will be able to
build the buildings that we need
to have this type program I
believe currently are high
school we have maybe for
electors will be able to enhance
that curriculum be able to offer
more more losses given our
students more opportunities we
have our full support to this
house bill again thank the
sponsors for presenting it thank
you.
Thank you thanks John Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good morning John
Thompson registered lobbyists
for central consolidated school
district want to stand in
support of this legislation Mr
chairman and and thank.
Madam chair Lundstrom and and
speaker Egolf for their support
on this measure thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you next step we have
you're gonna hate.
Boeing can.
Yes good morning thank you
members of the committee Mr
chairman.
This JD Bullington representing
the Pueblo of the governor and
the good the public good I is
one of the school districts that
sadly affected by this
legislation and I just want to
thank everyone who's been
involved.
Representative Lundstrom the
speaker also Lee lily may all of
you Mr chairman and everyone
who's been working on this
legislation Senator Mimi Stewart
I know this has been.
An ongoing process and I know at
times it's been painful and
difficult but I think we have
arrived at the correct decision
and the correct solution and the
public good is very very proud
of everyone who worked on this
thank you.
Thank you next we have J. funded
lands.
Ortiz.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee lily more December
presenting the New Mexico school
board association and our
membership Mr chairman has
ranked the impact aid issues one
of our top priorities we support
this hold harmless provision for
any reductions to the district
operating budgets as a result of
the U. S. department of
education's recent ruling on
federal impact aid we fully
support this legislation would
thank the sponsor for beginners
forward and we ask that can be
for favorable consideration
thank you for allowing us to
voice our position.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of house
bill six please raise your hand.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee one of my co
sponsor for bringing this
forward we believe it is the
right solution for all districts
in New Mexico we appreciate the
efforts that have been made to
resolve the save harmless
functions within House Bill to
to back fill these
appropriations and pick it up as
a state experience so Mister
chair members the committee we
wholeheartedly endorse this
legislation and see here
affirmative a thank you.
Thank you.
The comment at this time.
Thank you to Kara will now go to
our I always sorry I would like
to go back to the sponsor any
comments or questions after
public input.
Now I appreciate the public
input thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you will now go to
comments from the committee
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you are chairman Lundstrom
and this has been a a long
process and and I'm glad we're
at the finish line on this stand
and I did just want to ask is
this I'm more bill at
pretend Stuart I mean are we
looking at the same bill that we
passed actually on the floor of
the Senate recently.
No Mr chairman I'm I'm not
familiar with her bill could I
ask you either Charles or sunny
to respond to that please I I'm
I'm sorry I don't know.
Mr Chairman is not it is not a
more bill
the bill that you passed out of
the Senate eliminates of the
credits.
And then any amounts that are
spent on capital outlay over a
ten year rolling average would
count towards the public school
capital outlay.
matching it would be it X.
essentially a local revenue in
that formula.
The bill before you right now.
Eliminates the credit so both of
them eliminate all the credits
and and in the case of house
bill six and it tells the
districts you can spend an
equivalent amount of the credits
on either capital outlay Indian
Education Act or community
schools act
funding.
So thank you Mr chairman and so
I guess the difference would be
that in many trials you can
answer that.
There there.
What does PED do or public
school capital outlay easy
tracking of how the funds are
spent is there a little bit more
flexibility in this particular
bill with wholesaler stand or
sit still.
Still open to either operating
or capital expenditures.
Mister chairman Senator.
There's four brought buckets and
house bill six for how the money
can be spent it's the capital
outlay like HB thirty three
technology SB nine capital
improvements.
Indian Education Act.
Type expenditures or community
schools under house bill six.
So Mister chair and and
chairman Lundstrom and Charles
so is there less flexibility in
this bill or more flexibility.
I guess what I'm worried about I
want to make sure maybe the to
come together because I I don't
know.
Not from my view I think when I
heard and Representative from
the districts say that they were
interested in spending this
money on developing
C. T. R. facility and that's
exactly in my mind the type of
thing that that I would hope to
see because I think that that
really is the intent of some of
the funds that would be
available at by retaining all of
the money from from impacted Aid
so I guess I just wish we had a
little bit more information
about side by side I thought the
bill that we passed out the
Senate was good and
comprehensive I don't know if
this bill is better I I just a
little bit and certainly I'm
going to support the bill but
going forward it would be nice
to have kind of the same outcome
from both bills and that's that
I guess that's my only concern a
little bit.
So
I want to go ahead so sorry set
Mr Chairman go ahead.
I was just gonna say we might
see if Rachel got old from the
alley S. C. perspective as to
what kinds of things the the
difference between the two bills
from your perspective.
I would be happy to hear from
our.
So Mister chairman
Senator Kernan the HSD bill
didn't restrict funds to be
spent in any particular way so
it left it up to the districts
to determine how to spend both
bills have reporting
requirements to PED and them and
then as Mr Salim noted that the
L. E. S. C. bill didn't just
look at the revenue that's being
freed up in this bill is capital
but said any unrestricted
revenue that's being used for
capital on that ten year rolling
average would be considered in
the capital outlay formula.
So Mister chair and and thank
you chairman lunch from and and
Rachel so.
In this bill
there is no accounting for the
amount of the impact aid dollars
now going one hundred percent to
the district and how that is
being spent on capital.
Down the road I mean now they
tracked that correct and in so
it am I getting that wrong
Rachel.
Mr chairman Senator you are not
there is no section and
Representative Lundstrom spell
that deals with the capital
outlay formula.
Okay what it I I don't know I.
I guess I'm I just wish that
these two bills were were the
same because I think it's a
really important issue that we
are all coming to the table and
we're all addressing and as I
stated on the for the Senate
when we debated this bill you
know I have been very proud of
the fact that we have had a
formula that is equitable for
many many years beginning in
nineteen seventy six and and
when we shifted from property
tax you know that impacted a lot
of districts in my area and I
support what we did because I
think it's critical that we
provide for all students across
the state is it was we move in
this direction you know the
property tax
Issue yes that's the purpose of
trying to do this because
there's an unfairness there
among districts and and property
tax if they're able to generate
you know with regard to the bill
so we're holding this is kind of
getting off track again we're
holding harmless all the other
districts with regard to this
and we're doing that by adding
additional dollars into the SCG.
And into the budget this year
we're in pretty good shape and
surprisingly we've got the money
to do that it's so boring
forward Charles and maybe you
could help me what will happen
down the road and and I'm I'm
kind of the I'm I'm kind of in a
negative position right here
because I kind of see the
writing on the wall over the
next three or four years if
things go the direction that I
believe they're going to go with
regard to to production what
what we're gonna do what will
the impact be when we don't have
production kind of boosting up
the the revenues in three four
years apple how will that affect
at this group we will hold
harmless but the potential could
still be less money so I wonder
if trust could we hold everyone
harmless when the revenues are
what they are today.
Mister chairman Senator with the
budget that you have in the
Senate House Bill to that budget
adds money into the based on top
of what you did last Betul
session we added thirty one
million for the similar purpose.
So once the money's in the basin
if you passed either of these
bills and I don't see the bills
and in conflict that you passed
out of the Senate or house bill
six it's just how you want to
calculate.
Public school capital outlay
matching.
That money will be in the base
budget and basically the state
equalization guarantee will be
virtually a hundred percent
state funded so whatever you
decide based on future budgets
everybody's you know folks gonna
flow hired sink depending on
what revenues to so you won't
have a hold harmless kind of
issue in the future
the only other state funds that
will be part of the formula will
be driver's license fees which
is you know five to seven
million dollars at a three
point.
plus billion so everybody will
be dependent on the state for
their SCG funding going forward.
So thank you for that Mr
chairman thank you.
Chair Lundstrom and and Charles
and and so I guess it's it does
into the base this year and then
next year we do that I do need
do we do that over here at the
hold harmless just one other
just one year.
Mr Chairman.
All right and well I guess you
know I I think my only concern
and and I'm sure we can support
the bill but but I do think it's
if this is about property tax
and property tax you know that's
the inequity there when some
areas have to have greater
ability to generate dollars and
that there's an and of course we
produced a couple years ago the
percentages from of districts
and and so now districts that
we're getting close to fifty
percent match are now down to
seventeen and we we make that
change a couple years ago and
so.
We're still going forward we're
not going to do an accounting of
the fact that there's
additional.
My district is going to have to
continue to.
Get a very low match and not be
able to access their the funds
to the public school cap out
like that.
It seems as though there is no
accountability now with this
replacement with regard to to
property tax issues in in the
districts this affects so I
don't know I I kind of like the
accountability piece and Senator
stewards Bill little bit worried
that going for we're not taking
that into account as we continue
to give awards to school
districts based on the formula
that we changed a couple years
ago so but I you know I'm police
were finally getting to the end
of this issue and
The bill but I do think there's
a difference in the bills and I
do think that
that I'd like to have a little
bit more clarification on on
exactly what this differences
are maybe a spreadsheet or
something a side by side.
With regard to that but that's
all that's that's all I have
been and you worry down the road
I mean I guess you're right
funding is going to be what it
is and the just one year the.
Backfill for hold harmless is I
don't know all right thank you
that's all I have.
Thank you senator next that
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman juggling
two committees at the moment I
wanted to move a do pass.
Thank you senator are there
other numbers with questions.
Looking for heads up from other
committee members I don't see
any I I have a question or two
and and I think both bills get
close to the same name they're
slightly different in process
and.
Similar to Senator Kernan it
kind of would have been nice to
both bills were together where
we could kind of hash out
between the two of them it might
turn out the both bills get
passed middle be up to the
governor's to page one the
governor signs of.
Not to the like to put that on
the governor but that we ought
to be working it out as the
Legislature of couple of
questions is there what is the
reporting requirement with the
in house bill six as far as the
money is being used to improve
student outcomes is there.
Mr chairman I'd like to ask
Charles or Senator responded
that please.
Mr Chairman there's not a
specific provision in the bill
about student outcomes but
certainly there will be tracking
of how those monies are being
spent in which by consider using
and we always track student
outcomes in general to see if
there's differences going
forward there's pretty
significant requirements around
student outcomes tracking that
you passed in Senate bill one
and house bill five a couple of
years ago this doesn't add
anymore to that Mr Chairman.
Thank you part of the reason I
ask is what the discussion about
this for many years is this
money is needed to increase of
student outcomes on native
job impacted districts and such
yet I don't see that there's
anything specifically indicating
that it tracks student outcomes
as a result of the additional
monies
and if I could Rachel in house
there in that Senate bill forty
one does it have a specific
outcome tracking or anything of
that sort how are the two
different in that section.
Mr chair and
The operating budget educational
plan submission section but the
public school finance act it
includes a new paragraph that
basically requires a school
district or charter school that
receives federal or local
revenue that's being eliminated
the credits being eliminated in
the formula to include in its
educational plan a narrative
explaining how they will use US
federal or local revenues to
improve student outcomes.
and they are supposed to report
on the actual uses of those
revenues including a
comprehensive evaluation of how
the program and services
provided with the revenue
improved outcomes for students
it also includes some language
around
tribal consultation.
So some basic some basic
language so district or charter
that's required under federal
law to console shall
included it's educational plan a
narrative of that consultation
so it doesn't include a new a
new requirement for consultation
but to provide some detail to
PED about what that consultation
was and resulted in.
Thank you that was kind of my
next one is we've heard this
over the years and L. E. S. C.
one of the biggest concerns
always is that the tribal
communities don't feel like
they're being consulted about
how the additional funds that
are being generated how they're
being used to to assist native
kids who.
Go quite frankly they're the
ones generating these additional
funds between the two bills that
talk about consultation with
tribal entities and which you'll
and I guess up Representative
Lundstrom in house bill six does
it have any specific provisions
about consultation with tribal
entities within the districts
Mr chairman that's a great
question and I'm I'm with you
when it comes to accountability
and understanding more money is
going that's our responsibility
and thank you for bringing that
up but I did want to make one
comment Mister chairman what the
bill does is it establishes for
tranches of years which as we
mentioned earlier includes the
implementation of the Indian
Education Act is one of those
uses that is required
consultation is required when it
comes to the Indian Education
Act so it without putting a
specific paragraph in the bill
that says that because it's tied
to one of the four tranches of
years it's in their.
Chairman Lundstrom I mean it's
one of the four potential uses
are they required to have
consultation or only if they
choose to put the money into
areas of the Indian Education
Act.
Mr chairman I think at it's my
understanding is that the Indian
Education Act at least from from
the district that I represent
and others that are
predominately native is one of
the biggest basis in terms of
responding to the Yazzie versus
Martinez lawsuit so we feel that
that would be
And and I'm not trying to speak
on behalf the district but a no
brainer for them so to speak in
that that would that's exactly
what we're trying to do is to
make sure that there's adequate
funding in consultation with the
tribe's regarding the Indian
Education Act and I might ask
Charles or my my co us sponsors
joined us so you may have
additional comments Mr chairman.
Chairman.
Good.
Education thank you have a beer
I'm I'm happy to answer any
questions anyone might have.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee of the Indian
Education Act already has
provisions for a needs
assessments as well as seeking
additional funds as well as the
tribal consultation impact Aid a
law already requires tribal
consultation I recognize that
there's
concerns among many that this
might not be strong enough but
they are already current law and
now that they get extra money I
would anticipate that that would
be part of the discussions as
well and so that the bill does
not try to duplicate other
aspects of law when it comes to
those things Mr chairman.
Thank you I think what I'm
getting at is as I read through
it the the four pockets but it
really is up to the district as
to whether they put some in each
of the four they put it all into
one.
Is that accurate.
Mr chairman if they if I may
please
they have to consult on impact
aid.
If you receive the native
American set aside at the impact
aid already.
Okay.
What we hear regularly from the
tribes is they don't feel like
you're being consulted or at
least listen to when it comes
consultation takes place again I
think that's what what I'm
getting at is your is there this
bill require that there be no
impactful probably a bad word
for impact aid bill but it is
there are substantive about
consultation with the tribe's.
You Mr chairman.
What was beautiful about the
presentation and those that
spoke in support where the
lobbyist for the various tribes
so I would have a standard that
point that they would have
raised that issue of that when I
heard who spoke in favor of the
bill this morning sounds like
they they feel like it's a it's
a good method.
What those are done I'm I'm very
conflicted like I said we have
to build that okay yet at the
same issue in slightly different
ways
and yeah my guess is it's likely
that they're going to go up the
governor and the governor will
get to decide which direction
she wants to go with the as I
look at I think SB forty one
does a little bit more as far as
putting the money's
coming towards the the state
local match as it moves out
toward the ten year rolling
average this one has a little
bit more flexibility in some
other areas so it it probably is
going to be up to the governor
as to how she chooses to sign
that up any other questions from
committee members.
I'm not seeing any hands go up
if I miss you just jump.
If not we have a motion for a do
passes the Cheryl Mr chairman
again I'll move my two passed
motion thank you have a motion
from center but the effort you
passes their second.
Twenty one.
Someone is not muted.
I'm waiting for a second motion
from anyone on the committee.
One last time otherwise we're
going to die in committee for
lack of a second.
I'm not seeing anyone for a
second so you know I we are not
able to move forward if we do
not have anyone on the committee
that is interested in making a
seconding motion.
Well this is interesting
we may bring this back at
another time then Representative
would you be at would you be
interested in making a second on
that motion.
I'm I try not to either make
motions are seconds on bills
yeah that that words opted to my
a committee what this might do
is we might come and have a more
of a.
A an interaction between the two
bills L. as people get a chance
to look at the the difference
between the.
So Mister chair Mister chair if
if we could do that I would like
to sit down in in CS side by
side of the two bills and take a
take a little bit deeper look
because I'm still confused on on
the differences between the
bills are I really like to
Senator Stewart still and and I
just think I need to be
persuaded on why this one would
be better because I just don't
understand the differences so I
would certainly welcome either
LESC or Rachel maybe with L. E.
S. C. to do is start by side to
give us a real clear picture of
what the differences are and
bills and then at that point
maybe we could take a second
look thanks.
What I would recommend that we
will schedule for Wednesday is
more like yeah when we had a
presentation instead of an
actual bill on the table at that
point do you do more of a side
by side between the two bills
and at that point this would
still be sitting here we could
take a motion at that point if
that's appropriate as to what
the committee chooses to do
moving forward and so
representative of we've already
got a couple of carry overs but
on Wednesday we will take it up
as more of a presentation of the
two bills side by side and what
they do what they don't do and
at that point determine whether
the committee is ready to take
action and one that are.
Okay Mister chairman so that
means we won't need to worry
about having experts again what
is it does help us on
understanding the difference and
not testimony from the public
that kind of thing we've already
done that is that what you're
saying yes ma'am that's exactly
it is we potentially had most of
it what I'm hearing and feeling
from my committee is they really
want to see the two side by side
as to so what they do any
specific area of the bill before
making a recommendation moving
forward it correctly from my
committee I've seen couple heads
kinda nodding that that's.
The intent.
Okay yes.
Hearing thank you for the
hearing today.
Thank you and thank you for
being here and stay with us and
Senate education.
And so with that we are going to
move to house bill forty three
as amended and is for moving
over towards that for the public
house bill two thirty two has
been rolled over to Wednesday
wells the sponsor is making a
committee substitute house bill
one twenty eight at extensive
amendments so it's being held
until Wednesday so we can
analyze those house bill six is
going to have more of a side by
side comparison Senate bill
forty with that forty three my
brains turning much on Wednesday
and so we are now on house bill
forty three is amended Education
Act Representative Stapleton
welcome back thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee good morning
house with forty three the black
Education Act with my staff and
senator Paul creates within the
Public Education Department
critical mechanisms to address
educational disparities that
exist for black students Mr
chairman and members of the
committee current national
research has recently released a
congressional mandated annual
report the condition of
education twenty twenty that
think that a very unsettling
national picture of the state of
education for black students
poverty is the highest for black
students lack of internet access
black students attend high
poverty schools achievement gap
has not closed school drop out
rate is high and graduation and
college enrollment rates so low
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill forty three
authorizes a comprehensive
Advisory Council and a liaison
provides anti racism
professional development for
school personnel include
programs curricula and
instructional materials for
black that teach black culture
requires.
Status report to the secretary
and appropriates two hundred
thousand dollars to the black
education department.
A black education to the public
education department sorry Mr
Chairman.
This identifying best practices
for strengthening educational
outcomes for black students I
dress in black student
achievement gap.
Recommended curricular and
instructional materials that
include the history and culture
of black people and provided a
mechanism for parents community
and business organization public
schools public post secondary
educational institution to
institution and policymakers to
work together to improve
educational opportunities for
black students I Mr chairman and
members of the committee and now
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative I
should say Majority Leader
do you have any experts as part
of part of your presentation
right.
I do believe Mr chairman there's
Dr Jamal Martin from the
university of New Mexico all and
I believe also that there is Dr
Hey lady from this associate
dean of equity inclusion and
from the university of New
Mexico I believe that might be
available and there is Dr
Benjamin from PED.
Did you want them just available
as expert witnesses or did they
part of a presentation acts
expert witness I think Jamal
Martin has maybe maybe speak as
a our expert witness and then
the rest of fall and after the
late and Dr Benjamin is that X.
fall questions I'm answering
technical questions regarded
she's from the PED.
Thank you Dr Martin did you want
to make some comments for we got
a public comment.
Yes I would thank you Mr
chairman members of the Senate
Education Committee and
legislators stables in New
Mexico I'm here and I'm happy to
answer any questions that the
committee may have in this
regard and I have seven brief
points that I like to make about
the importance of this bill if
if I may.
One is that I think it's
important that this bill helps
you to understand that
Representative people in
America's southwest have existed
and met New Mexico before
statehood and this is not a myth
but somehow this this myth
continues to remote the
maintenance of the status
correlates with valid is a
power.
secondly New Mexico notions of
black inferiority appears
amenable and they're rarely
challenged under the historic
notoriety into the Spanish
tradition of the B. as in a
Sunday the cleansing of the
blood a blood purity which is
created a racial caste system.
Third increase the twenty first
century populations of
recognizing that as a stable
democratic Republic demands
acting on the legal moral
appreciation of the connections
between education and health
both the civil and human rights
HB forty three slash eight as
amended is a step forward in
addressing the systemic
discrimination deliberate
indifference number nine to
collect needed to establish
educational equity.
Sars comment to an COVID
nineteen also because anti
racist college of an active
engagement in the mitigation of
negative social determinants of
health what it also transforms
the past and present educational
dept hopefully HB forty three
slash eight will also bring
close links with the whole
school whole community whole
child automatic model for all of
the nine school districts that
exist in the state.
Last but not least or just
coming up to my last couple of
points that I think support for
the scholarship in African
Studies can advance paradigms
the student centered learning
essential learning outcomes hi
student achievement I
educational practices deep
learning a deeper learning which
is status is a culture of shared
purpose continues improvement
for human dignity and freedom
and it also fosters civic and
cultural and ethical learning
and last but not least I want to
thanks provided stable tempo for
the due diligence and I support
any bill of bills that proposed
to mitigate the racial
inequities even get New Mexico
particularly those incidents
that that transforms ways of
knowing about the treatment gap
and not just as a form of a
culture deficit the recognize
New Mexico districts and I think
that at some point rather than
debates we need discourse on
that so this is a win win
situation for all and one of my
favorite phrases in this process
that health is academics and
academics itself and I think
sometimes we forget that we tend
to think of education as a sole
creator of wealth in this nation
and education is far more than
that is far more than that
people and you so you can have a
healthy economy if you don't
have all the people in education
is one of the main things which
even and overcoming those
achievement gaps there's an
achievement gaps so I'm gonna
stop right now and a lot of my
colleagues and others to chime
in and I'm here to answer any
other questions that you may
have about what I've said or
would you maybe consider thank
you very much.
Thank you Dr Martin
Majority leader anything else
we're gonna public comments I
get wrapped up in your titles
are different than ours and
trying to reach the right title
so I apologize if I ever get it
wrong thank you Mr chairman
I I'm not sure doctor I tried
being yeah it pele from
associate dean of equity
inclusion of faculty she's
there.
Thank you with us to make a few
comments.
Okay Mister chairman I go to
questions we'll go out to the
public until current you'll take
us through the public comment at
this point.
Thirty three as amended we did
not have any members of the
public register in advance to
speak in opposition if there are
any members of the public who
wish to speak in opposition to
house bill forty three as
amended at this time you may
raise your hand all.
The note we will now go to those
who wish to speak in favor of
the bill beginning with the with
the deal.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lisa deal I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty and we stand in
full support of this bill for
the reasons given by the sponsor
and her expert and is centering
student equity in education
thank you so much.
Thank you are there any other
members of the public who wish
to speak in support of house
bill forty three of the men did
please raise your hand.
And we will go.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Emily will doubt
Representative in New Mexico
voices for children and support
hospital forty three we believe
it's crucial for New Mexico to
pass this legislation that will
ensure black students are
supported by anti racist
practices and curriculum
throughout their education
learning about black culture and
into racism will benefit all of
our students we think
Representative Stapleton for
bringing this bill forward and
urge the committee to support
its passage thank you.
Thank you next we had Charlotte
when you all.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is
Charlotte Madeline L. I work
with Julianna Koob I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs the black Education Act
is an important policy and
building protective factors for
black youth in our schools today
we ask you to stand support
stand with us in support of
house bill forty three thank
you.
Thank you very much are there
any other members of the public
please raise your hand wish to
speak in support.
Okay thank you very much that
concludes public comment at this
time.
Thank you and yeah I'll go back
to the the sponsor of the bill I
mean lots of times always like
to give you a chance after
public input but it was all
favorable but any other comments
for we go to questions from the
committee now Mr chairman I
stand for questions.
Thank you we'll now go to
questions from the committee
Senator Pinto.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward I
was reading through the bill
and.
How are we going to define or
categorize the children as being
black.
Representative.
I Mr Chairman representative I'm
Senator sorry good morning
Senator Pinto
In in in public education I
believe that Dr Benjamin is the
and so you can properly express
how the department determines
our our figure out I Hispanic
child from a native American
child from African American
style in the education system.
I can give my own opinion of was
black and was not black but you
know just by how you look.
So I'm I'm.
Mr chairman and senator Dr
Benjamin may be able to answer
that on behalf of you do and how
the school district the school
system in the state of New
Mexico the term and that
nationality all of the races of
different children.
Good morning Mr chairman.
I am doctor Benjamin and I am
the deputy secretary of identity
and we transformation for Mexico
Public Education Department and
the identifies that we use.
Just what is charter schools and
campuses that when children and
families register and the self
identify they fill out
documentation that the house of
course that let us know how they
identify with the African
American or African American and
it doesn't ethnicity or Spanish
or any other ethnicity so we use
that information as provided by
families to identify and
categorize students we want to
respect how people identify and
we trust and use the information
that is shared with us by
families when they register for
schools.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Representative.
There are there any charter
schools within New Mexico that
kind of
specialize or you know initiate
the black history within their
schools.
Mr chairman and senator she can
tell I I'm I don't have
specifically on charter schools
that.
Emphasizes
black history
I know that for example in in in
and high schools in public
schools middle schools and
elementary schools on the a we
have a six week we for example
of exploration of careers in
middle school and they can talk
about the different very S.
history of of mass different
nationalities but I also I'm
aware Mr chairman and senator
Pinto that specifically during
the month of black history lots
of educators across the state at
all levels talk with the
students about black history.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
representative that's a teacher
as far as history and the
resources that the state adopts
there is very probably less than
a paragraph.
In corporate ID in the.
It in that sense is this going
to dress any of that are we just
couldn't expected task force to
kind of give advice and manner
Mr chairman and senator Penn
Pentel my hope is that this
piece of legislation will
address exactly what you have
just stated.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and when we talk
about cultural.
And you know just the and the
point ample the the state of New
Mexico and the tribes in the
different nations how is this
going to protect
the different cultures that are.
You know the yeah you can be
back but you still have all your
your identifying tribes and
stuff will this protect them
also.
I'm I am trying to understand
your question could you restate
that question for me.
Mr chair of members of the
committee and Representative
I'm.
I guess in some sense you know
the US is kind of a melting pot
now and our children identify
very differently and you will
not be able to have me let go of
my my niece who is half black
in that sense but I think in in
that sense to I wish for her to
identify them further not just
to the point of where she says
that she's back in her dad's
from Chicago but that she has a
deeper insight into it and I'm
hoping that this does not create
a very are kind of put them into
just one.
Category I like how we are kind
of in some sense
state well they're just native
American and we're gonna leave
it at that but they're still
that the protections of the one
that.
Be more identified that it would
this would not hinder anything
like that.
Mr chairman and Senator Pinto I
hope I would hope not but let me
share with you I am the epitome
I the culture of mixture now
when I lived in New York and I I
I was consider
looked upon as a Latina as a
black Latino and I I am because
of my mother's having to deal
for the weekend and my
grandfather of Cuban but my
father is British black from the
Virgin Islands and so I come to
New Mexico and
What I consider myself of both
cultures and I was raised in
both colleges but some people
don't understand it why would I
be considered a back to the team
that if they don't know that
geography and if they don't know
the history you are correct and
so basically I say to you that
in the state of New Mexico we
have a lot of children who are
white and black Hispanic black
native on black.
I'm.
What the from Laguna pueblo was
big enough to present along with
all of us on that crown Act as
native American in a black woman
it depends on how that shot I
was raised at home in their
culture to determine that they
can exist in both cultures and
that can be considered for both
colleges both heritage and so
this piece of legislation
Mr chairman and senator dole
would enable and foster our
young people to believe in the
existence of who they are and
not one hundred other.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you Representative for
your response in that.
So we do we are you know the
state of New Mexico in the
Indian Education Act and having
the multi lingual bilingual task
force and you know the Advisory
Councils and you know this is
following that but I think is
there are limits on this
What was the title of it
commission or council are there
term limits on the council.
I Mr chairman and Senator Pinto
the bill asked to authorize a
comprehensive Advisory Council
and that is up to the PED to put
in place on the creation of the
council and and the rules and
regulations so rounding the
council wants the bill has been
passed
there is I don't believe we have
been here that we should have a
limit on a and we as a three
years fall council because the
council is needed to advise you
to the Department.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and the reason I.
State that you know as far as
what the Indian Education Act
and you know it if I'd like to
see a side by side of this when
we talk about correlating and
making consistency when we're
going to incorporate
Identifying factors into the
education system that I think
there has to be consistency and
some sort of
At eight.
So we don't have and any quality
Billy being built at so if
there's something that the
Indian Education Act that orgy
addresses something that could
be very similar to this it
should correlate to look to me
and even with any Advisory
Council and that manner as far
as the admin Bisi with Indian
Education that it should
probably follow almost the same
guidelines as far as membership
as far as whatever the term
limits are that so we don't
create in any quality in some
sense we create create this I'm
not I'm not saying everybody is
exactly equal in this manner of
how because we know there are
discrepancies and
In.
Inequities and injustices when
it comes to due to the skin
color of our people so.
In that sense you know I'm not
an expert on all of this because
of when we talk about history
and all the laws in the in
statutes in the state of New
Mexico and what we have
incorporate all the changes we
have done in PED but that I
think they should very.
Be very close should be closed
in that sense of when we draw
these things out
and and.
You know I don't weird time
crunch here Representative I am
applaud you for this but I think
also to when we do something
like this we must be very
careful as far as educating in
the matter of how barriers can
be broken not just created when
you identifying yourself or
moving forward as a way to find
that I find some of the members
of my own people that they are
kind of stuck in history in that
they just focus on the
injustices that were.
That took place in which we
cannot change but that progress
has to be put forward in that
they have to take that step two
to step in to where we are now
we're our children need to go so
that they don't have all there
is some violence around them
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee thank
you Representative thank you Mr
chairman I get my deepest
apology to Senator how local I
should have had him speak
initially as a co sponsor I I
apologize deeply Mr chairman and
senator Paul so if you would
like to express any comments at
this time Mr chairman please
would you allow it.
Absolutely so Senator pope
either as a sponsor or if you
have any questions as a member
of the committee.
Great madam leader no apologies
I I just came back into the
committee I'm running around
just like you are this morning
you just this Senate rules I saw
you popped in for second
I I'm in support of this bill
I'm a co sponsor and I just
thank this leads us on another
path of just dispelling the tri
cultural myth in this state
and I I just think this is just
an important part I want to
commend the the discussion from
that's been had here since I've
joined the meeting and I just
and I hear the concern Sir
Senator Pinto as well and I am a
an African American person with
a mixed background as well and I
think this bill is not going to
target education to put someone
into a box or put them into one
segment of of the state or
society but it gives them an
opposite it gives them an
opportunity to learn about their
background and their culture and
their history and I think that
hasn't happened here in some
cases in the state we just want
to make sure that that we're
doing so thank you Majority
Leader for bringing this forward
and I don't have any other
questions thank you thank you Mr
thank thank you senator I'm
looking to see other members of
the committee if they have any
questions I don't see any right
now and so I have some and and
usually my questions tend to be
more technical in nature because
I always want to make sure that
we passed good legislation not
just legislation with good
intent and so as I look through
it on page five line twelve.
I'll give you a moment to to get
there.
But it has a whole section
addressing black student
achievement gap and wholistic
systemic manner that includes
clearly articulate measures to
improve public education that
results in what do you what we
mean how do we find that is that
a one percent increases in a
twenty percent increase and this
indicates essentially they have
to do with or no they're not
filling their job
should that instead instead of
reading that
Things that have been shown to
substantially increase
achievement.
Substantially increases in
violation of the law.
Hi you're on mute
Representative.
We all with that usually being
on mute is better than thinking
you're on mute and saying things
that you don't want to what
heard that's true Mr.
What was the last statement
about
the substantially improve
education rates I'm it Mr
chairman the data has shown that
the achievement right and that
at the graduation rates fall.
Black students not only in New
Mexico but across this country
and in New Mexico is under
represented in comparison to all
of the students that and so I'm
substantial would be determined
by the PED.
I I didn't want to give a
percentage so a number but the
it but having an increased.
The representative I I fully
understand that but as a
statistician things like
substantial have you have some
meaning are significant has had
a meaning that it is actually
change that and I think which
really means here is you want to
implement programs that it shown
substantial increases not that
resulted in substantial
increases because that almost
after the fact it doesn't result
in that then the laws been
violated and I think you want to
implement programs that have
been shown to substantially
increase results in achievement
best practices Mr chairman.
Yes it doesn't say that in here
that it says you would you're
going to do these things and it
will result in.
and we don't know that and so
you want to use things that have
been shown in other places too
result in substantial increases.
I know that you but yeah we're
making a lot of words matter.
Okay.
And so the moves forward you
might well look at just kind of
a short amendment in there to
clarify.
That what substantial means or
the Kerr implementing best
practices into their number one
says best practices for
strengthening educational
outcomes.
But then it says to do it in a
holistic systemic manner that
clearly articulates the measures
yet you clearly show the
measures that will result in
well we don't know that they
will you will use best practices
that have shown that they result
in.
Thank you Mr chairman I will
take that into consideration on
page six one six this gets into
directing more professional
development and I'm beginning to
get very nervous that every bill
we pass requires additional
professional development and I
see Center don't kind of
laughing as teachers it seems
like we got twenty different
professional developments we
have to sign off on every single
year before we can start
teaching that this looks like
another professional development
I'm hoping they do over the
interim in L. E. S. C. that we
actually look at what are all
the required professional
development and see if we can do
some combination combining and
things like that rather than
have twenty different boxes that
all have to be check marked.
My question though is on line
six it says all personnel.
Does that include the guy
running the mower out on the
field is it just teachers and
aides and administrators is that
cafeteria workers all personnel
for a number of them and I think
it says later on that this would
be an online
professional development but
who's considered in all
personnel.
Mr chairman I'll person is all
personnel related to find in and
working with students
in school districts.
Well does that include the
custody in the lunch ladies.
monitor.
Yes but yeah you get them to
again yeah yeah people
interacting the bus drivers the
no there's quite a number of
different people and I don't I'm
not sure that's clearly defined
to all personnel who then the
district I presume has to verify
the table at this professional
development.
So I'm I'm not sure that ought
to be more clearly defined who
we do you know whether it's all
instructional staff whether it's
you know all the building person
as opposed to maintenance person
on the maintenance person to
come in contact with students
and other things but I'm not
sure that that's who you want to
have to go through or just sit
and do the the professional
development on the computer with
it.
As we go on
When my notes here I'm sorry
This requires a report to the L.
E. S. C..
On page seven.
On page seven requires a report
to the L. E. S. C..
Isn't this report already done
in this might be more of a
requests for Dr Benjamin.
Isn't this report already done
it this so things like
enrollment.
High school by grade by school I
think that's already done number
and type of bilingual
multicultural programs and
school districts and charters
attendance and truancy are those
not already part of the the
required reporting to the to the
PED.
Yes we do there is currently
required reports in place to
give baseline information as you
have shared but what is missing
is what the black Education Act
is asking for we don't just want
to know who's showing up we want
to know who showing up how
they're performing what best
practices programs and
implementations are in place to
help improve performance
measures improved graduation
measures so we want what the
black Education Act as well as
increased increased reporting an
increased accountability not
just the baseline information
that we have I'm being currently
report.
Thank you and I understand that
but I'm on page seven starting
line fourteen is it says that
the data should be ethnicity by
great by school I think that's
already out every year the type
of bilingual multicultural
programs attendance and truancy
for all grades.
Disaggregated now I don't know
and and it might be for Rachel
or if Johnson had is that
disaggregated by.
By ethnicity already or is that
just a a blanket one student
achievement by ethnicity I know
we get all of that.
Comes out in the in the report
that's already done I believe
and so this seems like it's just
redundant with what's already
there graduation rates by
ethnicity I know that's already
reported.
Senator Senator souls if I could
yes please yeah thank you Mr
chair I think that I think the
distinction here's your right we
do gather most of that date
already the distinction in the
act is that it would be compiled
specifically for the purposes of
highlighting how black students
are doing and that's something
that we have not done so far is
specifically calling out the
the.
The performance of black
students and highlighting where
they might need additional
support of what kind of systemic
changes might be needed to
address those issues so you're
right the data itself exists
school districts report them to
us but I think this is a
specific emphasis on on black
students and the progress.
Thank you Mr Senator and so
would this be the after that
date is already reported that
somebody's going to do this
liaison going to do a report
that just pools those pieces out
but it still would have to be a
comparison with how all the
other students are doing with
it.
Mr chair yes it would it is
based on the bill the reading of
the bill I think that the key
language here is that it
highlights black student split
so it's still in comparison to
other students but it's
highlighting.
Again data for for black
students specifically.
Okay going on to the next page
there's a whole section here on
higher education data reporting
and this may again be per doctor
Benjamin do you coordinate with
higher ed and their data
collection at the university's
on black student data or how are
we going to get from the
information from higher ed to
PED as part of this report and
verified that the results
moderate are accurate.
Thank you for the question Mr
chairman and so part of the
language as you all read through
the black proposed black
Education Act is creating more
specific intentional
partnerships with but with
higher education to make sure
that we're not just looking at
again the baseline data that's
already being reported that
already does consist of
enrollment program completion
and things of that nature but
also working more in
collaboration to support grade
school children before they get
to higher education and working
in partnership to create better
conditions to get them prepared
for higher education and once
they arrive at higher education
what are we doing to support
this successful completion so
the bill does talk about those
more intentional partnerships
are with higher education to
make sure we're not waiting
until some of them get there
we're creating the conditions to
get so more of that get back and
be successful when they are
there.
Thank you and I I fully support
the intention and everything I'm
talking about specifically this
requires in the report all of
this data and information from
higher at.
And as higher ed been consulted
that do they have this do they
already collect all of this
information and how are they
going to manage to gather all
this to hand it over to PED's
for this report.
Yes they have been they have
been consulted just
conversations with the team and
specifically with the interim
secretary about willingness to
partner in that was favorable
that willingness has been
concerned and not only that just
looking through the bill just
talking about additional pieces
of information recommended I
hire a school for that do not
currently exist so yes there is
not only willingness but
excitement and expectation that
we can increase the partnership
and so far as accountability is
concerned that would be a piece
of the role and responsibilities
of the liaison or directed that
would move forward would work
with an assigned interesting in
higher education for the account
that you don't just want to
collect that information what
you're absolutely correct who's
going to read it and once
somebody read what happened they
don't appreciate where what are
they going to do with the
information so yes there is a
great.
To do exactly that work in
partnership with PED and I need.
Thank you that's very nice to
hear because they're all hasn't
always been that close
partnership that I read is kinda
said we're over here yeah you
guys go do your thing and some
reluctance among some of the
higher ed to report all of the
different data as far as
ethnicity of faculty and hiring
practices and other kinds of
things of that sort of one of my
bigger concerns with the bill
and if we're on now page nine
and rolling over the top of Page
ten has to do with all districts
have to have a hotline to report
incidents of racially charged
aggression.
Absolutely wonderful intention
this bill takes effect July
first two schools and charter
schools and districts have to
one up and running by July one.
The lady implementation Mr
Chairman I am working with the
secretary still what to as with
this bill more fall like to have
an amendment that so that's not
going to be all districts have
been but the state have been I'm
not lying.
that'll I'll.
Right.
Apologize Majority Leader of
does that hotline have to be up
and running July one when this
bill takes effect we got school
starts with teachers all coming
back in August Mr Chairman based
on the discussion with the
secretary I'm in terms of make
in the different amendments that
we will bring as a bill will all
fall what based on the what the
tool that you suggest that
it will it will be up to the
secretary to determine with that
they will have it they would be
able to have it ready and.
Maybe Dr Benjamin can respond on
that our center
met Matt CENIC then respond to
that please Mr Chairman yes
either doctor Benjamin or Mr
Senator or both.
So I was respond first Mr
chairman and so while we are
watching the progress of
movement of the bill the
discussion has absolutely been
all I.
Our willingness to to manage the
hotlines you designed to and to
make available hot line through
PED well we do not have a
specific deadlines for because a
lot of that will keep you all at
if the bill passes when the bill
passes and things of that nature
but we absolutely are in
conversation right now about
taking steps forward it will not
be a second thought but it'll be
primary small in a primary
actions to do all that we can to
make sure that if this bill
passes.
Families students anyone
community members who witness
Rep racially aggressive or
racially charged incidents have
a means of reporting in not only
reporting but PED is preparation
if the bill passes to make sure
that there is certain action in
certain response that can happen
so it's not just a box checking
element because it legislation
needs to be.
And PED stand in support of good
legislation leading to good raw
and real action.
Mister would you like to comment
as far as on the on specifically
on the hotline and what costs
might be to get it up and
running and those responsible
manpower costs all those kinds
of things.
Thank you Mr chair I I think and
again we want to thank the
sponsor for being so cooperative
and working with the department
and as as Dr madam and so we
want to make sure that it's done
right and I think part of the
discussions that we're having
right now are what is the best
way to roll it out so that
we do have the the appropriate
capacity to make sure that any
any sort of hotline is available
to to school districts and the
folks around the state and so I
can speak to the specifics of
what
When we think that would be
ready but I think that's part of
the discussion with the sponsor
right now to make sure that.
The the heart of the bill.
Means intact and that we work at
the appropriate time line for
how to roll out the the specific
provisions so that it's done
right.
Thank you I appreciate that if
you get I think that was Senator
newbuilds Bill that had the
hot line for reporting threats
against individuals and schools
that had a fairly hefty price
tag and so what I worry that
yeah without money to fund
specifically the hot wind that
this becomes an unfunded mandate
either on the districts or
whether the the pad has funds
available to set up a hotline
because a hot line has to be
then this past that people that
are listening to it are there
any provisions for how
informational get put out to the
public that this hotline is
available for for making
reporting you know how would
that work that people know that
it's it's they are unavailable
yeah I'll start with
Representative Stapleton.
Or you can defer it to whoever
you like.
I'm Mr Chairman at I do believe
that there as we go proper we go
forward that PED intends to find
ways to and so those solutions
for you all but we have to
individuals from very rare I'm
not sure about my discussions
were with Dr still what in
regards to make in some
amendments to make sure that it
would work out correctly.
Okay.
Yes please go ahead Mr center.
I'm sorry to interrupt
Representative Mister chair I
would just say that no the
provisions of the bill place the
responsibility for letting
people know on school districts
in our discussion with the with
the sponsor in terms of shifting
that responsibility to that the.
PED for for hosting the website
I would imagine that the the
appropriate communication
responsibilities would also fall
to us either on our website or
via other means to make sure
that people are aware of the
hotline.
Okay
I'm just some final questions or
things this creates a liaison is
this a new position or is this a
reassignment of doctor manner
been to liaison position as
opposed to the equity director
of equity or is this a new F. T.
in in order to do all of this.
Mr Chairman I am not sure what
the PED intends to do with Dr
Benjamin she is currently that
at the from position but we do
need an STP within the black
Education Act I'm it's a
beginning stage I'm I'm sure if
we want to increase self funding
and Mr chairman if you were to
give us some of the money you
that we could move it up to a
bigger position what money's
anybody using Mr chairman.
Okay part of my salary.
Why salaries close to yours
okay.
So as at I'm sure that PED would
look at best call and then we
and that's about the discussion
that we've been discussing.
Okay I'm.
Thank I guess the other the two
hundred thousand that is in
house bill two I worried that
that's inadequate for for the
additional a person that's going
to be required for the reporting
for gathering for heading up the
commission the various things
were certainly for setting up a
professional development and
rolling that out to districts as
well as certainly the the faster
the hotline I hope that you
continue to work with the
department I think there's some
concern there as to this all
takes effect July one and so you
guys you madam possibly some
amendments that delay
implementation of parts of it so
that rules out over a couple of
years so that additional funding
and responsibilities can can
match up I think might be very
appropriate let me look and see
I'm done with my questions and
anyone else on my committee has
questions I'm not seeing any is.
Senator Pinto did you have other
questions.
Yes Mr chair on that point of
the Mr chair and members of the
the representative on the point
about the hotline I'm.
We have the office the state
office right office of African
American affairs.
Yes quiet quarry.
To try to put anybody on the
spot but during this time and
what's been happening with in
you know our society.
I don't is there a hotline on
that website.
Mr chairman and Senator Pinto I
don't believe so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Okay anyone else in the
committee.
Again my comments I I fully
support this is more technical
lead on how it rolls out to make
sure that we do it well so that
it has the impact that that I
think we all wanted to help.
Mr chair.
Yes the COVID I I just want to
praise you and give you credit
that you know even on a bill
cosponsored by your vice chair
are you still do due diligence
so thank you.
It's part of our
responsibilities and jobs
appears to to make sure we read
and understand the many of the
bills that we're we're building
on so.
So we're open for a motion.
Mr chair I move I do pass on
house bill forty three amended
have a motion for a two passed
by Senator pope their second.
By Senator Hickey
if you will call the roll
please.
Senator Brandt.
Yes.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Neville.
Senator Neville.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes and I would like to explain
my vote.
Senator pope yes Senator salts
yes
I'm Senator Neville.
Yes okay thank you Sir we have
to pass.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you for bringing this bill
four.
I.
I think there's some
technicalities with that like I
said as far as correlating with
what they've done with native
American and
You know that the act and all of
that so I hope that can be
you know addressed in that
manner so we will see some
discrepancies thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you and majority floor
leader regarding.
We
apologize I get all twisted up
congratulations you have to do
passed out of Senate education
and please do make sure that you
got this couple of those
technical things working with
the department thank you Mr
chairman and I am in the
process.
Thank you thank you for being
here and Senate education thank
you
we now well just for the public
we're gonna move to house bill
ninety three as amended which is
let out of school suspensions
are for the public health bill
two thirty two as that was
rolled over to Wednesday as a
committee sub was being done
house bill one twenty he is also
has the committee so that needed
time for people to review
completely house bill six years
helping the committee pending a
discussion that compares house
bill six with Senate bill.
Was it forty three forty one
forty three.
and we just passed house bill
forty three is amended the black
Education Act so Representative
Lara welcome to Senate education
for house bill ninety three as
amended.
Do we have Representative a lot
of.
It looks like you might have
left the room Mr chair.
What is that we we do we don't
Representative Montoya.
Thank you we will skip over
house bill ninety three and
hopefully we can get that
represented a lot of back
Representative Montoya welcome
to Senate education for house
bill one thirty eight increasing
fine arts education program
units.
I think this is your first time
with us Sir welcome.
Thank you so much sure chairman
souls and members of this
wonderful Senate committee it is
indeed my first time and it's an
honor I'm here to present house
bill one thirty eight with the
attempt to restore funding for.
Fine arts education across the
state of New Mexico for K. six.
If I may just described a little
bit my personal connection to
this bill.
Previous to be elected I am a
professional choreographer and
dancer and painter I spent about
twenty years in the Espanola
schools and I was very very
lucky to work very close with
Representative Max call would be
introduced the fine arts
Education Act with his help and
inspiration I founded.
And directed thirteen school
program.
For over twelve years.
That experience was
transformative for me as a lay
person and is certainly an
important to my role today to
support this incredibly vital.
Movement to bring arts education
more central to the public
education system.
During those years.
The model that we developed was
largely visiting artist based it
was centered on culturally and
linguistically appropriate.
Programming we had seventy five
visiting artists that infuse the
school day with the vibrancy and
a lasting love for learning that
is certainly measurable by my
standards as a practitioner.
In tandem with classroom
teachers and.
Instructors and aids and more
importantly the school personnel
across all levels what we saw
was students who understood
their place in the world.
That they found a sense of
identity a relevance for
learning that has led to careers
for hundreds of students
pathways not only in the arts
that was irrelevant at a certain
point because the arts nourished
this passion in this purpose as
for who they are and their
lifelong learning.
So I just wanted you to
understand that.
This is one of the key reasons
that I ran for this office
because I understand.
Up close and personal how
powerful this is when we look at
school outcomes I believe there
characterized in the state of
New Mexico as dismal when we
look at the Yazzie Martinez K.
it points squarely at equity.
And I just want to say before I
go into the detail of this bill
that perhaps there's opportunity
hiding in plain sight that has
not yet in my thirty years
living in New Mexico after
career in New York City and and
a broad as an artist.
Being utilized and that is the
fact that New Mexico is so
layered in cultural identity and
languages and the other for the
last hundred years we've had
incredible contributions from
every culture and I I see that
we do not use the arts you know
we use it maybe as a side dish
if you will metaphorically
speaking as an enrichment tool
but when we look at a five point
five proposed increasing funding
for K. twelve and programs that
are really targeted and I'm
proud to say that impact aid
community schools K. five plus
at risk programs.
In all of those applications do
we fully appreciate and use the
arts as a form of medicine to
really bring the schools and
school learning to where we know
they need to be.
A little bit of history about
the bill in in twenty eighteen.
There was a change in the in the
multiplier what this bill is
seeking to do is restore
funding.
From a point zero five to a
point zero five four.
It it would come to about three
million dollars in additional
funding and I realize the given
the discussion today.
I need a hail Mary pass to make
this happen but I'm here to say
I'm going to fight for this if
it means moving into the interim
and really being a voice for
this kind of learning.
Three million dollars represents
just point zero zero nine of the
proposed five point five
increasing K. twelve funding.
I have a couple of wonderful
experts that I believe were in
the room Mr Daniel fear and Mr
Kurt Schmidt and I'm wondering
if it's if it's appropriate Mr
chairman and members to have
them speak at this time is that
how you do it on the side it's
my first time.
Yes I want to remind people we
do have a hard stop in about
twenty minutes and we've got
another bill after this so we
people who need it very short
and up to the the effect of the
the change in their the formula
Health Division.
Understood in my experts will be
very very brief.
I'd like to bring first Mr
Daniel fear and then followed by
Kurt Schmidt.
Good morning thank you chair
thank you committee I'm the
chairman at
the end of your in the fine arts
coordinator for Farmington
municipal schools in the chair
for the New Mexico Advisory
Council in arts education it's
my pleasure to speak before this
committee as chair of the
Advisory Council I work
alongside brilliantly created
and like minded arts educators
from across the state all with
one goal a high quality arts
education for the children New
Mexico.
What's it like to make in
support of funding changes
proposed by HB one thirty eight.
This year I watched arts
education become more important
than ever for children in
schools as they have been truly
discouraged by the social
isolation in the last ten months
I've seen kids sing dance draw a
lack in their fine arts classes
and I can't help but notice the
joint since community being
created and those spaces even
online with intention art
classes can provide the best
social emotional learning.
Also even though Farmington is
considered a metropolitan area
our connection to rural and our
schools are culturally diverse
the restoration of funding will
go far providing more equity for
our diverse classrooms.
Multiple studies have found that
race ethnicity and socio
economic status to predict the
person access to the arts and
culture of the community with
minority and disadvantaged
students having the least access
other studies have shown that
the same students have a great
deal to gain provided arts
education and are dependent upon
their schools to give it to
them.
Finally Farmington and many
other communities throughout the
state have received designations
as in New Mexico arts and
cultural district our school
should reflect contribute and
nurture that community we asked
the committee today to support
this and pass this piece of
legislation this is great policy
Mr chairman and committee
members H. B. one thirty eight
will restore not increased that
restore the funding that was
lost in the fine arts programs
across the state The New Mexico
by the council on arts education
urges you to support H. B. one
thirty eight it passed house
committees in the house floor
strong support thank you for
time I'm not sure to go to Mr
Schmidt.
Good morning chairman souls
members of the committee my name
is Kurt Schmidt and I'm the
executive director of fine arts
for Rio Rancho public schools I
also service pastor of the New
Mexico Advisory Council on arts
education I just want to add a
few points Mr statement first of
all I want to give you a real
life example of what happened in
districts with the formula
change in my district we had to
cut to full time teaching
positions last year luckily the
district was able to cover one
of those positions and I was
able to reassign to the teacher
however not every district was
able to do to have such
combinations and many were
therefore forced to make
difficult cuts also it's been
suggested that some of the
reduction in funding experienced
by districts under the formal
change was due to reduced to on
student enrollment my district
saw such a reduction but even
after adjusting for fewer
students the formula change
still would have resulted in
fewer funds and force forced out
and what forces to a limited up
to two position and finally I I
would just like to cite a few
numbers demonstrating what this
bill would mean for arts
programs in our state how the
new multiplier we're proposing
in this bill been in place for
this school year and based on
projected enrollments as tech
for example would have received
an additional twenty one
thousand dollars for their arts
programs Bloomfield extra twenty
six thousand dollars Los crucis
two hundred thousand dollars Rio
Rancho hundred sixty two
thousand dollars Carlsbad
seventy thousand dollars Artesia
thirty nine thousand dollars
Gallup seventy six thousand
dollars in APS seven hundred
eighty five thousand dollars all
these amounts representing a
restoration of funding that
supports fine arts education for
New Mexico students so thank you
again for your time this morning
and we would appreciate your
support.
Thank you for we got a public
comment any particular any
additional things
Representative.
you know this is been a very
controversial and a big learning
curve I work with sunny Lujan I
work with Rachel gradual and
these folks are really at and
we're to matter you know words
like restore.
Are not a largely agreed upon
but I'm open to the debate I'm
here to fight and be a champion
for arts education as long as I
in this this body and and long
past that as well so let's go to
public comment if that's
appropriate now chairman souls.
Thank you you'll take us through
public comment I would remind
the public we limit the two
minutes per person we are on a
very tight schedule so please
keep your comments concise.
Health one thirty eight we will
go directly to those here today
in the public if there are any
members of the public who wish
to speak in opposition to house
bill one thirty eight please
raise your hand now.
No hands rates we will go to
those who wish to speak in favor
are there any members of the
public wishes speak in favor
please raise your hand.
Thank you very much that
concludes public comment.
Thank you.
We're not gonna go to questions
from the committee and as we do
that just the a little bit my
understanding is there is not
additional money headed to the
S. T. out of this the SCG hi is
is so big what this would do is
actually redistribute some of
the money's there towards
fine arts education by changing
the multiplier from twenty zero
five two point zero five four so
it it doesn't add additional
money also there wasn't any need
that was used to be restored
this is actually increasing the
funding districts okay the
money.
Specified I think towards one
particular thing the money goes
to the districts based on the
multipliers that up the local
school boards and districts on
whether they actually put that
into fine arts education thanks
to bring but questions from the
committee center Pinto I have
you up first.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and thank you
Representative
do you know how many.
Current.
School personnel are able to
teach fine arts.
Thank you to six.
Senator schools and
Representative pito I'm gonna do
for in a moment to to Kurt
Schmidt to answer more specific
questions but I I know that in
the application for fine arts
education funding each district
has the opportunity to devise
sort of a site specific model
some rely on bona fide arts
educators who are certified and
others rely on an arts in the
schools artist in residence
approach which is the the model
that I used in the Espanola
schools I will do I will defer
to to Kurt Schmidt to further
clarify that's okay.
Gentleman souls Senator if I
understand your question
correctly do are you looking for
a exact number of teachers who
teach fine arts is that.
Russell that are qualified.
I don't have that really
available I can tell you that
that the
Nearly every single district and
charter about under its charter
but every single district of
takes part in the FAA and I I
about I just can't give you the
numbers of numbers of teachers
where possible of these teachers
are or call her qualified and
certified center I'm not sure
you're could add anything to
that.
Mr chair members of the
committee and the reason I ask
that you know the I have to say
sergeant probably the biggest
school districts in the state of
New Mexico that I represent and
it's easy to say yes Farmington
is participating yes Gallup is
participating but with
populations that are rural
that's why I am asking exactly
how many are out there because
we.
If we're going to do this and
the money's not at you know
factor in that sense are we
opening ourselves up to
litigation in the sense of how
is this related to you know
special education in that sense
and especially to disciplinary
issues when we talk about this
freedom of expression while we
stay quiet nights because that
is a whole different realm in
which it's not clearly defined
and.
You know children do you have
that
right to express themselves but
yet we do disciplinary issues
and we have just school clothes
and but when the children are
they're trying to
Fashion themselves in that sense
from head to toe it is counted
against them and more in the
sense of us seeing it at its
freedom Act expression in that
sense so what we're going to do
something like this I think
there's a bit of a deeper
meaning to it I don't know if
you want to comment on that.
Sen chairman souls and Senator I
referred to you as
Representative and I deeply
apologize this is my first time
crossing over when it when you
mentioned the potential for
legal challenges it kind of
threw me for a second I'm I'm
not sure where you're going you
also mentioned special education
in my experience the arts
programs that I help to run
were so beneficial to every
student and especially those
with learning challenges we made
every effort to use the arts to
build sense of belonging a sense
of of self awareness a sense of
cultural relevancy and most
importantly the vital connection
to relevant learning.
Whatever level it was very
effective so I don't know if
anyone else can answer the
question of legal issues
I'm not nine nine Charlie.
I might yeah that that lots of
those are a bit outside the
realm of this bill where it's
just changing that.
The formula calculation in the
SCG.
I mean certainly there's always
concerns about whether things
are then equitable but this
really changes but the money
that goes to each district and
then it's up to districts on how
they they spend that money by
each school which and Senator
Pinto we certainly know that's
not always out there within
districts.
And thank you Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee and
thank you Representative and I
don't think we do enough for you
as far as gifted and I think
this is where it kind of really
puts
because when you test the child
in that sense in the following
to a different spectrum a gifted
child and we don't provide those
services knowing fully well that
someone as qualified there to
teach it are to help them with
that and the money is there
within the district I think that
does open us up to litigation in
the sense of not meeting the
needs of the child
so thank you Mr chairman thank
you members of the committee.
Thank you senator.
I've got several other people up
Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I want to thank the
representatives that not only
for bringing the bill I I do
worry about a little bit about
that.
When you whenever you shift of
the unit values from one area to
another certainly there are
those that are going to get
increased funding and some of
some of the other districts are
going to see a decrease in
funding.
Excuse me but I'm I know I've
been been I have been trying
over the last few years to to
get a shift for CTE funding and
and I would really like to see a
little bit of a change in the
formula that anytime you take
add to you're going to take away
someplace else and so it's kind
of a complicated issue and I
wonder if you have considered no
we don't like to talk about the
Los the line funding but maybe
this would be a place if if this
bill isn't successful to begin
next year to create some
programming that that would give
fat those districts an
opportunity to apply for
additional dollars it's not is
Stable as through the funding
formula that certainly would
give an opportunity to do that I
I support the idea.
But I just worry that when we
start shifting the value of
units without going through
perhaps L. E. S. C. R. the LFC
to kind of figure out what
that's gonna mean across the
board I worry about that but I
love your passion and I agree
with you that it's really
something that that we need to
make sure our schools receive
the funding they need to do this
I wonder if you have to look
back at I believe in this was
before I was here.
It may be sunny or someone from
LFC has history on what
Representative called dead
Mexico I think you did something
years and years ago expecting
that this would would live
forever and I don't think it has
and I think that that what
you're trying to do is bring it
back maybe to the intent of what
that Mexico did years ago would
that be correct are you familiar
Representative with that effort.
Chairman and senator absolutely
yes back in nineteen eighty
seven ninety seven I started a
program at the bill are the
elementary school on my own I
found the funding and saw
remarkable results by two
thousand two I read in the news
newspaper that that then
representative Michael was
introduced in the finance
Education Act I called him I
went to dinner with his wife
that night and it set off the
next fifteen years actually the
next twenty five years of my
life it's been transformed by
what his intent was I believe
that perhaps this is the time to
build upon that exceptionally
powerful work in bring arts
education more to the center for
a whole host of reasons
particularly school outcomes
that are again characterizes
dismal we have not fully use the
arts education as a tool perhaps
centrally as the main course
even in the state of New Mexico
I hope I answered your question
you did thank you for that in
you know history is a good thing
to know and I appreciate your
bringing that forward at again I
don't disagree with your intent
I just wonder what we're gonna
do about this the the shifting
unit thank you that's my only
concern that but I do appreciate
and I'll keep listening thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chair yes.
My apologies I like to make a
motion to do pass on house bill
one thirty eight okay we have a
motion for it to pass I think I
still have one other person on
the list Senator Brandt and then
we'll get to that you passed
motion.
Mr chairman.
With the interest of time let's
just go and do the motion I was
just going to speak in favor of
the bill so.
second senator I will go I thank
you senator I I appreciate the
the comments we have a due
process motion is there a second
or did you seconded Senator
Brandt my second thank you we
have a motion and a second
million if you call the roll
please Senator Brandt yes.
Icky.
Yes.
Senator Kernan.
Yes let me explain about that
Senate Bill yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto yes.
Senator pulp pulp test center
San.
Yes and Senator Kernan to
explain about these what what
thank you and I'm gonna ask a
representative to help me co
sponsor my bill to increase
funding for CTE school so I'm
counting on you thank you.
Congratulations you have a do
pass on your bill house bill one
thirty eight I hope that you're
on L. E. S. C. through the
summer and you'll learn lots
more about the the formula
functions and works the way it
works well and where still maybe
a little bit clunky shall we say
but thank you congratulations
chairman you can count on me to
be an active voice on education
for our state and set Senator
Kernan you can count on my
health let's let's get on and
I'm and I'm delighted by this
outcome thank you so much for
this.
Thank you I did see that we have
Representative Lara on house
bill ninety three as amended
limited out of school
suspensions we've got just a
minute or two and we I don't
think there's a lot of
controversy but you know I I
sometimes the wrong with that
but Representative Lara if
you'll very quickly explain your
bills.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee House
Bill and ninety three is us or
for us to limit out of school
suspensions specifically for us
students have been identified as
homeless for or in the foster
care program of we are not
trying to eliminate suspensions
at art all over us for is that
certain considerations be taken
into.
Into account when we school
administrators are looking at
the suspension as a possible
disciplinary action is expected
and some western expected hello
somebody is please get back on
you from the last bill what
think.
Thank you.
Senate.
Thank you Mr chairman I I do
have I do have an expert.
Well let me just see whether we.
Okay Mr chair thank you other
than that I sent a December
questions.
Okay.
First you know is there
opposition from the committee
are going to be questions or do
we want to go straight to a vote
Senator Kernan.
Senator Kernan I'm trying.
You so so my only concern with
the bill and just looking
through it is it's a timing
issue when you've got a serious
situation on a campus where
there has been pilots and and
you are now required before you
can suspend or remove that
student from from the school
grounds you have to go through a
number of steps in in it's about
the timing issue and certainly I
believe that it should be the
last resort but but on the other
hand I think there are
requirements in here on page two
line at eight through sixteen
that you go through various
steps before you can actually do
that I don't support and
suspending students that are
homeless certainly or faster
students absolutely but I do
think there's a requirement in
your for districts to go through
certain steps before they can do
that and there could be a
situation that could be very
dangerous that that child really
doesn't need to be on campus in
person can you respond to that
please.
Mr chair and representative of
those Senator Kernan yes you you
make a very valid point and.
Bill looks amended on the house
floor to address that issue our
first brought.
Lane the amendment forward and
that included protections and
and or language in the bill that
would allow for immediate
suspension of for us to that
particular student there was any
danger to other students or two
staff members.
And if I can break in just a
moment and ask our major
Chair of this committee are the
titles wrong again the.
Do you want to continue on and
finish this bill should we roll
it over till Wednesday we always
try and have a hard stop right
about this time so we can get to
the floor.
Sure I'm comfortable with that
amendment.
Okay.
Mr.
Okay we'll we'll continue on
then
is there are there others the
questions from the committee if
not we'll be open for a motion.
Your care I I move for a do pass
on house bill ninety three
minutes.
Do passes the second.
Thank you Senator public yes.
This is Mariann.
I I'm confused.
I know that we have a due pass
motion by Senator pope is that
correct that's correct okay did
we have an amendment.
No it was amended over on the
house side okay okay the EDD
confuse me I'm sorry okay those
numbers are second do we have a
second.
Very interested in making a
second the motion.
How will the second on this
particular bill I don't think
there's a lot of controversy
just people are busy.
So you'll call the roll Senator
Brandt.
Senator Brandt.
No.
Sorry Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan.
I'm gonna vote no it explained
about that Senator Neville both
known.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes.
Senator solves yes.
we have a due pass failed.
Yes thank you
So can we do a substitute
motion.
Mr chair I move for a no rack on
house bill ninety three men and.
We have a motion for a direct.
Their second.
Yes I'll move a second on that
and you can call the roll on the
no REC.
Senator Brandt no.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan.
Senate Bill no Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope yes Senator souls
yes okay in this without
recommendation moves on without
recommendation Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you committee and and
thank you ranking member for a
getting that one moved on
through so we don't have to come
back to it again so thank you we
are Senate education is
adjourned for today we will see
you at eight thirty on what.
Thank you.
