To start without anyone from the
the republican party
particularly on bills that are
fairly non controversial which I
think is most of the bills that
we have on the agenda today
people that are watching we are
gonna start with senate bill two
eleven then we're gonna flip the
order of the next two of the
requested a sponsor center my
estimate so will do two thirty
five then to eighteen and then
we'll finish up with the lottery
scholarship changes bill we do
have a hard stop at eleven
o'clock and even if we're in the
middle of a bill we're going to
stop at that point so presenters
public dead wants to comment on
things we may not get to things
if we have to many people want
to do public comment you have
several new people if you are
doing public comment we do limit
it to two minutes for each
person you do are not obligated
to take all two minutes
any comments from committee for
we get started if not center
pathy if you would scientist
education promotion fund thank
you very much mister chairman
mister vice chairman of members
of the committee thank you very
much for allow me to present
this morning I am before you
with what is called our science
education promotion find I know
chair you and I have worked on a
number of issues like this and
the twelve years that we've been
here I did spend approximately I
did spend ten years chairing in
vice during the science
technology and
telecommunications committee and
we heard resounding as you
probably recall you're in most
of these meetings with me over
and over and over again we need
to work force that is focused on
science and all the various
types of science that we we need
to to strengthen our work force
here in new mexico so
essentially what the fun does is
it it helps
crade away to promote for
institutions
grants that would help them to
develop an implement strategic
planning for creating
educational curriculum and
degrees in very specific areas
and we know that these tranches
of our economy are were the jobs
are mister chairman and that's
why we need to be focused on
these items these are things
like aerospace bio science cyber
security at renewable energy
intelligent manufacturing.
And the science of agriculture
and i'll just spoke is in on one
item on cyber security of the
net the ones that I just named
you do know that this last year
I was successful in many of us
attempted to create but I was
able to get it across the finish
line the office of cyber
security what I found out as we
created the office mister
chairman but we have nobody that
can actually work in it and I
don't mean that we don't have
nobody that could work in it but
essentially we in new mexico we
have about a thirty eight to
forty percent under employment
in cyber security so we need to
be focused on promoting those
career fields those items and
that's essentially what this
would do a person can leave high
school and in about six months
have their initial certification
then they can move on to second
third and forth certifications
we're asking for a million
dollars for this week you know
that the budget has now moved
from the house to the senate and
I feel confident that we may be
able to get this there are other
funds out there another things
going on you know in in the
millions of dollars of ranges
here and if we can't get that
into the budget essentially we
would have this fund established
and then we could find money
from you of works that's going
on in northern new mexico
college some stem monies that
are out there and we can put
this million dollars into this
fund so I just kind of want to
help everyone be aware that this
is something that would be a
available to the entire state
and it would promote specific
things in public elementary
middle school high school that
post secondary institutions and
other state educational
institutions where they could
apply to this and make this very
important of our part of our
economy move forward i'll take
that where we'd like to go
things.
Thank you we always go out to
the audience first show hands
those in support of this
particular legislation.
Thank you and immediate
opposition.
Seeing that in opposition if
anyone feels compelled that they
like to put give public
testimony I please come up with
we need to make sure you use the
handbike stand.
Mr chairman thank you very much
standard house for the school
superintendents a mega really
short we support or this is
going we support this funding.
We just want the committee to
understand that the whole notion
of innovation funding is not in
place in the house bill to as we
currently speak I consider this
to be part of that charge of
money that we need to look at
and so we are due to consider
that thing
thank you star anyone else.
Yes sir.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's nathan bush
and government relations
director at the university of
new mexico
we stand and strong support we
appreciate the sponsor's
foresight and looking at this as
a.
Long term kind of pathway issue
for students to work the way
through elementary and secondary
imposed secondary institution
this is important that we lay
the appropriate groundwork thank
you thank you anyone else in the
room and no one in opposition.
There's.
It's not questions from the
committee
thank you mr chair.
Wonderful bill I love it and I
hope we do.
Work really hard to get money.
As excuse me saturday
they just senator keep their
pope thank you mister chair
thank you center for bringing
this forward I agree I think
this is great just a couple
questions are there any examples
of funding from economic
development or any other state
agencies have that have done
this type of grant w.
Yeah thank you chairman thank
you vice german excellent
question yeah you know in from
an economic development
department standpoint.
That not for this specific
purpose that i'm aware of that
i'm that's why i'm here because
that we don't really have a
focused effort on promoting this
type of of degree to programs or
educational programs up prior to
getting the college but one
example would be we would have
about our work force in the
chicago airport as an example
and we promote what is the new
mexican workforce all about
because we know that a lot of
folks like to move from chicago
to albert you for some reason
and and they are they love it
and so so we we do things like
that we we produce promotional
materials to promote
some technology sectors that bet
you know are in new mexico and
this would be similar to that
but it would basically be
marketing to children if you
will in and answer strategic
planning to get them from the
earliest opportunity to be
interested in this type of a
career and then go down that
road to fulfill it in one of our
great institutions that we have
all over the place.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you senator you know.
Wondering what the amount.
Thank you the questions.
I have a question that it come
up on some of the analysis that
this is under it economic
development department and
they've indicated they don't
have the staffing to manage this
in the interactions needed with
the public schools what's the
plan for going forward or you
concerned that that may have
resulted in a veto because that
department doesn't have it or
doesn't want to work with public
schools about with this thank
you mister chairman of members
of the committee and that's
essentially why we ask for the
dollars that we do for various
programs this is probably not an
fte within that department if
you will it's probably a half an
fte or three quarters somewhere
in that neighborhood and I think
almost everyone sits on the days
in front of me and I know myself
yours i've been here I sat here
many times and had to listen to
that kind of feedback from
multiple time and i'm not not
just respect their but I I don't
blame them for saying you know
what we don't really have the
man power to this for that
we get that almost every single
time we try to create something
new and so that's why i'm not
simply trying to cram something
down the economy to go on
departments throw what i'm
saying let's do this because we
know that you want it which also
helps to when they're out
marketing the state to bring in
companies to our.
And also coming with dollars to
so not asking to do something
that's not being funded.
And at that point.
We don't typically do on that
point senator that's more of a
house type of thing
but you know if you would like
to have a comment for a second
time I would be happy to wreck
i'd like to have a second time
thank you.
I believe this is so important
to do not want to stop that but
you know there's a lot of
marketing in this and and
contracting for a marketing and
single bid process less than
sixty could really fulfil that
so there are ways around the
thank you thank you mister
excellent point thank you.
I will do pass second position
for do passed by center pope and
sega by center hickey if you'll
call the role please.
Yes.
Sender my estimates yes.
Senator pin.
Yes.
Never placed the marks
yeah.
I will next be going we're going
to skip one go down to senate
bill to thirty five the higher
education student retention and
graduation and those watching at
home then we'll go back to up
one on our agenda listed to
nineteen so two thirty five
higher education student
retention and graduation sir my
estimates and you have an expert
other senator to assist you it
appears.
The.
Thank you
honourable members this is
senate bill two hundred thirty
five dealing with higher
education it's an appropriations
bill.
Uhm.
And essentially is dealing with
expanding efforts through
evidence based programs to
retain students and improve
graduation rates at all public
institutions of higher education
I think the key the key ear is
not high school the freshman is
charming I believe but freshman
is sophomore I think we kept
stats at the institutions
particularly if we're going to
go full board with the
opportunity scholarship which I
believe we should.
Are we really got a it's not so
much getting the best bang for
the book but insuring they were
catching students that may be
slipping or may not are
progressed to that next
semester.
So with that I will turn over to
center abbey so for more
detailed explanation thank you
very much mister german members
of the committee the the offsea
has been doing some program
audits with regard heritage in
terms of their graduation rates
but for your graduation was the
six year graduation rates are
which I started of sources you
know from your from your
experience really is it's kind
of the the best box that are
that looked at and as we've been
expanding access to heritage and
part of it though has been
but but how it's not how many
people enters how many people
exit as well and and so are and
and so part of what we're
looking at then is a problem
called current campus because of
the instrument for evidence
based change.
And it's a problem that is
active in about three different
states
the
satisfactory college said one
college or already carrying
campus
schools
the idea is to to work through
the department of her education
and make it a system wide
program this is a program that
has been studied through
colombia teachers college it has
been shown emperically to make a
difference in terms of
graduation rates it is what are
the programs that does not focus
on students it focus on the
faculty and focus on the staff
in terms of the relation that
they have with students enters a
big sure that they that they
make students understand their
welcome on campus and and that
they feel like they have a home
there and and so and it's a it's
one where they were they
continually work with them it
obviously it would not be a
guaranteed that that would be
the program but it is it is
because a heritage of would have
to let an rp and they would have
to compete in terms of who would
be doing the system with a
program
but with that would be happened
to stand for questions.
Thank you after the items those
in support.
This program.
Is there anyone in opposition.
If some of the supporters would
like to come up
microphone
work thank you mister chair
good morning as to cherry
members of the committee marks
together with the new mexico
council university presidents
and we sound supported this
legislative senate bill two
thirty five
while senators for bringing this
important bill is mentioned in
the there's an also evaluation
this summer those presented on
financial aid and why think they
focused on was too retention and
the super pretty funding and
more support to that serve
attention through the
instruction in general there's a
nasty recommendation for worst
more stuff support services in
higher education this bill would
actually complete that and help
reinforce them support those
those efforts by our heart
institutions that we stand full
support of this legislation as
chairman may thank you.
That's much a question of
this is putting together to the
chain you know we we we started
out with the most phd's per
capital in the country in new
mexico between all of our labs
and institutions
and we do incredible number of
start ups here but they all get
taken out of state and self
worth in so we we just started
economic development at
particularly and the technical
areas here that you're looking
at follow all the way through
down the road and I think this
is an important missing piece
and so I am strongly in support
of it but I also encourage you
to do whatever you can because I
think there's again worthy of
additional funding to
do your best.
The.
Thank you because it because it
is it is a fundamental piece
that easily gets overlooked and
but it gets to the senate then
it's again huge competition
thank you center hickey.
No i'm okay mister chair
apologies
thank you.
I just have a quick comment or
two back years ago when I was
working in mexico state
university I actually was
trained to be while the trainers
of faculty and support staff and
others on
how to recognize students that
are in crisis that need some
help and.
Rather than just a go over to
that office make a phone call
over to the office so that they
know somebody's waiting at the
warm hand off type of thing or
if it's a student that it needs
more stop your job they'll walk
him over there up and just that
the whole university and and we
had people go through the
training from the castodians all
the way up to faculty and and
it's senior administration that.
It reflects the whole
personality of the the
university when everybody is
focused on the students as the
valuable asset rather than as a
bother to people and and it
makes a difference I don't know
if that's still going on I don't
remember the name of that
program and i'm I was going to
ask i'm glad you said this is in
a one program you gave an
example of one but it's these
kinds of programs to to ensure
that the students are getting
what they need outside of the
classroom.
The.
Mister that is correct but it
also includes in the class which
was ratio that they have with
the faculty as well yes.
Yeah and certainly then just
we all most of us remember our
higher education days and there
were some fact that you seem
like teaching a class with the
bother and others who truly seem
to care about the students and
they're learning and trying to
to support those that are
carrying about the students more
and help people on how to manage
and none of us made it in our.
Pleasure the committee I will be
do passed mister motion for a
new pass.
A second
you'll call the ropes.
Yes.
Yes
yes you have to do pass.
Thank you and the next bill that
we're going to hear is senate
bill to nineteen then a lot of
nasal spray in high schools with
center my estimates and then our
last bill on our agenda is going
to be senate bill two thirty
nine lottery scholarship changes
do recognize we have half an
hour to get both those bills so
be visit of time thank you
senator thank you very much
mister chairman honourable
members this is senate bill two
hundred nineteen.
And it's continuation on what
we're kinda currently doing let
me just take a moment and then
i'll introduce my my expert
witness.
But drug.
Drug use has been tapering
downward amongst a lessons and
and teenagers in this country
but drug overdoses has risen.
Yeah.
And that is up you not have many
reasons i'm sure but partially
or primarily because of the
introduction of fetnal.
Into various drugs as well as
federal you know.
Ingested individually the.
The food drug administration has
approved a drug.
As approved a drug called.
The luxembourg and food and drug
administration actually approved
a brand name of no locks on this
past march.
Narcan in which it was
previously adjusted via
intravenous needle and now it
can be adjusted be via a nail
spray and the lockson
essentially reverses the effects
of depressing in the body it
will it will save someone from a
drug overdoors fedenal is a is
in the category of depressions
as opposed to stimulants in the
drug world.
And it is highly highly toxic
slows down the body functions to
the point where someone dies.
The administration of no locks
all.
Could save lives and it matters
within seconds or minutes
whether that person has access
to that right now the department
of health is doing a good job
providing the loxel to high
schools for for administrators
at the high schools in the event
for an overdose of a student.
Mister pogola gentlemen to write
my right wants to take it to
another level we want to make no
locks or available to the
students to take off campus to
have with them.
If they have a family member who
struggling with.
Without with drugs or they're in
a situation where one of their
friends are colleagues or.
Or however it is experiencing a
drug overdose they can literally
save their life at that moment
in time.
So we appreciate the the
consideration and with that I I
up very proud.
And honored to be sitting next
to mister carper will a junior
is a fantastic young man is
eighteen year old from alba
cricket the senior at all
correct academy high school and
his family had been through a
lot but he's.
But is here now to
to explain why so call.
Mister chairman members of the
committee my name is called per
gollen today I stand before you
with a have you heard burden by
the tragic loss of my sister to
a battle that many families are
facing across our nation the
opportunity crisis her name is
sophia a vibrant soul for a
promise and potential
extinguished far too soon by the
use of narcotics.
Sufficient story is not unique
it's a story shared and
countless households with a dark
worth of its has torn apart
families and shattered dreams
her overdose wasn't just a
personal tragedy it was a
colossal event that was felt
through our family.
The pain of her loss is
difficult to put into words the
memories of her hands with their
better sweet echoes.
However in this darkness there
is a glimmer of hope a chance to
prevent our families from
enduring the same awfulness.
That hope lies in the form of a
bill that I encourage you to
consider today a bill that
mandates the implementation of.
Of.
But now it's on a high school
and other educational facilities
alexam also known as narcan is a
life saving medication that can
reverse up overdoses and give
individuals like my sister a
second chance at life by
entering an alexon is readily
available in our schools we can
intervene swiftly in the face of
an overdose emergency we can
empower teachers administrators
and even fellow students to
become first responders in the
fight against open overdoses we
can turn our educational
institutions into haven't of
safety and support for a youth
shilling them from the deadly
consequences of operators.
Some we argue at implementing
such measures is unnecessary or
impractical but can we afford to
wait until another family is
torn apart by the terrible grip
of obe dangers can we ignore the
suffering of our youth
condemning them to a fate and no
apparent should ever have to
endure.
We have the power to make a
difference we have the
opportunity to save lives and
spared families from the tragedy
that my own hazard.
I urge you members of the state
congress to support this bill or
hardeningly.
And let us honor the memory of
my sister and all those who have
been lost to the operator to
crisis by taking the size of
action to come back this
epidemic.
Together we can turn the tide
and build a brighter safer
future for generations to come
thank you to the.
Who do the committee members.
Thank you.
Thank you senator.
Thank you mister chairman the
the fire suggests that it that
one up one the lots of packet
breached school would be about
nine thousand dollars when you
divide that by a million
approximately a hundred eleven.
Um packets per per high school
are out in the community saving
lives thank you mister chairman
thank you for hands those in
support in the areas.
I suspected those in opposition.
If a few of you would like to to
come up in the public comments
please do so at displayed with
guy line up
whether.
For four folks from this row
because take turns.
Okay mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is molly
walton I am assuming president
and I captain the mobile team at
hintannel high school in less
cruces with about fifteen
hundred students.
In two thousand nineteen my
family adopted three young boys
we brought them into our home to
provide them with a safe place
from their parents who reject
reasons.
I believe that now they have the
opportunity for a future but
maybe not because then all is an
invisible drug that can affect
anyone.
Federal does not discriminate
from age schooling or the amount
of money you make it is
invisible.
It doesn't matter if you go to a
private school public school or
if you are homes got fenel does
not only kill people divides
families
I am very part of the choice my
parents took to give my
brother's a chance I do not have
the answer but last night on
know before it was stated that a
legal drugs such as that and all
we're being carried across the
border and moving through
staying country.
Driving up here yesterday no one
was at the border which will
check point mister chairman will
you please contact the new dea
agent swanda thorough and james
the division director for alpaso
which covers new mexico and ask
her immediately to the to tell
this legislature.
What you can do to come back for
not and maybe even consider
taking asking the governor for a
special session.
According to the fire on page
two
significant issues where it
stays out your ideas is a
rampant among the population of
united states as a whole
especially in new mexico and
including teens.
What would be the consequences
of not in acting this bill
students and personnel may no
shall continue today thank you
mister chairman and members of
the committee
thank you.
The.
Anybody know everyone get two
minutes in the car will have you
sit back.
The.
Thank you mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is bether a hotel meal
I was an addict for ten years
i've been clean now for twenty
three years we now have a
facility in albert kicking to
mexico where we house almost
people meaning women are in the
prison system and we bring a
mentor our facility.
Well working what we're now what
we're now we're seen as were
seen a change when it when
people come from you know the
stream or the prisons and and
it's really it's really sad
because as we go out to the
streets we're starting to see
the rise of fitting all.
And what it's destroying not
only just you know people in the
streets but we're seeing
actually now destroying like we
disoccurred the brother here
where he brought the message
it's now families.
And you know I really really
believe that if we can be able
to help in any wave you know
it's just getting really bad out
there the drug uses is
increasingly rabilian you know
i'm just grateful because in a
way we can see the opportunity
if we bring in the nark and we
can you know be able to help
it's it's so sad because now
we're starting to also see
sixteen year old fifteen year
olds using fat and all having
over those and being able to
give them an an another chance
you know it's it's.
It so said that they're trying
to target the elementary kids
now with fan they're trying to
get it so low where they can
bring it into the into the
elementary schools and it's so
sad that they're targeting this
group of kids.
And to be able to bring this
into the school right I believe
it be a blessing thank you thank
you.
A next please let's kind of
hurry.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is new suburb
and I am from us cruises and abu
kirky.
You must criticise i'm attending
centennial high school and
captain of the women's golf team
we also is at it first and
central in the center of album
or videos my father and I have
opened have often stayed up to
watch the constant eradic
conduct of not only homeless but
many individuals with the
abusive behaviour I can only
believe that this is the use of
drugs.
This brings me here today senate
bill two nineteen a simple bill
but just the beginning of
addressing the epidemic of
federal use in the invisible
consequences that society does
not see.
You're harming people my age by
the way i'm sixteen years old
the same age so fear per go has
unfortunately lost her life to
fitness I was thinking about
severe on the drive to santa fe
thing about all the things I am
doing that she has been robbed
of from the epidemic effect now.
I have looked into the laws the
new mexico legislature has
created and previous governors
are signed into a war and that
have addressed the severe
tragedies that have occurred
fresh lady asking omission to
create a new department and
today we sold we call it the
children youth and family's
department in to this day we
still have problems de johnson's
clean indoor air act under
governor she's on a martin as
this act has reduced the amount
of death from second hand smoke.
Kit is katy stepage who grew up
in chrospet and attended new
estimate state university due to
the tragic loss of her life this
legislature has made changes.
Maybe brand.
A baby that lived for a hundred
and fifty three days in
measuring my father explained to
me what happened to brand new
opens and I can't and I don't
even have the worst to share her
story with you
today because of this probable
junior had the courage to come
from seconds please.
Come before this legislature and
tell the story of his sister
so fear who asked her life to
federal epidemic I have spoken
to carl and you should be huge
told me how funny positive and
the artist she was he of his
sister his parents love sophia
two minutes
her story shall recognize your
last seven days no in this
committee you have two minutes
for public committee if other
people would like to I apologize
that you know i've been very
consistent always so if someone
else
the commission
should.
This chairman dumming silver.
The.
In what she would.
Today she suggests that this
long.
And any moving forward dealing
with combating the use of
fentinal.
Be addressed as so fears law.
Mister chairman members the
committee.
I was the lobbyist for the
retail association for many
years and.
For many years they asked me to
keep sort of federal.
On the counters over the
counter.
The result.
With people smirk still the drug
and create meth.
The.
Unfortunately we had a great
movie great show reaking bad to
have it had it really early
expose it but believes the drug
epidemic.
Today we're faced with method to
me.
Fatima and it's coming in all
areas and as cheap is the
cheapest drug out there and it's
something that you can't still
from stores.
It's something that's coming
from china mexico
where it be but it's ruining our
state
so mister chairman in writing
I feel so bad for lobbying
that pretty much help that
method problem.
I feel deeply saddened.
So today this legislature.
It's a take it.
Just this little step.
So.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you thank you there's a couple
more folks thank you mister
please
good morning bill we're going to
try and get done we have a hard
stop at eleven o'clock my mister
chairman members give me marks
vegetarian here as they
concerned parent and a friend of
the percol of family so I just
wanted to sell problem with carl
junior for bringing this
legislation part in the sponsors
well i've got to see him grow up
since he was probably about ten
years old
and the point I would drive home
is that I got the privilege to
meet his wonderful sister was a
beautiful young smart
intelligent woman who is raised
by some great parents part of
parents and had an amazing
relationship with her brother
this can happen to anyone and
now it's been in terms of she
was just the delight to be
around is fun and this is
something that could be any
cheaper just decides just to try
it one time and analysis does
point out that this is rapidly
turns round that possible
overdoes having this in school
that's in the point it's in the
physical impact report so with
that I just urge these and
strongly support the slice and
ask for this community pass this
legislation thank you mister
chairman
thank you.
Thank you mister.
And I don't think there was
anyone in opposition
so questions from the committee
please.
Thank you miss german and
senator.
Research bring in the spill
sorry to hear about your sister.
And he has great results.
Risk in ball but not is great of
a risk as the od um so I just
want to get a little bit into
you had mentioned.
Lost nine thousand dollars it's
not produce.
Mister chairman I wrap nine
thousand dollars to put one dose
in every single high school in
the state.
Per the fire to put a single
dose in every.
Mr german center then I believe
so that was the the doch.
It was the.
Because the analysis came in
late.
Yeah the up if my mama chairman
sinner brandy up and also nails
breaking costs between twenty
and four dollars per dollars
a narcan can run up nor kind of
the brand name can run up to a
hundred and thirty dollars.
Um.
And it says on page two of the
fire.
The cost of supplying generic
milosevil nasal spray one dose
for each high school would be
eight thousand nine hundred
twenty dollars so divided by a
while that into one million that
would be one hundred eleven
doses per high school.
Then you're connect jump in for
a moment
I can't believe that that fire
is correct when it's forty
dollars it does it can't be
eight thousand dollars for
windows in the high schools each
high school mistake.
I understand that but again it
can't be for a dozen that might
be enough to handle young
several of them or a yellow
whole kit full of them but I
can't I don't believe that that
can be correct when the cost of
a single dozen forty dollars to
put in high schools as eight
thousand mister writes I believe
you're support I believe you're
correct because I I inserted the
word high it it said schools for
every school we we just wanted
in the high school so you're
correct there would be much more
available thank you.
And and so.
Even at those numbers a hundred
and eleven doses in each high
school.
Are you really planning on
putting a hundred and eleven
dollars in each ice corps.
And was chairmans that are about
if the math is wrong than my
then my extension on a math is
wrong but yeah we'd want to put
a couple hundred doses price
school and make sure that the
students have if the student
sorry feel that they're in that
world that.
So that so you're running to
actually give it to the students
to take hole.
Mister chairman a red correct
currently deohe puts puts this
in the schools for school
administrators and believe it
out the state and mexico mister
chairman was a was it was I was
ahead of its time in two
thousand one a bill was passed
into law are releasing schools
from liability with regards to
this and it's it's kind of fight
in twenty four dash twenty three
dash one in which there would be
no civil liability to the.
Administer of the
what at the time was a injection
now it would be a ne.
Thank you senator denner
thank you mister chairman and
thank you for bringing forces
bill and the quantity of the
narcan dispensers is critical
and I agree users were two
hundred we're now seeing people
with fat now needing two joses
of narrow can
to come back around and so
and and it's going to get I mean
it's going to keep going in that
way because one does for some
people who have been a really
gone out one one will that work
you gotta have to and
unfortunately we'll probably get
to a day where we've got to have
three so the more does as you
can get in I also really believe
you need to send it home now it
may hand up and waste baskets
and so forth but what is a life
you know and it's just we it's
worth so much more and so again
I theme this morning is let's
see if we can't get this through
and I I think it will go through
as you get to finance but then
last year next year it's getting
the house bill to and get him up
and get the dollar mount up and
get the number up there is
really no other solution that
basically people should be armed
with two with any.
Thank you center hicky and just
a reminder we do have a hard
stop at eleven on this bill
anyone who is your percent bill
to thirty nine it does not
appear we are going to get to
that today it will be on the
schedule for the first bill on
monday so we will not get to
senate bill two thirty nine
center thank you mister chair
and thank you center my assist
for bringing the spill forward
you know I just believe this is
the right thing to do
and i'm actually able to you
know go back to my education as
a bill chemist understand the
mechanisms of how this works so
it's kind of good to have to do
that and in this committee we're
seeing people in our communities
especially first responders even
you know it be exposed to
federal.
And need nor can so I think it
woul.
When they leave school when
they're in our communities that
this is a risk to them even
separate from the facts of kids
that are being exposed that
might try this drug and so.
You know i'm only support of
this I hope we can get this
million I think we need more.
Um and we have to let folks know
that you know this is about
saving lives and shouldn't be
any shame.
Or be able to administer this to
someone and you know as a state
you know we have to do what we
have to do to address the
federal issue with the reality
is here and this is about saving
lives so I am in support of this
how we can do more.
To save lives and thank you once
again thank you mister chair.
Mister apologizes here for the
first part of it just wanted
understand working announced
nasal sitting in injection is
there any downside if i'm
someone gave too much too little
I don't know enough about it in
that like say that in late
is there any chance that someone
could misuse this
more worried about if child a
student takes it on and they
don't know what they're doing
could be there be a negative
effect mister center that thank
you mister german center I guess
I was trying to someone today
who's.
Kind of knowledgeable about this
and said if someone were to pass
out
non drug use but just pass up
for whatever reason and you
inject and you just in our can
it would not harm them then but
i'm sure there's that effects
like any drug but nothing hard
phone certainly nothing up in
that nothing in the realm of.
You know.
We have the the side effects of
the negatives would be.
Any alternative.
Thank you senator up several
years ago I carried a bill to
have a co prescription for any.
Opined that the prescription for
the locks on being cold
prescribed for any of those some
for the very thing and to make
sure that it was available in to
get it in more of the medicine
cabinets just in general
afterwards I learned lots about
the lock zone and some center
gay goes if you if somebody
is passed out and you give them
the locks on thinking it was a
drug over those the only side
effect is they get a witness
it it truly is a miracle drug
that it's only thing it has
essentially no side effects but
is to reverse.
An opined overdoes and so I
think this is a great thing the
focus of this bill is not in and
certainly understand what to the
other things we've got the opi
concerns this bill is addressing
when somebody has taken and an
overdoes to make sure that we
can have a reversal and save
their life and all the training
that i've heard is again and I
think it was pointed out it may
take more than one you give them
one they start to come around
but if it was a high level of it
it may take a couple and
certainly always call emergency
services to come immediately but
it does save lives and it is
saving lives in new mexico it is
out with the first responders I
believe it is now in some of the
schools being able to make it
available that people can take
home make sure that it is more
widely available like most of us
have something like that of his
mall in our medicine cabinet to
deal with that rear we ought to
have this in case there is an
accidental overdose for whatever
reason this is a very safe
mechanism and truly as a
bureaucrat drug the deals with
it so I very much appreciate all
that you're doing
any other comments if not will
get to a vote center he keep for
a second time I just want to
elaborate a little bit and I
checked my knowledge basin and
looked it up you really only see
side effects and people who have
been using opinions when they
acute reversal happens you can
potentially get attack a cardia
maybe little naziar vomiting
there's essentially people who
who are in open your usage but
in another tough I want to
assure everyone here if if you
accidentally give it a wrong
situation don't hazitate do it
thank you mister chair
thank you mister chairman
members for the time and and I
don't know if I express this
initially but carl came to me
with this bill who was his idea
as idea so will be.
I appreciate this the
conversations i've had with the
sector of health sector pad will
have this conversation in
finance it will.
We'll keep making this happen
thank you mister chairman great
thank you mr cold mr chairman I
moved to pass for a due pass
by
center in the bill if you'll
call the role please said the
brand cinder gay
sender hickey yes center my
estate yes.
Yes
yes you have a due pass.
Thank you everyone our next
meeting will be on monday at a
regular time eight thirty I do
want to apologize for cutting up
the young lady I try to be very
consistent that we only allow
two minutes and stop in
certainly your story is very
compelling but when make sure
other people
so I apologize.
The.
