Need to come in and out and
stuff like that so we're going
to try and manage that and as
much as we're able to the first
bill that we have today is
Senate bill for twenty to the
school district membership
limitation with Senator Stewart.
That just.
The when we do get the public
comment on things I do with it
no more than two minutes per
person there's a number of
people will last on a particular
bill will last for five or six
to the stand up you would need
to come up to the microphone so
that we can manage time as well
we do have a hard stop at ten
forty five today.
anything.
Thank you member of senator
Neville anything on your side.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Senate bill for twenty two just
does one thing currently in
statute we require no more than
ten percent of the population of
your districts population up can
be a charter school if you have
thirteen hundred students or
fewer.
So for the very small districts
we have that in place now no
more than ten percent this list
that thirteen hundred so that
would be more no more than ten
percent in districts so let me
first say that.
Charters schools are here to
stay they serve very good
purposes for many in many places
I've tried to help us make our
charter school laws good of
we've we've had trouble with
that know governor seems to want
to even touch it thinking it's a
third rail the last time we had
a study of the charters in New
Mexico was an LESC study and
twenty sixteen they found
several troubling things and we
haven't addressed any of them
there's there's there's problems
with financial management in the
some of these charters just
think about it they just don't
have the staff to understand
fiscal management all the
responsibilities from the PED
so we really have a situation
where we started off with
charters with them saying let us
be the at the Gainey picks let
us try to improve the way we
teach students so then we can
spread it to the other public
schools that hasn't really
happened but we have some
charters that perform very well
we have many that don't we have
many that perform just the same
as the public schools in their
area there's no there's
conflicted as a research and the
research is clear in a few areas
online charters produce very low
achievement scores in math and
reading for students pretty well
across the board so we had a
state Stanford study done in New
Mexico charter schools and again
they said most charter schools
make similar progress to those
in the other public schools
online charters at significantly
lower progress so I.
I just think we have a situation
where we're not really looking
at the charters as a whole we're
not really able to do more
management issues when you look
at the APS audits it's all about
the charters they have thirty
forty fifty more audit findings
and they're all about their
charters so I believe that we
need a little bit more
assessment little more oversight
and that we ought to do another
study of them and in the
meantime what this bill does is
it it stops more charters from
being created in districts that
already have ten percent of
their population it doesn't do
anything to current charter
schools it simply says that if
you've got more than ten percent
of their population and charters
got to wait until if you're
population increases or that ten
percent goes down so Mr Chairman
the other issues with charters
to set their superintendent
salaries are extremely high we
have some chart we have a
charter with eighty students and
their superintendent makes
sensually two hundred thousand
dollars so there's really no at
the controls on staffing
I just raise that as a concern
so I'll stand for questions
thank you up to the outings
those in support of this
legislation.
Those in opposition.
Okay first those in opposition
if of six or seven no more than
that would like to come up and
two minutes each please.
So.
But we're way over six or seven
their done women ladies.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Richard
Romero I a registered lobbyist
representing various charter
schools in the state here
I want to start off by saying
that I'm a big supporter of the
New Mexico public schools I had
a long career as a teacher high
school principal truant officer
an assistant superintendent I
love the public schools I myself
am a product my son is a product
of public schools my wife is a
product of the public schools
are you holding the button down
you have to hold the button all
the time I think I am that there
it is okay anyway I do believe
that they are very difficult to
change.
And I I I've been a supporter of
charter school since my very
first year as a legislator when
Bob pearls introduced the very
first charter school bill and
then I teamed up with senator
mark Boitano Republican
legislator in Albuquerque to
pass the second one and then
fine tune the next one but I've
been a supporter because they do
provide parents an option.
We even have provided of course.
That send their kids to charter
schools or private schools and
I'm thinking why can't everybody
anybody else have that option
granted the charter schools do
have some problems but so do the
large districts.
you know where was the outrage
when APS had.
What some money embezzled here
just a couple of years ago.
I I say give them a chance to me
this bill is reminiscent of.
Call where a Cold War era when
he's Germany was trying to stop
people from coming.
Process into West Germany you
can't stop it you've got to get
paid in second place by thank
you very much thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee Matt Paul from public
charter schools of New Mexico
the education debate is
critically lacking a discussion
around parents and children
funding the school that's right
from the app for that yet right
here in this school district
that we sit and half of families
choose something other than that
district assigned attendance
zones school that they're
assigned to.
Parents are choosing the right
school for their kids and it's
the norm in education across the
country.
Your FIR fails to recognize how
much choice is happening amongst
families it shows thirty two
hundred students attending
charter schools in Santa Fe
public schools.
With over thirteen hundred of
those students are coming from
out of district attending a
virtual school that's
headquartered here Senator brick
and mortar schools have told us
that over a third of their
students come from different
school districts to attend that
school district boundaries are
meaningless for families they
just want the right school for
them for their families.
And so it kind of puts into
light what the baseline of this
bill is about ten percent of
what when students are coming
from all over to attend the
school that's right for them
whether it's a district school
or a charter school.
School districts don't want
charter so bad all they have to
do is create the schools and
programs that families want.
If you're not sure which
programs those are they can ask
the families and their
communities charter schools are
built by our communities for our
communities they develop in
places where family see it need
that isn't being that it's what
the charter law was put in place
for in the first place.
Also note that it's very notable
that the LFC FIR it has a two
thousand seconds please two
thousand nineteen study if you
look at this year's data it is
we get we have great results
lastly I'll just say whether you
like all forms of school choice
or just public school choice
this is a bad bill.
Thank you.
You and supporter of post.
He was doing propose supports
right now.
I suppose.
And I'm sorry posed I'm sorry.
After hearing the things up
wanted to dig in my paperwork
for some my name's James
national in the school were
chairman for El Camino Riel
cattery so valley can we we've
been of charter schools is two
thousand and two I think it was
former so much Senators may
understand us or history a
little bit operation.
Rules were three campuses from
group from Arizona out of state
and the district gotten four
Forsman action because they were
not doing things accordingly and
we were allowed to take over
I've been a school board member
since then and can't seem to get
away a lot of the players.
Right now is before see on.
This legislation that short of.
Artificially wants to restrict.
The arbiter schools been
coming to be now there is a
reason that people.
Cost in one of the lauded to
become
in the state statutes to begin
with.
This because they felt strongly
that they were not getting
served well within the education
system.
Has anything changed.
What's changed here is that the
district is still having
difficulty.
Keeping their customers why is
that.
It's because they have chosen to
reform.
My budget.
Is about three point five
million I have three to fifty
students that works out to about
ten thousand dollars per
student.
The district's budget is one
point six five billion.
Seventy three thousand four
hundred seventy nine.
That works out to twenty two
thousand dollars out purchasing
sectors with and I spend ten
thousand and we be and how for
pound.
So if they're having problems is
something within the district
that is occurring that they need
to reform.
Thank you for thank you that's
all right thank you okay.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on public education
commissioner Stephen curry ago
prior to serving on the PC I
served for nine years on the
board in Santa Fe just before
twenty two is bad policy for
kids and for fostering
innovation and excellence in our
schools several years ago I was
a natural of the school board's
conference and keynote speaker
Johnnie Taylor the president of
Sherman the nation's leader in
HR said it very plainly and
addressing the increase of
charters private and virtual C.
put it that this adapt or die be
competitive in the market place
or you're going to be left
behind and what is New Mexico's
districts answer to politician
eliminated through self serving
in short sighted legislation
years ago in Santa Fe we didn't
run afraid from competition we
welcome to and we came up with
solutions we open the Mandela IB
magnet school in it go the
twenty first century trades and
technology high school board of
innovation and meeting the
desires of kids and families so
many outstanding charters
throughout the state wouldn't
exist with this poorly thought
out legislation ATC in here in
Santa Fe and aims in Albuquerque
two of the top schools in our
state and recognized nationally
both charters cottonwood
classical prep another ID school
roots and wings in Taos academy
up north although Leopold down
south in Hosur in Gallup meeting
the needs of our Yazzie Martinez
families and the Albuquerque
sign language academy just to
name a few the schools wouldn't
exist with this proposed rule
neither would New Mexico school
for the arts with its ninety
seven percent graduation rate
and to the districts these are
not your kids and these are not
your tax dollars these kids and
dollars belong to all of us
instead of dumbing down our
schools in our district by
eliminating any competition
learn from enterprise at the
level of our state's best
charter schools don't just vote
no on this bill scrap it
altogether our kids are schools
in our districts will be the
better for it thank you thank
you Bob.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Gerry
that I'm the founder and
executive director Albuquerque
collegiate charter school an
elementary charter school
located in Albuquerque south
valley our school has
outperformed neighboring schools
in our area by three to four
times our schools early literacy
proficiency last year with sixty
nine percent the fourth highest
in the state of New Mexico every
school near us was well below
twenty percent.
I don't say this to disparage
the hard work the challenging
work that our educators and
scholars are doing in our
community and across the state
but to provide context for help
free to Klay important of a role
our school plays in our
neighborhood and community under
the provisions of this law had
been enacted a few years ago our
school would not exist and would
not be an option for families in
the south valley.
Albuquerque collegiate like many
charters around Albuquerque and
across New Mexico has a waitlist
and when I run our lottery for
next school year in April I will
have to call numerous families.
I will have to call numerous
families.
Mothers fathers grandparents to
tell them we don't have space
for them to tell them they have
to find somewhere else and there
may not be other options for
them that they feel are adequate
for their children.
This law is not just an attack
on public charter schools it is
an attack on families
particularly families that have
been historically and
generationally underserved this
bill implies that families
should not have the right of
choice if I can draw a parallel
it would be similar to saying
you know there's just too many
people shopping at those new
farmers markets those mom and
pop stores like Jerry's markets
and market and lost by the US
those stories are really hurting
the produce budget of Walmart.
I urge you to make the choice
and vote with the families of
New Mexicans and the children
that deserve options.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm Robert Beatty with
the swept the southwest
educational partners for
training and the director of
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
are okay I was started twenty
three years ago and as a
community school that was before
community schools that operates
from eight in the morning to
late at night swept it's in
support of two applications in
Albuquerque up for new charters
one service securely traumatized
elementary students the other to
serve refugee families from
Afghanistan countries in Africa
Haiti and now you Craney and
municipalities I'm.
Charter schools are public
schools parents vote with their
feet and parents do vote I'm a
huge supporter of public
education and have a good
partnership with Albuquerque
public schools if any of the
committee members that are part
of Bernalillo county or the
sponsor would be willing to work
with swept to have conversation
with the district how we serve
those refugee families I'd be
happy to return with from my
application thank you.
The.
Good morning education study
committee my name is rich peta
on the director south valley
academy.
Albuquerque New Mexico on Coors
and break up south valley
academy has a student body
population of six hundred twenty
it's pry one of the largest in
person charter schools the state
of New Mexico it is ninety eight
percent not the you know in our
goal at south valley academy is
to have our students go to
college.
We're surrounded by west mesa
Rio Grande at three school I'm
pretty high and we have a
graduation rate of ninety
percent.
No I've read to date my
opposition against for twenty
two and hopefully I bring a
little bit of perspective to the
Education Committee today.
I've been in education for
thirty years.
Eighteen of those years by the
way have been administration I
retired as a superintendent use
the return to law to come back
to education I chose the south
valley academy because I care
about the spending population.
We have a waiting list of over
two hundred students want to get
into our school.
The opposition to this is all
about the education of New
Mexico schools not public at
we're not charter schools with
the education New Mexico schools
what thing is B. mention today
what the limitations of the of
the bill.
Charter schools are more
accountable hi I know that
because I came from the District
Court the have to go through the
I choose APS I choose Public
Education Committee I choose
right I just want just to inform
you Senator souls because this
is a critical issue to New
Mexico's education we all ranked
fiftieth in education we have to
have innovative ideas.
We look at graduation rates
particularly schools understand
I request the committee here an
additional thirty seconds by the
way if possible but here's a
point I want to make up charter
schools a workable they reviewed
by semester the still have to go
in addition to an audit thank
you thank you so much for your
time today.
will take their to and sure
their ability to members online
opposition members to at them
awesome.
And then after that Missy per
year.
Can you hear me yes.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is to that
excuse me.
My name is Jim Lawson and I'm a
constituent Senator Hickey my
daughter is a second grader at
the Albuquerque school of
excellence a charter school near
tramway and Lomas here in
Albuquerque to be honest my
husband and I were not happy
with the public school options
available to it my daughter was
starting kindergarten and we
actively sought out charter
school options that would fit
with our family the school of
excellence has done that
providing a safe school in an
engaging environment that has
fostered my daughters love of
art in reading where as a second
grader he's already reading at
least an eighth grade level we
should not restrict need order
school options are being
established and I oppose SB four
two two thank you thank you this
is current
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
misty Currier was strategies
three sixty and I represent yes
every kid for many of the
reasons previously stated we
stand opposed to this
legislation and ask you to
please do the same access and
opportunity for all New Mexicans
is important thank you so much.
Thank you.
Those in opposition right in
support of.
With the bureau of.
Yes.
Thanks for.
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you
senator of sort for caring this
bill Larry Chavis superintendent
Santa Fe public schools.
Charter schools are to designed
to provide innovative a more
flexible ways of educating
public school children not to
severely affect our public
school districts yes some school
districts like mine our
experience adverse effects from
opening charter schools within
our boundaries twenty five
percent of our students attend
charter schools and many more
attend private schools the
opening of charter schools is
impacting resources resources
and staffing at the time of the
climbing a role meant due to low
birth rates and also the cost of
living here in Santa Fe this all
comes as the district implements
a variety of innovations support
high quality learning and try to
meet the needs of all students
and our staff.
Teachers have even started to
ask their principals about their
job security given that we have
new charters applying to open up
in our our school district when
you have teachers and educators
worried about their job about
the the life of their school
district they start to
underperform because they're
worried they are not happy about
what's going on and they're
concerned about their job and
security this bill levels the
playing field allows all
district like ours to focus on
better student outcomes rather
than shifting resources and
cutting jobs this is decimating
some districts and it during
that that report there are ten
districts are well above ten
percent already we are at twenty
five percent so again I urge you
in favor of Senate bill for
twenty two in support of all
school districts in the state of
New Mexico thank you thank you.
Stamps.
Good morning Mr chairman members
the committee stand rounds for
those school superintendents in
the college of education leaders
here this this bill doesn't
decimate existing public the
charter schools act as the
sponsor says this bill doesn't
change that playing field in
future operations what it does
do is raise a policy question to
what level are you as a
legislature committed to
allowing your public school
system to operate in a major
supporting the students there
and have charter schools as the
augmentation to that we do we
believe that the policy being
suggested here is correct we
supported the original cap
attend percent for smaller
districts.
Because we see destination that
occurs inadvertently by the way
this plays out and so Mister
chairman we do we certainly
support this bill we ask you to
support it also as a committee
we think this is good policy
it's a right next step thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Let me make.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee lily more T.
cell the legislative liaison for
the New Mexico public school
association and I come before
you as I have for the last since
two thousand and fourteen the
association has had a position
on charter schools and since two
thousand and fourteen annually
we come before you and state our
positions and in this case our
position has been to support a
moratorium on new and virtual
charter schools until until
existing schools are funded
adequately and that statues are
clarify to address those funding
inequities and any potential
abuses are corrected we stand in
favor of education we stand in
favor of public schools we want
our current public schools
funded adequately for that
reason we support the bill it is
moving us in the direction of
the membership of the New Mexico
school board association that
has called for a hold back until
our public schools are funded
adequately we thank the sponsor
for regular forward and apply to
curb her career courage and we
ask you committee members to
favourably consider this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
This.
Mr chairman Chris balls I don't.
Register lobbyist for reduction
public schools and the schools
public schools we stand in
support of this piece of
legislation.
We we believe is good policy we
wish the committee to place to
pass this the opposition made
several points and a lot of
those points can be qualified
really well if you take a look
at FIR and the legislative
location study coming analysis
clarify so ask you to please
take a look on that as we go to
the debate and I ask you to
support this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr CNS.
Good morning Mr members of the
committee.
It's clear to okay thank you
Steve ceiling is with any New
Mexico government relations
director and on behalf of our
members we support this bill we
understand that charter schools
have a place in our state we get
it we understand that but we
also understand that we need to
fund our public schools and that
money can be diverted it to
funding charter schools and high
salaries for some
superintendents instead of them
going into the classroom so we
do ask that you consider a vote
in favor of this bill we thank
the sponsors and
yes thank you.
Thank you is there anyone.
Support on the online okay thank
you out will not go Senator any
comments where we go to
questions from the committee.
Well Mr chairman I just want to
reiterate that this does nothing
with the current charter schools
just prospect of Lee moving
forward a district that had a
more than ten percent would not
allow another charter until that
was it just so.
Your co sponsor yes there's my
cosponsor from the house.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee members and I want to
I want to commend
sponsor Senator here because
this is something these are
discussions we've had.
And need to have a regarding our
charter schools and our the data
and information we have
regarding enrollment regarding
next steps regarding the
modeling and the promise of why
we allowed our torso succumb to
play and be come public
charters.
We have a model in place right
now that we've been discussing
and having tools conversations
about Mr chair during the
interim committee and those are
community schools and I think
they're left out of this
conversation because we went to
bat and said let's come up with
models let's figure this out and
having that in place and now
moving down the road several
years now and having more data
and information compact more
charter schools we know that
they are no better.
In performance.
Information in levels than our
public schools in many cases I
appreciate the conversation
today and the passion of our
charters that are coming in
discussing and standing up for
themselves however this bill
does not do what they are say
what they say in fact there are
some false narratives that have
been
mention today to the point where
the equator public schools
Walmart no I find that.
A bit of a problem because I am
a proud mother of.
Of two children one in third
grade now one twenty two years
old who went to our public
schools and without that public
school in place my child would
not have had his services meant
so I stand proudly now as a
mother with another child in the
Santa Fe public schools and I
want to thank those that are
coming and and talking about
this in a very level minded way
we are the place where we have
to re evaluate where we are that
is our function that is why we
are here is legislators this is
nothing to say to our charters
that they cannot access this is
not the promise of this bill and
I would say thank you for the
time to speak and I really want
to thank
Senator Stewart for bringing
this for today.
Thank you the questions from the
committee.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
The only change on this as I can
see is on page three.
so this would only affect the
initial applications to start a
new charter school or would it
keep existing charter schools
from expanding.
Mr Chairman it would it depends
on where the charter school is
so if the charter school is in
one of the districts that's over
ten percent it would stop the
expansion.
So if you have a charter school
Mr Chairman Senator like Ames
academy.
The student a phenomenal job for
I can go to one of my district
ask academy who's doing a
wonderful job
and they've reached that ten
percent
Then they're not allowed to take
care of.
Find for students anymore Mr
Chairman Rio Rancho was only at
four point four percent so they
could expand all over Rio Rancho
they couldn't expand in
Albuquerque.
So thanks Academy Mister
chairman Senator who's probably
one of our top schools actually
they've had awards for being top
schools in the nation.
Would not be able to expand and
serve more students if those
parents wanted their children at
school Mr chairman that's not
what I said if you ask about Rio
Rancho in Albuquerque and I said
they can expand in Rio Rancho
okay could expand in Rio Rancho
with only four point four
percent of the population and
charter they could not in
Albuquerque with a nineteen
point eight percent population
and charters.
So.
Mr any other district Mr
chairman that Roman center why
do we want to limit.
Parents choice and so in that
way his parents to choose to put
their children and charter
schools what we want to live
with that choice.
Mr chairman I I don't think of
this as a limiting I think of it
as a leveling the playing field
and giving the local districts
the ability to maintain we've
had a couple of districts that
that just kind of been decimated
by charters and that certainly
wasn't our attention when we
started with charters so this is
a way to kind of level the
playing field make sure they're
not taking over districts or
creating problem where the
districts are it's hard for them
to function because of the lack
of resources all of them going
to the charters so you you can
just vote no I expect that the
fact is is that we have to do
something I believe of about
this issue and this was a way
that I thought that would be
easier to do doesn't affect
current charters it may affect
the expansion if they're in a
district where it's already over
ten percent of but not in other
districts so to me it's a it's
it's an effort to try to level
the playing field for districts.
Mr Chairman center.
I think you're right will
probably end up disagreeing on
this issue we've agreed on a lot
of issues this year so we can do
that it's okay
but you know my my concern.
Is really again I I want parents
to be able to put their
children.
And I know you're concerned for
the children as well I'm not
saying it's not because of that
we both have the same concern we
just have different ways of
getting there.
But my concern is is really.
More for the children it I
believe that parents are the
best ones to make a choice as to
where their children get the
best education.
And my concern is making sure
our children get the best
education possible for some
parents thank you co sponsor
that was the public school.
I've actually had my for my
children as you know in every
type of school there is.
I have in private school I've
had a home schooled academy
charter schools and I've had him
in public schools so I have a
vast experience with different
types of schools and what we did
is we put our children in the
school that best met the needs
of our individual child.
At that time.
And I I just can't support
anything that would take that
choice away from parents so
thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir last
this.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Representative
Lujan thank everyone who who
came out this morning it's kind
of at that point in the session
where we can't let everybody.
Everybody COVID so that's where
the chair was coming the
But it's a.
I think there's a disconnect
that I'm hearing
People did draw a distinction
between public schools and
charter schools charter schools
are public schools.
So so let's let's try to help as
I don't know what the new phrase
could be public charter charter
public on but you cannot suggest
that they're two different
things in the same and I know
that during the the agency of
the Great Recession we're not
tremendous tremendous budget
budget crunch in this this the
last time I heard this bill and
it.
And and the bill was presented
because we're just in this
horrible world of scarce scarce
resources.
Now we're in a world of kind of
we're still don't governments
scarce resources by definition
but it's but we have relatively
abundant resources compared to
five five six seven years ago
for sure hopefully we can
maintain it you know if we if we
continue to grow our economy the
also Mr chairman thunderstorms
Representative Lujan one step
tacking anybody we just have
policy differences you know
policy differences
But
but this is a moratorium the
generally was correct it that
that that spoken in favor of
this is essentially a moratorium
it's written kind of cool that.
Can go up to percent but that's
the moratorium for all those
districts that.
That are currently at ten
percent or above and
theoretically aims could have a
branch office in Russia but I
wasn't with the gentleman was
getting I don't think it was is
can aims grow where it currently
is you know the answers no
answers no so so anyway system I
think charter schools up I I Mr
chairman I refer to it as the
right L. high systemic Bill
Greece we were right all high
worked out for me was one school
everybody went to the same
school
no we went to different schools
and you know you participated in
what you could and it worked out
for me because I knew everybody
I graduated high school with
kids I went to kindergarten
with.
That at but that doesn't does
not everybody's reality that's
not everybody's situation
The one that comes to mind is
what was mentioned Mr in the up
sign language academy which is
like a revolutionary way of
teaching deaf and hard of
hearing.
children and their families you
know that would never have a
reason for the charter school
movement and so the folks here
in this room that are come but
that are from charter schools
they're not here protect their
schools their schools good to go
even if this passes they're here
to protect of the ability for
education entrepreneurs to
develop new and innovative
educational models for the
future so I think that's
something that we we don't want
to do away with.
At this time I want to but I see
the points that are being made
because a lot of our friends in
the nonprofit sector that get we
get paid a lot
so that may be something to look
at we definitely I don't know if
the stats are any different
because.
I think.
Senator skids charter schools
may on the margin maybe more in
power than other parents
those students would probably do
well at public school maybe
maybe not it's tough to do a
statistical analysis and as you
can consider all those variables
I think it is time to study some
of that stuff see if it's all
charter schools are succeeding
or not with the ring something
innovative and new to the table
or not that that's something
that that I totally agree with
what Senator Stewart is
advocating in general insight
support that and now at this
bill isn't necessarily targeting
that this bill doesn't
necessarily.
you know we'll be talking about
audits here in a minute Mr
chairman and out.
This bill doesn't necessarily
get it some of the specific
concerns is just kind of like.
A general moratorium until the
population grows or something I
don't know but anyway I I
couldn't support at this time.
But it but I think it's worthy
to do another study every five
five years or so to kind of
gauge where where we're going
with charter schools and things
of that nature thank you Mr
thank you centers to
Representative Lujan Senator
Kernan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
both for
being here and all of you for
being here it is a it is an
emotional
issue and we've seen this before
this isn't the first year we've
seen a room full of people with
regards charter schools and so
there's a lot of passion
involved in and I think that's
because parents of and charter
school supporters
do feel very strongly about the
decisions that they make for
their kiddos so I have a
question no
I'm looking at the F. I R. in
looking at the total ma'am the
charter school personages so
when you think about online
students that are registered in
charter schools where you
showing of those students the
county.
Mr Chairman.
Santa Fe has one word count
where it counts
we'll have the SCG help here so
madam chair I think my point is
if you have an online charter
school those participants can be
anywhere in the in the state so
I'm asking if those students are
counted within their actual
school district or if they're
counted for ever the.
Our during school in Mr Chavis
superintendent Chavis could
answer we see Ellie S. C. trying
to figure it out
it is Mr Chappell superintendent
yes yes.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Kernan you
know I will I want to wait for
LFC because I don't want to give
you the wrong answer my
interpretation is where its
chartered for the authorizing
body so if it's a Santa Fe
public school charter school
that is remote and those would
count towards our our membership
thank you thank you Mr chairman
we will wait for for definite
answer but but I do think that
makes a difference and I'm
thinking about Carlsbad you know
they've had on schools and make
Farmington had one and that that
that could affect that
percentage and I think that's
unfair so you know hi Spence in
position now if that is the case
and I don't know if you no now
the answer of are going.
Question Mr chair Senator so I
just wanna clarify the question
you're you're asking what where
the population would counts
depending on where the school is
located excellent the percentage
our understanding is that the
enrollment counts toward the
district in which the charter is
physically located yep.
So thank you Mr chairman I think
that that's something to look at
because I think you've got some
locations that may be over
represented as far as membership
that in charter school so that
may need to be looked at
the the thing that I that
concerns me and I we don't have
a charter school by.
I don't think in my entire
district well I have Carlsbad so
I did that in Lee County we
don't have the we have private
schools we've got one private
school that they just are
beginning construction of a new
building and they're doing that
because as parents want their
kids not in the public schools
but in private school and then
we have a couple others and in
and in my County that are very
popular and so.
Not everybody's happy with
school districts with public
schools even in my area and of
the public school supporter and
taught for many years and both
private and public school and so
you know their reasons people
choose that.
So I think the waitlist issue
especially in Albuquerque and
that seems to be where.
The biggest problem is and I'm
not gonna sit here for take the
Albuquerque public schools
because I don't know that much
about them that obviously I mean
there are a lot of people that
would prefer not to send their
kids so you know I think that
the studies important and I
think we need to maybe take a
look at really digging deep into
into the efficiency not only
part of charter schools but my
goodness we know that even in
public school we still have a
lot of issues and I don't think
it's about the money at all we
keep increasing funding to
public schools we have ever here
that I've been here except for
the few years where we took
their money that that it's not
about the funding and I think
it's about about other things
and I'd like to know what those
other things are for sure and
and I think policies one I think
success in with the kids are
achieving what they should
achieve so you know and I'm
those Senator Stewart no some
problem I'm not gonna vote for
this but but I do understand the
concern and I do want to say
that specially in some of the
really small communities
I think palaces is a perfect
example of have that's really
impacted the local district but
it's also a message to tacit
somewhere there.
Parents aren't happy so you know
I do understand
I do understand that concern the
I guess we just need to really
take a deep look out of you know
if this bill will pass it
million may not but
At at I just think that we've
got to figure out why parents or
someone happy
With the public schools and and
see if we can continue to
improve in that area so those
are the questions I have to I
would like to know more about
the online thank you thank you
senator others Senator Pinto and
you have any questions.
No I don't okay Mister the bill.
Just looking at the numbers and
the F. I. R..
Mr chairman it looks to me like
Senator.
This is only two three districts
in the whole state is that.
Albuquerque
Mr chairman we have those.
We have ten reserves in.
That that have two percent.
For more that are above the
limit that was in the original
legislation will Mr Chairman the
original legislation put the
membership of the district at
thirteen hundred thirteen herbal
low you can only have ten
percent this bill takes away
that provision of third
understand that so ten of the
current this ten of the eighty
nine districts are over ten
percent now.
Okay.
IBM's reading the.
State the state charters I was
looking for a call.
I I guess some.
We don't have any so I don't
know.
Except as to because one I guess
but
I think Miss Mister chairman I
think maybe that districts like
as Senator Kernan stomach tells
is got to.
Pretty big it's pretty
significant number what looks
like more than their total is
that right.
So Mister chairman at the.
F. I R. puts House recent twenty
percent.
You Mr chairman
One of the concerns I had
somebody mention well it's going
to take jobs from it does take
jobs from the public school but
it also creates jobs and charter
schools so is that not a fair
balance the the we have a what
fifteen one two something under
twenty to one student ratio
around the state.
Is that.
And what exact number is Mr
chairman I'm not sure what your
question is is the question is.
Overall are we've got affecting
jobs but charter schools we
still have to have a teacher for
every fifteen or twenty kids
right.
Mr chairman I I I don't think
the jobs is this is part of the
I was brought up into it it was
mean.
Within these districts that have
these higher percentages that is
a worry from public schools
because you know I mean
essentially going up close
public schools the traditional
public schools rather than
charter gonna have to close them
if you continue to open up more
charter public schools.
I've got mixed feelings thank
you Mr we'll do.
Open.
Just a couple of comments or or
questions I have and I was the
president of the New Mexico
school board association when
charters first were begin and
started under the governor
Johnson
at the time.
Charters very specifically said
we're going to be innovation and
we're going to pick up kids that
don't traditionally do well in
the public schools things like
and at Robert F. Kennedy is a
perfect example of those kinds
of of charters of the questions
were specifically asked about.
Charters that are just
alternatives and it was like no
this is not parent choice this
is for kids type of things
there's been a major shift in
those twenty five years that now
it's all about parent choice
there's been no innovation moved
from charters to traditional
public schools and if that
sometimes you know people are
very up protective of that
because that's their marketing
for their charter school instead
of trying to share with schools
down a broader market out and so
also that the very beginning
there we was very clear in the
initial laws that charters with
like we're never going to ask
for school buildings we've got
that covered.
Now with the the shifted towards
wanting capital outlay funding
for buildings we're never gonna
ask for transportation
requirements and now with the
number of charters in
Albuquerque in particular
they're asking for
transportation funding so they
can move their kids to the
schools and so there been some
major kind of page and switch on
what was promised with the
initial things twenty five years
ago and I get it that things
change as the world changes.
But.
We're we're talking about some
some major changes and things I
think certainly the the
discussion about the L. E. S. C.
and I'm not going to be Cherry
at the next two years it'll be
up to Representative Romero.
But certainly there needs to be
a deep dive into the charters I
still and we have some wonderful
charters we've got some great
ones down in Los crucis I don't
know what you probably have the
numbers what our number is in
Los crucis.
You're not over to ten percent
my guess is it's probably about
six or seven percent maybe I
don't have the percentage okay
want to accept the once over
okay up.
Three point seven point three
point seven compact.
The court and again I think it's
important this does not change
anything for currently charter
charters.
Changes nothing.
It prevents the continued
proliferation of additional
charters.
In some of those districts that
have high proportions of that.
I think that's appropriate in
the end certainly until we look
at and and look at the overall
performance I was talking with
Matt Paul the other yesterday or
the day before.
About this particular bill and
the New Mexico charter school
associations done a good job of
closing down some of the worst
of our charters which were
greatly affecting the numbers.
But there still are a whole lot
of charters that are performing
the same as traditional schools.
And typically require greater
resources than than others
and so I've got some concerns
about.
About kind of what is the
purpose of the charters when it
shifted over time to just be an
alternative to public to the
traditional public school as
opposed to having a specific
mission to try something new to
pick up the the kids that are
have been drop outs or in Los
crucis one of our very good
charter schools last month had
yes.
Picks up some kids that that
don't fit in or of trying to
remember the name that the art
school down there the been
around kids that are in Arden
theatre there of the the dance
to a different drummer and that
schools that very effective for
for those students.
But we have an awful lot of
charters that look a whole lot
like traditional schools but the
parents who have social capital
to manage the system up getting
into the charter of filling out
the forms all of that that
others don't have
of kids in foster care don't
have somebody who can make those
applications for them some of
the kids in special education
the special education services
though charters as public
schools are supposed to provide
those don't always have the
services for deaf hard of
hearing multiple profound you
know multiple other kinds of
things aren't available there
and so they are not providing
all of the same services that
traditional schools are so I
mean this is a very thorny
issues certainly and again I I
tend to I'm supporting it this
bill because it doesn't change
any charters that are currently
here and those of you who have
charters that are have parents
and charters wonderful applaud
your kids are doing great that
it's working out for you no
problem at all.
We've got great public schools
too and we do have school choice
within public schools parents
can send their children to any
public school that has space
that they want there's parent
choice there.
Public schools.
Do not have caps on their
enrollment if there's a kid
lives in the district they are
required to take them charters
don't have that I mean there are
some some major differences but
I think it's something that's
important.
That and again that we study we
get a better study of how
they're performing.
But this certainly is a thorny
issue by the it's been a
reasonable cap for the smaller
districts we've seen it the
proliferation in larger
districts to where it's causing
the problems we were concerned
about the smaller districts when
the law was initially put in so
with that I'll be quiet and.
Senator.
A motion to table it is not
debatable.
Your.
Hello please Senator Brandt
Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan sixty five of.
Senator you okay.
Well you can you have been here
for the the debate but the
I'm sorry I did I apologize the.
Senator my Estes yes.
Center Lovell yes Senator Pinto.
Yes.
Senator pope.
Yes.
Centerfolds no.
The Senate bill is tabled.
Senator.
Ation
that.
Mr chair.
And and fellow senators I
certainly understand the concept
behind this bill I will tell you
of the economic development.
My district I've got more calls
about this and maintaining the
ability to have charter schools
insisted that the taxes for.
Hey.
Because uncommon.
The
may assist charter schools in
chartering authority audits.
All that up if I could the
moment in previous conversations
outside kind of moment a
personal private.
I'd like to recognize our new
secretary designate is here with
us.
That does any over metal you're
welcome to Senate education if
you want to.
Senator short on the microphone
but thank you we're we're all
very happy that you're here and
you are welcome and Senate
education anytime you're here.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for that
recognition.
The public.
Gets close together like we have
a better thank you for that how
the unusual tricks Mr chair
members the committee thank you
so much for this it's it's a
great honor to be here this
morning I just coming in to try
to it start to listen to all
these bills and and get spun out
just for everyone here I'm very
excited about this still closing
down loss in this is a
superintendent I'm still working
as a region with with our higher
ed I'm very much looking forward
to seeing how I can be a
positive influence for public
education so Mister chair thank
you so much for that thank you
welcome.
Yes this and this is the charter
school and charter thirty audits
for sixty six.
Thank you Mr chairman honorable
members this might be apropos
this is up Senate bill four
hundred sixty six and it
requires charter school to pay
for have a separate audit from
is charging Authority doesn't
diminish any current current
laws with regard to that
authority.
That requires all charter
schools to have their own board
of finance and if I could just
of.
And I'm I'm joined by Mister
Paul we all know to explain by
the more intricacies of the
bill.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chair members of the
committee
Thank you to the sponsor for
bringing this bill this bill
does a couple things
What we're right now charter
schools don't have access to all
the funds that a public school
has a school district that is
and it's not it's not like a
discriminatory action so right
now if there is below the line
grant funding that is provided
from the public education
department the charter school
must apply through their school
district and if the school
district isn't interested in
applying for those grant funds
than the charter schools kind of
out of luck our school districts
are normally really great
partners on these below the line
grant opportunities.
The other type of funding that
that sometimes gets gets mixed
up by the way the current
process is is the federal funds
so presently and again this is
in a discriminatory action on
the school district they take in
direct costs when they get a
federal grant so title one idea
of the bill take fifteen
eighteen percent off the off the
top as an administrative fee
then those funds go to the
charter who then administers the
fund so we're kind of EE paying
for overhead here and and so we
we can feel that that there
might be a better way to to and
gauge on that and then lastly
regarding federal funds Esther
funds they didn't have to go to
charter schools our charter
schools got those additional
pandemic related funds because
the school districts partnered
with us but not because we were
supposed to get it on a per
student basis like state
charters to and so we have a we
have a funding access issue and
we've had an issue in the past
that we've heard for a number of
years from school districts that
they're upset that they have
there they have audit findings
of charter schools on the audit
of the school district and so
what this bill is attempting to
do is to provide more
accountability for charter
schools greater access to funds
and let districts audits reflect
the work that they do with their
own books and so you'll see as
you walk through the bill here
on that page number two it notes
that the audits are now separate
and along side each other that
allows they're still you know on
the they're still subject to the
authorizer relationship and the
way that looks like so right now
all funds go through a school
district to get to a charter
school authorizing practices and
ensuring that the financial
practices of a charter school or
okay never has any.
Thing to do with withholding
funds it's about looking at an
audit it's about doing site
visits and and potentially going
on reporting that's more often
than it than it otherwise would
normally be so monthly reporting
and so what the what the bill
then does is ask for the ability
for locally authorize charter
schools to become their own
board of finance this is how
half of charter schools operate
right now state authorized
charter schools are their own
board of finance there are
additional requirements for the
charter school board that they
must needs to have this
designation with DFA and then
the money will go directly to
them without any of the the
overhead costs with grant funds
they can apply for individually
we think that's a that's a
better way to do this process to
allow the requisite autonomy for
a charter school financially to
make the make the program that
they have a vision for their
students work so
I think go ahead it back over to
the sponsor but that's really
what the bill is doing we think
it's a nice
we think it's a nice increasing
autonomy for a locally
authorized schools we do get
sorry it and nice increase in
accountability because of the
additional requirements while
also providing some additional
autonomy.
Thank you Mr for the folks
listening back home up I'm
joined by Mister Matt Paul the
executive director of the public
charter schools of New Mexico.
With that will stand for
questions thank you Mr rose for
this legislation.
Opposition.
Yes.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is made
out of and executive director of
New Mexico kids can't and we
stand in support of this bill
for a reason that stated in your
FIR it will eliminate a live a
level of bureaucracy and will
improve the efficiency of school
funding streams allowing local
charter schools to receive and
spend state and local requests
in a more timely fashion in
short it will allow our charter
schools to get resources to the
students that need them more
quickly and we are huge
supporters of that we also
believe especially given that
the conversation earlier today
our charter schools want this
level of accountability for
their audits and for their
financial transparency as the
member of the governing board of
a charter school that state
authorize we have this
responsibility already and I
think it is right and fair that
our local charter schools have
the full responsibility of their
audits as well so we look
forward to the way that it will
improve transparency and
accountability for the charter
funding for all charters thank
you.
Thank you stamps.
Mr chairman again stand around
for the ma'am selling for the
NMSA we stand in support of this
Ali Mr chairman perhaps for
slightly different reasons one
use the legislature moved.
The independence on the state
level for the oversight fell on
these two these charters for
financial control and and and
building their own board of
finance you're really slighted
the public schools.
Because authorizers.
In my in my time as a
superintendent especially Los
crucis all of my audit findings
had to do with our authorize
charters with a great
relationship with them we try to
work with them and help them
which I would hope so how would
continue working into that level
Mr Chairman why treat the local
charters different than the a
state chartered charter schools
and so for that reason Mr
chairman we urge you to pass
this bill and then Mr Chairman
will want to continue to have
discussions about the bad actors
that occur and I know that's in
Matt's area also and we need to
figure out how we rein in the
bad actor part of this thank
you.
Thank you.
And we have one on line in
support JD Bullington JD.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Hollington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which supports
Senate bill four sixty six this
bill proposes an important way
to streamline and increase
accountability in our charter
school system our state's
charters have the ability to
stand on their own to handle
their own finances and this will
eliminate one layer of
bureaucracy in our education
system for the benefit of our
charter schools and their
authorizers thank you thank you
the I think we're good questions
no thank you Mr questions from
the committee.
Senate Bill.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
It in the FIR talks about.
The charter cost I mean the
other costs four of four
thousand to twenty some thousand
dollars whatever it is and
you're already paying that is
what it says.
If you already paid it how come
it's not a already essentially a
separate audit I'm gonna try to
figure this out why.
Mr chair but we have to use
this.
It's got a good voice the.
The the little ones were great
work really can okay Mr chair
and senator Neville the reason
why is because the charter
schools can treat it is treated
as a component unit and so what
they're paying for is for the
testing of the amount of
transactions within their school
site then it gets compiled in
one larger audit at the district
level.
That's the answer I have I don't
know if it's a good one but the
component unit is kind of what
what this is trying to change
well it makes sense I just
trying to figure out so what you
already by not it's and there.
Not separate already you that's
all Mr thank you the questions.
The current thank you may be off
track Mr chair little bit so
board of finance they would
agree with select them.
Mr chair and senator current in
the the selection for the
finance and the audit committee
would follow the same practice
as a school district so for I'm
gonna I'm gonna get this eighty
percent right but both
committees have largely board
members but they do need to have
external members from the
committee with financial
background and expertise so
follow up question Mr chair on
the election of board members
for charter schools have set
down.
Mr chair and Senator Kernan
It's done in a number of
different ways some charter
schools do choose to elect their
board members but otherwise they
are selected by the community.
So Mister chair when we do our
study if we do a steady I would
like that to be included because
I know I've had concerns come to
me from an online school with
regard to the board members of
that school and I couldn't
figure out how the world they
got to be board members and
that's really concerning to me
so I hope charter school
listening to that because I do
think that's an area that really
does concern me and now we're
going to go to a board of
finance which could be even more
concerning on who's doing that
so charter schools have a
responsibility to and we need to
make sure that there's fairness
in that election process or
however there selected because
control can be held in the hands
of one person who actually sex
all the board members so I
really am concerned and I think
that should be something that is
carried forward.
Yes.
Yes Mr chair and Senator Kernan
I just I just know I I take
those and and welcome a
conversation the center I'm on
it the one thing I'd say is when
we go to a board of finance we
have the oversight of the school
district that's authorizing and
the state presently it's just
the the district that's
authorizing so there is enhanced
accountability on the process
all right so I'm comfortable
with that Mr chair but we do
need to have a conversation
about the other thank you very
Brandt thank you Mr chairman and
and that center I I actually got
to serve on the board of finance
for Rio Rancho public schools my
last couple years on the board
and it's it's always at least a
couple members from the board as
your which helps the board no
more of what's in the budget as
it comes before the board to
vote on the budget
and so you can't have more than.
To because then it becomes a
open meetings act violation and
so you know that's kind of the
way that works but that is
traditionally how it's done in
the regular public schools and
then you come back later that
board of finance puts together
their recommendations for the
budget that comes back later but
I do eco drive I keep calling
you doctor for in this year.
I do echo Senator Kernan some
concerns on the some of the
boards with the charter schools
I think that that would that's
something we've talked about for
many years since that we really
need to look at how do we.
Make those little stronger a
little more open as to how
they're selected.
So that's that's something I
would I would also reiterate
thank you Mr.
Thank you other questions
etcetera Pinto.
No questions okay does one make
sure we don't forget that you're
up there with us.
Yes thank you up question I had
on page three the Google page
three or the bottom side of page
I brought page four page five
which are kind of the real meat
of this locally try to charter
schools up qualifies boards
finance by July first twenty
twenty four what if they don't.
This is what it says all of them
what if the board doesn't get
qualified they don't send
anybody they don't get enough
they don't pass the course I
don't know what it requires.
Mr Hey center Mr chair they
would be subject to corrective
action from there authorizer is
what I would think would be the
next step just like any time
they don't comply with the law
what would corrective action
look like.
What kinds of things of course
are done in corrective action
and Mr Mr chair members of the
committee when a school is put
into corrective action it really
depends on what what issue
they're having in this case I
think that we just set a time
line for completing the the
pre requisites to become a board
of finance and set a time line
and say okay you didn't get it
done by this deadline let's
figure out a new deadline and if
you don't do it by then then you
start building escalated in
terms of the consequences so you
could have your charter revoked
should you not comply with with
public school code and that's
what this would be.
Okay I mean the kind of said you
don't meet that deadline will
give you another deadline yeah.
Mr chair just just to yes I mean
in some cases when it when it's
not when it's something like
this and trying to put it in
just this contacts when it's a
new law and you know if it's
just about hello Kate Kate you
can get it done by July
fifteenth I can see that
operating differently than a
school saying well we just don't
want to do this and so those
would have to pretty different
actions from the author but what
does it take to get certified
does A. board of finance what
does that require of the the
members or to do that with what
that means.
On it for one.
To be qualified as a board of
finance.
Mr chair it's in it's in the
bill here just just looking for
not as anything changed but it
just applies to a.
Thank you Mr chairman the up
armor numbers on page twelve is
the statutory requirements to be
The board of finance so it says
a on line eleven a local school
board has the authority to
approve establish.
The establishment of a locally
charters.
Charter school within the local
school boards district and kind
outlines the.
The requirements I believe
that's the case.
Okay we see the analyst here and
let me read to be doesn't is a
board of finance local charter
school be required to have
trained staff capable of keeping
accurate complete fiscal records
or bonded against lawsuits
governing body members not
previously suspended.
I guess I'm getting to the still
on this.
What training who provides the
training.
Where does that come from
because we've got a whole lot of
charters that within the next
year have to get trained who
does that Mr chair that's a mix
between the public education
department in the school board
association and so the just like
any other a licensed business
manager the public education
department's going to use rule
then I'll
administrative tools in their
tool kit to be able to provide
guidance in this arena the
school board association because
every charter school must have a
license school business official
they would get training in the
additional requirements
associated with becoming a board
of finance let me just let me
may I'm gonna put you on the
spot does a school board
association provide training and
certification and as being a
board of finance.
Mr chair you appropriately
shamed me there it's the school
business officials knew masco is
that a Organization US agency
agency stated I apologize and
let me just stand I mean do they
have that do they have the
capability of of.
Providing boards of finance for
we I suspect we have a couple
hundred.
The chairman can either refunded
okay to refrain the question
just a little bit because I
don't know that we have clarity
as to what the board of finance
means so I was super schools and
more New Mexico when the state
allowed small schools whose
board of finance have to be the
county treasurer of become a
board of finance Mr what you
just read is really the essence
of the matter let me raise what
happens on the board of finance
the charter school board will
now be the sole responsible
party for all things financial
further charter.
No increase the risk that they
have the liability risk that
they have because of the act
improperly.
Then they will be solely
responsible for that and will no
longer I'll disagree with Matt
the part of the charter with the
local district could you just
removing that in this bill from
that relationship.
Now the new New Mexico asbo is
the site the trains Business
managers and I suspect would be
encouraged to help provide
training for of those boards in
their rules about proper
financial procedure proper
financial policies of proper
financial practice Mr chairman
there lot of restrictions and
twenty two eight of New Mexico
public school code finance code
that tells you exactly what
those are from bonding to
investments to what you can
spend accounts Bennett a to the
chart of accounts and so this is
going to ride largely on the
back of their of their
financial officer.
Being either they're chief
financial officer who were that
as Bo person is in their
relationship I believe twenty
past this you look Sanchez the
local district completely.
So that be it becomes a
programmatic oversight you did
ask one question should this
should be not me to the board of
fast requirement I'm a different
have been this is my opinion
based on my years of experience
and maybe wrong I got my law
degree from university of Kerala
some lower elevate so you see a
large.
Of but Mr chairman I think that
The local charter becomes the
sole responsible party and all
of these matters in the end if
they acted improperly I believe
that.
In the agreement with a local
charter and charter authority
would have the option of
removing them as a charter.
As as as one of the steps that
could be contemplated we talk
about the bad actor issue we've
had some bad actors I'm not
going to talk about it because
it isn't everybody for certain
for some very good charters
Accenture's replacement in those
matters.
Just like the state does you
have to consider whether or not
that charters retained in the
Public Education Commission has
removed charters from a number
of districts or fail to re
authorize charters and I suspect
that's what the practice will be
at the local level that's a long
winded answer to a simple
question but it's gonna ride is
going to rise and fall in your
asbo person and it's going to
require all stipulations and
twenty two eight.
To be followed by the charter.
Thank you.
You also mentioned the PED's
does training I'm Greg I'm gonna
put you on the spot does the
rate do the training for the
financial officers we're have
the capacity.
We do provide training we don't
I'm not aware of any
certification that the agency
provides and sorry this is great
frosted with the public
education department Mr chairman
members of the committee
of spring budget conference is
coming up soon that's one of the
big events that we have that we
wind which we provide training
for business officials school
business official specifically.
Thank you that.
But then Senator I could go
through you of that okay if
you're alright with me just had
asking questions directly
amounts to Mr.
The.
Of the locally authorize
charters how many already have a
trained business person do you
know all of them all of them
must have that now and so they
all have a license business
official.
And so there really isn't gonna
be any needed training.
I think there will be some
needed training about the
transition but really how they
do their job won't change audits
will change for them because now
that audit will be just their
entities audit and not a larger
part of a a more global audit
from a school districts to some
things will change but the way
they execute their books the way
they currently over sorry much
of their on site oversight will
not change the oversight at the
board level would would
potentially change we have a
number of locally authorize
charter schools that already do
have finance and audit
committees but it is not
required because they're not
boards of finance the end and I
guess I'm stuck on this qualify
as the board of finance do they
get a certificate from as Bo do
they you know they they get a
ribbon on it would.
How do we know they're
qualified.
Mr chair it it's actually a
process that works to the FAA
and it's it's a bit being a
governmental entity that can
receive funds directly from the
department of finance and
administration.
The okay.
I guess I'm I'm still confused
you know it's.
The kind of a known issue that
you are now we're we're gives
you up the placard to hang on
the wall but your office that
that you are and it says the
board.
Locally charter schools out
qualify as boards of finance
does that only require one
person have been through the
training and the whole board is
now qualified.
Mr chair so that when it says
qualify in the in this case it's
qualifying for the designation
of a board of finance that comes
from DFA you need to prove that
you have these committees in
place you need to prove that you
have a bank account.
That can that can receive money
every brand new charter school
that does eventually get
approved they go through this
process in the summer before the
debate start operations so that
Qualifikation happens there I
think the qualification that
regard is is associate with
training would come from.
PED the school business
officials and our organization
because we do governing council
training and so we would
certainly put together a new
module for this should go
through okay I'll I'll let it go
I just done I'm still.
You're a little confused as to
how we know someone is qualified
or not qualified and who who
gives that and how do you know
if I were to go check that the.
The ones in Los crucis for
instance do is do they have a
designation written somewhere
that they are qualified as a
board of finance we're not
qualified yet or they were but
they're not anymore because a
business person left the own
keeps up with those.
Mr someone find out who is who
is it yeah we're is that kept
that's the rule of the
authorizer I mean I I I don't
know what Placar sick
stratification exist but I know
that if the if if a school that
state authorize their all their
own boards of finance now if
they were to receive a report
from the school budget and
finance bureau at PED to their
authorise are saying.
This school is falling out of
compliance on the you could
expect some quick action from
the authorizer to intervene on
that and and start them on
intervention latter that may
lead to closure if it was
something I appreciate.
Okay I'll I'll I'll drop it I've
gone on too long about.
You just.
Not quite sure how that works of
any other questions.
Leisure the committee.
Moved and seconded you'll call
the roll please Maria.
Senator Brandt yes Senator
Hickey yes Senator Kernan.
Yes this is Senate Bill.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes Senator sold
yes.
The past you have a to pass on a
seven one vote.
Their master's years still up
with head varsity coach and I
know we have a.
An amendment that I think
chairman honorable members if if
I'd like to discuss the bill.
in the context of the amendment
so if someone could make that
motion this is a Senate bill
four hundred ninety.
In the amendment as a six five
three point one I just want to
think of Mr here's your staff
educating me on these proposals
and and facilitating this
amendment which is markup is a
which is comply with New Mexico
law.
Okay.
So.
Hello would you like to do this
you explain with the amendment
does you want thank you thank
you Mr chairman so the up the
bill is to incentivize coaches
to stay in the profession and
and those with and those that
teach at the school to to become
coaches what the amendment does
is clarified that it is a one
time temporary salary increase
of up to five thousand dollars
instead of a bonus you the we
can't just give bonuses without
reasons and and they must be
tied in with existing bargaining
agreements so the the amendment
clarifies that but and also
changes the bill so it's not
just any coach but a coach with
the teaching license.
Okay.
Questions from the committee.
Okay well and we're only on the
amendment discussing right now.
Mr chair.
With the message.
The amendment.
About question on the amendment.
The question on the amendment go
ahead Senator thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator just
just what the language were
removed from bonuses to one time
temporary salary increases and.
So when we say I'm just trying
to understand the verbiage
within one time because they're
getting this five thousand and
and that's the only right so get
at or like I I just kind of
confused on the verge of how we
do that are are we saying.
One time they won't get it any
other time when they stop
coaching that goes away because
when I get into coaching salary
I just kind of just wanted if
you can explain that a little
bit just that terminology thank
you Mr chairman Senator pope so
so to a bonus is is is
unconstitutional because it's
like well that it is a bonus for
what they did what they're going
to do it has to be more tied in
with the collective bargaining
agreement or specific Task Force
Pacific up.
Requirement of the job so degree
or whatnot so this languages
constitutional and so it's a one
time temporary salary increase
this up in theoretically if this
were to pass and become a great
idea it could become a
reoccurring expense within the
budget and then it wouldn't be a
one time it would be a an
increase in salary budgets for
this year
since we do have a little extra
extra funding it would be a one
time temporary salary increase
for the next fiscal year.
And thank you Mr chair and
that's what was kind of
confusing me because we're doing
it one time but then what would
happen if each year so really
this would have to be.
Within the budget and and their
salary would have to be
corrected to just cover the
whole of the one time in the
current salary correct Mr Boller
this proposal as one time but if
if if were in agreement it's a
great idea than.
Then it could become a thing it
could become a part of house
bill two.
Thank you Mr.
Others on the amendment.
Senator Brandt Mr chairman and
answer you may or may not know
the answer and
but because this would be a
salary increase if they're close
to retirement wouldn't this now
than the fact of their
retirement.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Brandt I don't know who I would
have to look at the particulars
of the collective bargaining
agreement.
it wouldn't be in the collective
bargaining agreement that's part
of I'm sorry thank you Mr
chairman center and it would be
it would just be how it would
apply to statute.
I suppose you could argue either
way but I don't.
The.
The statue in front of you mind
if I allowed stand to answer
that he seems to have the
answer.
Mr chairman I would be part of
salary and therefore would have
all deductions would be taxed
require so security here very
and all those deductions to come
out of Mr Chairman stand if they
were in there I guess last three
the average are the highest
three.
I.
Then wouldn't that then have a
big effect on the or could have
an effect on the RB sure it
would it would add to their high
I average about five thousand
dollars and one of those years
thank you thank you Mr.
The actual and that Mr incident
ran the it would all it would be
part of the actuarial experience
with any other salary adjustment
that we currently have.
Other questions on the
amendment.
I guess my question is.
What's the difference between
bonus and temporary salary
increase thank you Mr chairman
thank you
I mean it doesn't change
anything other than the words
get actual has the same effect.
It has the same effect Mister
chairman Senator souls
But it's but it's up it's
constitutional just a good old
fashioned bonus for no reason
other than someone's policy
initiative is is
unconstitutional there's a whole
one case on point a salary
increase for no reason is
constitutional there is a reason
there is a reason that's with
the teacher's license and and
create an incentive to coach so
I I may have misspoken saying
that quote there's no reason but
essentially if we were to do
this
in here's what here's what that
there's a case on point Mister
chairman Senator souls are.
The National Union of Hospital
and Health Care employees verses
the border regions two thousand
ten in which they are the
legislature gave hospital
employees a bonus and the court
said.
And so here's the arguments back
and forth and it says that the
hospital argues that the bonus
would be a payment that that the
recipients would receive based
on nothing more than simply
being members of a bargaining
unit when the new contract went
into effect according to the
hospital the bonus did not
represent compensation for
pastor expected work for an
enhanced job qualification or
for any quality or longevity
standard and is therefore
forbidden the court found that
argument persuasive and so you
just can't give a bonus however
a salary increase.
is constitutional and and I
suppose you could call it a
legal fiction or not but at this
this language in the amendment
which is why I would like to get
to the date of the bill if we
adopt the amendment the
amendment is constitutional the
bill was originally written is
unconstitutional.
I guess I still get to whether
you change the words are not.
It still is additional
compensation like a bonus for
not doing nothing more than
having the title coach in front
of the and you already change
words coaches to teaching.
But are we able to give bonuses
to teachers.
Mr chair Senator souls once
again you can I give bonuses but
you can increase salaries
anytime you want.
Are all teachers would be
getting the salary increase Mr
Chairman legal service
consultation already yes the you
could give salary increases your
question was.
We give salary increases the
answer's yes you're correct in
this bill not all teachers would
receive this increased.
Compared to what they're now
doing what did they done
different to get this increase
okay I think you're arguing the
bill was chairman of that.
It option the amendment are
going to look at our to our
dental bonuses verses one time
temporary increases that
changing the words don't change
the underlying assumptions about
the true and once we get to the
bill and I look forward to okay.
I wouldn't discuss when we get
to the bill.
We we have a second on the
motion.
Thank you.
Second by Damascus if any other
questions on the amendment.
Sen Pentel.
No question it's good just
making sure you're still there.
Yes I am
here you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Maestas yes
for Novell is Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope yes Senator so no
but you do have an amended bill
thank you Mr thank you for the
courtesy of of that amendment
this is the Senate bill four
ninety as amended its to
incentivize.
The coaching profession coaches
spend more hours with students
and most other teachers
I think the best experts in my
opinion is those coaches that
actually teach at that
particular school are they not
only know the game and know the
nuances of of teaching that
those life skills through that
that that sports experience but
also have they know what to
teach and they know how to
convey and they know how to and
their professional teachers so
what this does is hopefully on
the margin keeps good coaches as
coaches maybe bring some former
coaches back in may be
incentivized teachers at that
school to pursue a career in
coaching so what does this would
do is allocate three point three
four million dollars over the
next fiscal year to give a one
time temporary salary increase
of up to five thousand dollars a
determined
As determined by the school
district to those coaches with a
teaching license.
with that I'll stand for
questions okay out to the
audience those in support.
In opposition.
Stand with me if you like to
come.
The term again stand rounds of
the superintendents we
appreciate the senator's intent
our coaches are underpaid in
many places and we do we're
losing them in droves we have a
lot of technical issues with
this Mr chairman this is
probably had would have to be
serve through the insurance
system which is a addendum to
contract would it be re written
by the district our concern is
this I believe the bill still
says.
Head varsity coaches Mr chairman
that's less than ten percent
year totaled teaching or
coaching staff in the school
district read about how many
we're JB let it levels your C.
team levels all of the assistant
coaches that are involved in
this now we just want the
community cognizant this is
going to single out just head
coaches and we have a concern
about that we think of pro
policy standpoint they're
probably fall short of where we
might go we also concerned that
in this next year.
This will go away.
So it amended to those contracts
back to exclude this additional
amount and so that kind of a
cadence we think might be
problematic to the local
districts final point this
begins to interfere with local
product.
Local agreements with our unions
and others and so for that and a
number of other reasons we found
this technically insufficient
and we oppose the bill.
You know we may.
Good morning good morning
members of the committee the
let me R. tease the legislative
liaison for the New Mexico
school board association and Mr
chairman members of the
committee many school districts
currently provider rate
differentials are stipends for
their varsity head coaches and
that can be very depending on
the sport and based on the
district's budget capacity this
bill without a salary standard
thereby creating a future
recurring cost of and many and
as you know New Mexico square
Association has continued and
continues to support and
advocate for local autonomy we
believe that this decision needs
to remain at the local level
that needs to remain with the
school districts we oppose the
intent of this bill and we ask
for your consideration in that
regard thank you.
Thank you anyone online.
Was there anyone in opposition I
mean in that support all twisted
to the the backwards on
everything.
Okay if not questions from the
committee.
The pope.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you center take my take on Oscar
for second
You know I I think I appreciate
definitely you're trying to do
I know there's the balance of
what these educators are doing
in coaching and they're not
doing it for the money but we
all know they spend a lot of
time and what they do
How did how did you come about
getting that five thousand
dollar number and I guess what
what were you thinking I guess
the amount thank you Mr chairman
Senator pope it was a kind of
the eleventh hour bill drafting
and we didn't know how many
coaches there were.
so we took a stab at five
thousand dollars
You know three point three four
million we then learned off as
the FIR scheme in how many high
schools there are on the sports
for high school things that
nature so I don't think the the
bill as currently written would
have covered everybody so
So we were thinking of all she
we given the two thousand dollar
salary increase and so we.
We are decided out of respect
for the local school districts
let it be determined by the
school districts up to five
million so it's I really
appreciate the the the arguments
of the opposition that it
doesn't go far enough and that
somehow disrespects local school
districts up because I'm off I'm
all for a for those arguments.
Thank you Mr chair Senator the
next question is right now how
how is this the coach's current
coaches salaries have how was
that funded are and how does
that contract work thank thank
you Mr chairman Mr rounds with
my one step at all thank you for
that thank you Mr center folks
on up so on the FIR on page two
there's kind of a list of.
Of a head coaching assignments
and the the increased type into
their salary when when you when
you correlated to hours spent
that I don't know what I though
I know that's probably way lower
than their than their other
salary but that's a great
conversation I would like us to
have that conversation now and
maybe this summer with your
permission if if if someone
knows the answer that question
if you could please answer.
Then.
The chairman Senator pope would
yes of course one more time this
for have a real quick yeah I
just want to understand right
now the current coaches salaries
how was that funded in and how
is that paid for thank you Mr
chairman it's and Senator pope
currently that's determined at
the local board level.
It is in most salary schedules
and districts in fact that's
required by the chart of
accounts as far as accounting
for your expenditures the very
statewide
depends on the district is it
all comes out of districts
operating.
budget and cheer to strike a
balance there increments across
all ranges have been
historically low to the center
point we we have underpaid but
folks in these positions across
the board for the amount of time
they put in when I coached Mr
chairman back in the nineteen
seventies I think a calculated
twelve cents an hour and so the
world wonder good employment is
at Mister chairman Senator
Paypen Takeda do don't do it for
the money although it is a part
of how you attract those to come
in and support and so we again
we appreciate the intention is
just how do you get from point a
to point B. and did end up
properly and scale that on a
statewide basis is really the
issue but it's it is the local
district the board has to
approve the increments schedule
that the coaches around just
like they do for any other
instrument that occurs and then
that's a dented to the rule
based contract for teaching.
That an individual has non
teachers not employees they have
simply the and committed
contract.
Your.
It thank you madam and senator
and this comment probably get
the finance chairs eyes popping
open on this what was there any
thought to I guess upping the
funding and and operations to
the school district to pay for
this verses like a one time
salary increase or bonus like
funding it that way thank you Mr
Mr pope well hoping to have that
conversation
that the committee willing but I
think it's a great did some to
consider and and some to look at
because we are losing good
coaches.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Senator Brandt.
Are you ready yes okay no
problem go to someone else if
you wanted for.
Your expertise with your your
doctor expert.
For
those
Just a few questions on.
So wait for but.
It
is Senator
the coach's already receive a
stipend.
For coaching thank you Mr Mr
souls I I believe they do once
again page two of F. R.
appreciate the FIR folks putting
this this graph together but.
I don't know if this is exact a
cross district lines
But I think this is an
Albuquerque thing because the
the the Albuquerque teachers
federation provided the
information but football head
coaches get roughly fifty four
dollars additional golf and
tennis twenty three hundred
dollars additional.
But I don't know how this
determine who makes that
decision probably the or what or
what the assistance get which
was a great point but I think
the more we learn about this and
the more.
you know I think it's a good
dollar spent if these were
increased Mr chairman Sir thank
you and appreciate that I think
those are part of the bargaining
agreement to the is our yeah.
Look into my my friends over at
the you are so no I think that's
for the bargaining agreement is
how those are determined is
probably looked at as far as how
much time is put in to those
extra hours
and varsity coaches I believe
they'll have to be licensed
teachers correct and but I do
not know they don't have to be
okay but most of more to.
So they're getting there most of
them are getting their regular
salary
which we've increased
significantly over the last
several years plus they're
getting the stipend
Plus are getting exposure so
then they can move and go to UNM
coach which is what happened in
Rio Rancho right so you know
that's that's what happens us
with the coaching thing starts
so.
I I really strongly support
local control I think this takes
that away I also think you're
gonna run into some problems
because you're going to have by
doing this any school district
that has a union contract is
going to have to go into
renegotiations at least on this
one issue for how that's going
to work and so I I don't think
export this and I really
honestly think we need to put
more focus in our schools and
education in on sports thank
you.
The questions.
I have a couple of questions is
I'm looking at the FIR
This bill would support six
hundred eighty eight varsity
coaches.
I know that the preparation
divide by five thousand.
We have two hundred eighty eight
high schools that means that
would support possibly three per
high school they're way more
than three varsity coaches for
high school how would that work
would it be you would get five
thousand you'd only get your
share or proportion of that
would be the first schools that
would in would get the five
thousand how would that work
when there's not enough funding
thank you Mr Mr souls that was
the original bill the amendment
fix that the I missed six that
money talk about that for the
amendment of the amendment the
third prong of the amendment was
Up to five thousand dollars so
could be five hundred could be a
thousand B. two thousand and
then also to deal with the Santo
Brandt's issue Mr chairman of
the last line of the amendment
is the shall be determined by
the school district so it's all
about local control so that
money if we were to appropriate
the three point three four it
would
It would it would cover all the
coaches but much less than five
thousand.
I guess I get even bigger
concerns then is it the local
district determines how much.
But the head is the one that
gets this and has to allocate it
back out how does the district
go about doing that is it only
the first districts to apply to
get the money to distribute up
to five thousand.
Mr Jones our souls I I don't
know.
Because the funding is
insufficient for all head
coaches.
To get funded Mr usage Mr
chairman Sir so that is not
insufficient no because the
amount is anywhere from one
dollar to five thousand dollars
you're correct I don't know if
every head coach the money's not
sufficient but that isn't that
doesn't mean that school
districts could use
discretionary monies to augment
this particular appropriation.
But I get back to then is it
allocated then from the PED's
based on the total number of
head coaches which I don't think
it actually says in here.
Which each district would get
less they could admit up to five
thousand out of their local
budgets if they choose but
there's not sufficient funds for
for all of the head coaches.
And so they'd get a proportion
of that.
I mean that's a no number I
don't know and Greg I don't know
that you would know the number
of how many to head coaches we
have but it certainly is more
than six hundred eighty eight
correct Mr Mr souls and so that
would be determined either by
the.
The leadership of the finance
committee next week for pent or
by pet rule
and it would maybe model this
tier system that that ATF gave
us but that would be that's a
great thing to learn and and a
great great thing to think
about.
Okay and and I'm looking back
through the amendment it it
doesn't really deal with the
fact that it's insufficient I'd
also ask does this include
varsity coaches for E. sports
varsity coaches for
A yes.
The head sponsor for hopes up
which puts in the same kinds of
hours the coaches do head of
mesa various academic types of
programs that.
Also are you a very much paid an
additional statement.
And often are considered like
the mesa coach I mean they are
coaching a team that are going
to that competition would
include those in which case
that's even less sufficiency
thank you Mr is our souls it
would be up.
Obviously as any appropriation
bill the the language to be
incorporated in the house bill
two so that language can be
tweaked by the leadership of
that of of the LFC with regards
to the definition of varsity
sports that I don't have that
definition at my disposal but it
would be whatever that is
defined now.
What typically financing house
bill two doesn't make policy
take decisions like that would
language correct Mr chairman so
so I did suggest that the LFC
would determine what is a
varsity sport that's determined
either stature by NMAA.
In other words we're not
changing what varsity sports is
I don't have that definition
funnymeme nor we gonna seek a
change in bill and I guess it
what it says point but there are
other programs that act very
much like sports as far as
having a sponsor a coach you
know somebody the host said that
help occupation specialties deca
mesa the various CTE programs
teachers are putting in huge
numbers of extra hours just like
varsity coaches are yet this
bill is either excludes them or
is silent about whether they
would be part of it which also
springs and a whole lot enter
even then that thank you Mr Mr
souls no I agree this does not
go far enough it does not go far
enough with the conference we
have and and expected income we
have with the next five years I
don't want to exclude anybody
I'm just bringing this bill
forward to to make this point up
but if folks want to amend it to
include more folks amended to in
a higher appropriation I see I I
agree with those sentiments but
this to I think that this is
sound in terms of incentivizing
coaches with teaching
certificates to to state to
state or join the profession.
That I guess Mr much more the
school board Rev up the the
superintendents association and
others this is more of a local
control as to how much they can
set with the teacher there the
varsity coaches are if they want
to incentivize those things it's
very much of the agreements they
have with their unions and such
so Mister with the more money at
their disposal of the more
options they have for that local
control.
So.
We we can COVID the yeah okay
let's let's put another hundred
billion dollars in education and
health they're able to do that
rather than piecemeal it for
once a particular group but
other questions from the
committee.
Pleasure the committee.
Motion to table you'll call the
roll please merry and Senator
Brandt Senator Hickey pass.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my
Estes.
Senator Neville yes Senator
Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes X. one
model.
Senator Hickey.
yes.
And senator souls yes.
The bill is table on a six one
though yes yes on a six to one
but.
Senator Mr chair
I see what you're trying to do I
get the concept I'll be willing
to talk with you about what we
can do and and maybe during LESC
on on a way to to compensate
these coaches more and also
address the issues of local
control.
Thank you Mr.
And what the.
With four bills have a hard stop
at ten forty five.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee
I hope you'll allow me a little
bit of flexibility to move for
no kind explaining that to to go
forward I think in the
legislature we have to train
people to move up in their
positions and to understand how
bills are presented in LESC we
have a whole group of young
people that are working there
and Senate finance I'm sorry
whole group of young people are
working there so I brought my
expert witness A. J. who's gonna
help us presented a bill in the
state yesterday and I talked
earlier so I really really well.
There's agencies industry and
and and so I'm sorry confused up
as chase here and Senate bill
four ninety two is educational
retirement board it triggers up
the timeline extended timeline
from thirty six consecutive
months to sixty in the let A. J.
just to explain the bill thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee so yeah under current
law under the return to work
those authorized in twenty
twenty two retired teachers can
come back and teach for up to
three years after a certain
retirement period has lapsed for
them while still earning their
retirement benefits so without
conflicting with the IRS of this
bill as senator Munoz mentioned
move to extend that return to
work period for retired
educators to five years
we what good teachers in our
schools we know that the best
teachers are the ones that have
substantial classroom experience
and allowing these educators to
return and share their expertise
with the schools without
interfering with their
retirement benefits will ensure
that classrooms have high
quality teachers.
Thank you in the house
no complaints.
Video center will stand for
questions of the audience those
in support of Senate Bill thank
you in office anyone in
opposition.
We are short time line if
anybody feels compelled they
needed to speak if you come up
please.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee the Lemme artistes
with the New Mexico school board
association we have supported
this type of legislation the
past we continue to support we
thank the sponsor this is
excellent legislation or bring
our teachers back into the
classroom and allow them to stay
there longer to teach our
students that experience that
they bring after the been
retired with all those years is
invaluable we think this is a
great piece of legislation
please move it forward thank you
Senator for bringing this
forward thank you Willie Mays
Stan Turner stand in support of
this bill and thank the
executive director from
educators were tower board for
his continued interest and
what's going on here he in fact
is on the recommend of the
thirty six can with my director
and the thirty six consecutive
or non consecutive months moving
to sixty all point I would
correct just a little bit on the
presentation all it may in fact
be five years you might be
slightly longer because of the
non consecutive nature forty
gives in the sixty miles we
strongly support this bill we
think it'll help us thank thank
you.
Thank.
Good job it Mr chairman John
urged with F. T. New Mexico we
are also in support of this bill
and for all the reasons of in
several we want to expand a
little bit on the comments of
the presentation it's not just
teachers are eligible to return
to work on this project with
your B. participants only think
about the vacancies in our
educational system rules
transportation even some higher
education participants of the R.
B. those folks would be eligible
as well which so this is a win
win across the board to fill
those vacancies as we talk so
much about twenty twenty two so
we do support for this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
The
one online any comments for we
go to questions of the
committees and I know my wife
retired from your be solved or
job driving a bus.
Questions from the committee.
The.
Motion and second
Did we lose our quarrel no
because we still up.
And for been to up in the that's
right.
Still with the.
New Mexico.
Of I would like to offer an
amendment in that talking with
the superintendents around the
state there's a concern with
what we currently have of having
a ninety day you sit out that
people retire in may and they
can't start back in August when
school starts and so schools
have to start with.
A substitute and then the person
comes back that causes
disruptions in the school year
and so I'd like to propose that
we change from the ninety day
set out to a forty five day set
out that allows that to happen
over the summer where people can
then begin the next year.
Mr chair I think there's an
issue with the R. B. in the
number of days a set out but
I'll but David Archuleta.
That.
Mr chair it Mr chair the concern
is is that there has to be a
legitimate lay out period and
they typically
the R. S. typically views at the
ninety day even though they
don't spell it out the ninety do
lay out is illegitimate lay out
period for some of the return to
work so while people typically
leave work in may really the
retirement date is July first so
did a July date you know what to
someone can usually return to
work on October second we said
we we we do see the the
challenge with that but it's all
based off of what we would
consider to be the bonafide
retirement period the.
There are other states that have
almost no set out time some that
are thirty day set out how did
they get around that or how does
that happen that they can and
yet we can't indeed so there's
there been a number of states
only a handful that have either
eliminated the the with the
layout period meaning they can
basically immediately returned
to work or after a shorter
period of time I would say that
that sort of presses are yes
the.
limits of what the IRS rules
would allow and would simply put
us in jeopardy for potentially
losing that tax tax exempt
status that allows us to make
those pre those contributions on
a tax free basis before
deductions are taken.
Okay and one question.
And so why can't we change their
data the actual retirement stage
at July one as a date the
actually just turn in the form
for that right.
As and senator Mr chairman I
believe because they work we we
the way that it's calculated
right now is based off of
quarters so they they earn
service credit for the quarter
and they are paid through the
end of June so if of someone
only wanted to be paid through
may and not be paid for those
three months I I don't have a
good answer for that question
right guard for the question
right now I'm gonna say that
they earn service for that
credit and they're paid through
the end of June.
Yeah you might my purpose of it
is to to not have somebody start
with a long term sub and then
the teacher coming in October is
if there was a way of getting
around that Senator Kernan yet a
COVID.
Mr chair some wondering what I
couldn't the the teacher this
going to begin full time could
that person work as a a long
term sub I know that would be
paid as much but would that be
legal for them to do that.
Andrea be that that would be
about it I think and again you
may have better information but
I know their concerns with the
districts about substitutes who
were our retirees on how many
hours they're allowed to work
per week that that was types of
things that we've run into some
of those but I don't understand
fully how that works.
Mr chairman and senator current
currently there are four options
for returning to work one of
which is after one year lay out
which is getting ready to expire
at the end of this year they're
allowed to return without any
sort of earnings cap or limit
but that will expire at the end
of this year those people that
are participating in that
program we have about twelve
hundred maybe fifteen under
members they're currently
participating in that program
they'll be grandfathered into
what they will be allowed to
continue under that program the
other options that we had and we
had prior to last year was you
could return
after ninety days intern up to
fifteen thousand dollars per
year.
The next option we have which is
theoretically it's and we refer
to it as a No Way Out period but
there is sort of a lab because
you can't apply to become a
return to work retiree until
after you retired and that is to
come back in a quarter time
status or point two five ten
hours per week so they can do
that but that would basically if
they did that would eliminate
there they haven't laid out for
ninety days which is the other
requirement of the existing law
which were referring to amending
right now is house bill seventy
three this past last year.
Okay so I'm confused as to
whether we're able to do this or
not.
And and again just trying to
solve a problem I mean certainly
I support the bill as it is but
I think that they would help fix
the other problem of having
substitutes starting school.
before we get our qualified
teacher back in.
Mr chairman we it when we
started by last year about
anything less than ninety days
our legal counsel both internal
and external advised against.
Okay I'll I'll drop.
Drop my a recommendation we do
have a motion for a do pass if
you'll call the roll please
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes Senator Kernan center my
Estes.
Philadelphia's Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes.
Senator souls yes so you have a
do pass.
Th th yes and we are getting
close to our our shut down time
on things Center mu knows you're
up with four ninety four higher
education funding after budget
passes thank you Mr chairman
Senate bill ninety four just
look to reducing instruction
general funding purposes for
tuition seems like every time
the legislature
passes something opportunity
scholarship provided a
scholarship all the sudden we
see tuition increases following
right behind we're trying to
control tuition on the students
by doing this and so let my
expert witness start off again
thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'll be brief as
senator Munoz said it's aimed to
address tuition and fee
increases as senator Munoz also
noted higher education
institutions had an eight point
one percent increase in tuition
from twenty twenty to twenty
twenty one two point two percent
increase over COVID and an
eleven point three percent
increase after the passage of
the opportunity scholarship so
the data does suggest the
tuition and fees continue to go
up so this bill is a five year
budget adjustment which provides
that if tuition and fees go up
except for a few emergency
contingencies the institutions I
NG funding will be reduced on a
monthly basis proportional to
that fee increase so if there's
a four percent tuition increase
but only three percent can be
justified under the proposed
criteria than the left over one
percent would be the I. Angie
reduction for that month and do
anything to reduce the
amendment.
We haven't meant there was there
there may have been an amendment
they're supposed we have not
gotten an amendment having
that's okay.
Confusing decisions and it's
okay.
And yeah that's all I have thank
you Mr Cheney Senator no I I'll
there's a sheet and I don't know
if I have copies the four year
average of of four year
institutions increasing tuition
over the last twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty three has been a
twelve percent increase in the
fourth.
You have a great conversation
over help how long a period is
that.
That is from twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty two a twelve
percent increase and that's
that's the total percentage not
the yearly percentage total
percentage over four year period
on four year institutions of so
it's about three percent a year
meanwhile two year institutions
only increased by two point
three percent.
and community colleges about
seven point seven.
Okay up the audience those in
support of this legislation.
Those in opposition.
You all like to come up in.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of.
Mr chairman members of the
committee model shows registered
lobbyist for central New Mexico
community college and we
currently.
Legislation that we have been
working president facing higher
it's the vice president of
finance Lydia Padilla Jackson
have been working with the
sponsor to try to resolve some
of the issues we do
I understand and we know that
the sponsor understands that we
need some flexibility on how we
deal with are ready needs
relative to inflation and so we
will continue.
Thank you.
Mark did you want to.
Sure.
Lujan.
Thank you Secretary breakfast
together.
I appreciate the nice practice
by the way.
You Mr chair members of the
committee marks that are a
within Mexico's university
presidents it's kind of hard and
and I like the Senate in terms
of the you're either for your
against this is a public comment
affected I want to commend the
sponsor for initiating this
conversation is an important
conversation because we talk
about funding for higher
education and what that that
entails is this bill tales
instruction in general funding
which is our core funding you
talk about the SCG for public
schools which I'll be honest
this is just my opinion is why I
mean we've just fund that let
you wouldn't believe but in
higher education hi I considered
in a nickel and diming process
for higher education because we
have to wishin well you'll hear
they can raise tuition they can
increase tuition and keep in
mind when we talk about the
increase in tuition over the
last past years our neighbor in
state like Arizona through the
recession raised tuition almost
fourteen percent in one year on
New Mexico's roughly about three
point two percent.
we try to keep tuition low.
And so when we raise tuition
that tuition dollar doesn't go
as far as of eight thinks it
goes so we have to rely on the
ships in general fund this year
let's say finance committee and
house appropriations finance
committee substitute for House
Bill to recommends a one percent
increase in line Jeez funding
for all of higher ed statewide.
Remember one percent in I. Angie
is seven two million dollars
statewide for for higher
education.
Inflation right now higher
indexes roughly about five point
two percent in second place
national reserves about six
point two percent.
So if you find a seven point two
million dollars right now
there's a bill Senate bill
eleven that's going to probably
costs almost nine million
dollars to implement that bill
Senate bill house bill one fifty
one thank you about a million
thank you keep in mind that when
you thank you twenty million
thank you thank you.
I can cut that cord from the.
Thank you thank you chairman
soul Senators thank you senator
Munoz Vanessa Hawker with the
New Mexico independent community
colleges in this bill as Mr
Senator was saying it brings up
the conversation we talk about
public education when we talk
about public and we're only
talking about K. twelve our
public higher education
institutions are public
education and when we look at
how should how should be funded
who should have to bear what
costs what should the students
cost B. which now for New Mexico
residents opportunity
scholarship is picking up a
significant amount of that what
should the state share be
looking at the entire picture
and so we thank the senator for
bringing this up so we can have
this conversation during the
interim what should New Mexico's
higher education system look
like how should it be if be
funded thank you.
Thank you in just a anyone else
we went in opposition.
Those are positions any thank
you thank you.
I'm just losses morning of any
comments for we go to questions
of the committee so it's a very
interesting to me that that
higher it compares himself to
public education.
As we move forward with the
opportunity that's almost the
same system is as public
education where we're giving
them free enrollment continues
to to shins their stories
throughout the whole system all
tell you one story with a kid
who is a friend of my son and.
Have a lottery
was denied for opportunity.
Was getting his masters in
aerospace engineering and MSU
and was Dodd denied opportunity
and those are the kids that you
want the system to work for an
issue got through the system in
came a waiver but the problem
was the kid had same care with
money spent their dual credit
system had gotten too many
credits as we move forward had
to associate's degrees working
on his master's in aerospace
engineering and that
disqualified him because he's
higher institutions move forward
they they the cost control has
to happen at some point in time
you know we had a lot of need
he had adopted they provide an
opportunity he still short
stacking all that still meet him
short the cost controls and
universities have just got to
come under control you never
seen cut.
He never him say okay we we have
more money but we have less
students.
They're declining population and
and their inability to recruit
students throughout the state in
you see it is hurting the
institutions and I don't have
the institutions and.
Our meeting was seen and before
COVID four thousand students
come back around two thousand
and and I may be correct on the
number but only gained about
five hundred students backed
will you work the thirty five
hundred population go to they
graduated they do something
where they do the right why are
we getting those numbers back up
as we move forward and I think
that's a problem in the more
students we have in the last
cost on them higher institution
should be not raising tuition
because you have in your
increasing your population but
here you still have the same
operational costs but they're
increasing operational costs on
the same side as we move forward
so that was for questions thank
you questions on the Senator
Kernan thank you Mr chairman and
yep I agree we've always had
this problem whenever we readies
it it like getting the
opportunity then they raise
tuition and and that is that's
nothing new it's been going on
so but also recognize that
higher it is becoming more and
more like public it and we have
less students in public
education in my correct and
we're just increasing funding
and so that's what we do we give
more money less students
We have unfunded mandates in
public at in it appears higher
it's experiencing that as well
so I think it's worth a
discussion to figure it out and
I don't know if this is a of
Bill to open that discussion of
we really do want to go ahead
and make that decision now that
I I just think that that there
are so many more similarities
now between our our higher it
maybe it should be tied to cost
of living rather than just
because we're doing opportunity
and and providing more money to
the students of Corsica rice if
we're going to pay the tuition
so I I like the idea of figuring
it out in the in coming back I
don't know if we need to do it
C. to light up implementation in
twenty eight so that's there's a
lot of repealed in twenty eight
at with this point with this
going to affect.
Mr chair Senator I believe
ninety are for the next school
year some of the state but I can
double check.
Pretty quick pretty quick I
would hate to see Mr chair you
know for that to our public
schools and be with the cap this
room full again so just just a
consideration at I think it's
something we need to address but
in in in the other issue is.
I don't know who really has
conversations with with a higher
ed do it we don't L. E. S. C. we
have a little bit but not much
just with the schools of
education and then I guess I go
to LFC and that's where you know
all the conversation Kerr's that
we've got to figure out a place
with them to reside I think it I
don't know where that is I don't
want to be under Elia city and I
kind of get that but there's got
to be a place for them to come
for us to go to them and sit
down and have these
conversations so I don't know
where that is but certainly we
need to do that so just curious
if this is a message bill or
this is something we really do
want to just implement right
away so that's all I have thank
you and little bit of my
prerogative before we go on we
are past our stop time and so
I'd ask Miss our ranking member
we can finish this bill should
we do we want to go on to the
others does anyone that's in to
do that I think those maybe
fairly short but just as we're
trying to manage or put those
is.
Okay so the one forty five I
presume the house bill one forty
five and and Representative
Ezzell you've been waiting very
patiently I've been trying to
the kind of mark the time as we
are so is that all is that okay
with members I'd we always talk
about a hard stop but we can by
kind of a acclamation got a move
on that other thing so we will
finish this one and then one
forty five we will not be
hearing H. B. one eighty one
then afterwards Center Hickey.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
interest of being brief I'm just
gonna put on my business cap
If if if the money just keeps
coming no one's going to do the
tough things to them and that's
cutting and in business when you
have a down cycle you're not
selling it I mean you gotta
adjust you got to bring that
discipline you have to really
think which are high value is so
I think this is a very important
bills to be able to bring to
higher education so that they
have to pay attention to where
their costs are prioritize it
and live within the kind of me
as the economy goes up and down
and figure out how to do it so I
am very strong support this
bill.
Thank you other comments.
At the center Pinto always would
check in with you.
In the rough.
I have a couple of questions.
You indicated that there were
over the last four years I've
been a twelve percent increase
in tuition for the four years
correct what's the CPI increase
then over those four years I and
sepia and did it depends I mean
you have to go back and look at
the bait the status of a share
of the if you look at CPI you
gotta establish a base your form
and whatever that base number is
and then you look at the CPI
increase in that sector right in
the in looking overall CPI
increase or you can look by
overall CPI overall CPI in
minutes fluctuated almost
everywhere from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty those without
years are you really C. B. I was
really high because consumers
are consuming more product home
what's really high.
In four percent.
Four percent per year.
what's the C. P. I've been over
the just the last year or so.
I am currently in with the CPI
we know inflation rate is but
the CPI you have to pick a month
and base that number off of CPI
and then come back the C. behind
you that basically you have to
do on a monthly or quarterly
basis so I I can tell you what
it's been in this six month
period.
Okay but you said there was
topercent increase and you know
if you said if it's been four
percent per year over four years
that would be a sixteen percent
it seems like the public it the
higher it is been doing pretty
well in controlling their costs
compared to the inflation and
certainly CPI affects what they
have to pay salaries for faculty
costs for building material me
all kinds of different things
that typically all of those move
with at least inflation levels
we've been hearing over the last
year to very high inflation
levels.
It seems like that's not an
unreasonable increase how much
is over the last four years have
we increase the base funding for
higher education.
Hi Angie and last for your I can
answer that question I don't
know a lot of tough.
But they're aging premarket what
has been the.
As the committee I'd say the
average increase for higher ed
probably about maybe twenty two
percent.
Just keep in mind when we were
cut heresy the highs because
roughly up to eighty percent
during that there during the
COVID our special session so
what we're trying to make up
ground New Mexico state did you
just say on right sizing when
chance across.
And actually decreased
employment level so much that
Los crucis and this was in the
LFC con in this report that
there are one of the highest
unemployment rates in your in
the United States because of
that decrease in employment at
New Mexico State University so
we do drive employment and this
in the state of New Mexico thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you and you know and so it
seems like yeah we've been
underfunding them that one or
two percent when CPI inflation
is been four percent.
It seems like if anything were
under funding higher education
at the state level where that's
been forcing them to to be able
to pay back Lee competitive
salaries and other things
requires higher tuition if the
state's not going to pick up
their role
in past years higher education
was seen as a public good and
the state general support for
higher education with
substantially higher this is
across the country that it is
now.
And it seems like now we're
almost forcing more of the the
support for higher education on
to tuition for kids this Madam
get puts the higher education in
almost the double jeopardy that
we have to raise tuition in
order to.
To fund faculty to be
competitive regionally
and they don't have a whole lot
of other options if they're not
getting the support from the
state then to raise this raise
tuition but if they raise
tuition then they're in jeopardy
of getting less support from the
state and instead of a virtuous
cycle up we get a vicious cycle
down that it causes them to have
to raise more tuition because
they get paid even more from the
state I think that's bad policy
to do that that we need to be
giving greater support to the
university so they don't have to
raise tuition on students of.
Also it came up about yeah we
ought to study this in their
interim the US Senator Kernan
indicated higher than really
have an interim home to to look
into study these things of
certainly I think L. E. S. C. is
talked regularly about including
them but it's not under our
constitutional mandate to do so
other than teacher preparation
programs and so it that causes
some other things that their
only recourse is to go to
finance committee.
Where the it leads from higher
ed your lease my view sitting up
here on higher ed is where they
feel like they're not getting
fair hearings in being heard for
the the needed cost increases
certainly the CPI increases over
the last four years are
substantially more than twelve
percent over four years.
Senator Mr chair the CPI in
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
one was roughly about five point
two percent they took an eight
percent increase in twenty
twenty two CPR was about eight
percent in twenty twenty to
twenty twenty three they took a
thirteen percent increase above
CPI so those are the CPI
numbers.
The the university's charge
thirteen percent more over CPR
that's how much the fee I went
up to the I'm averaging just two
years ago actually take twenty
twenty one and twenty twenty
which is one point two percent
CPI was twenty twenty one was
four point seven percent in
twenty twenty one they came with
the eight point one percent
increase.
And then you take the following
year if you could call in here
twenty twenty one because our
budgeting cycle in trend it.
Make these more in the budgeting
cycle twenty twenty one twenty
twenty two.
Twenty twenty one see that was
four point seven percent in
twenty twenty it was eight
twenty twenty two is eight
percent over those two year
periods they took a thirteen
percent increase.
Which is in line with CPI but
where were they weren't aligned
with CPI was in twenty twenty
twenty twenty one when two guys
only one point two percent
increase but senator you said it
was a twelve percent increase
over four years so it's going to
be the cumulate shin of those
four CPI numbers this is an
overall twelve percent is an
overall accumulation all higher
and instructions the the total
CPI numbers this is for all four
years branch colleges community
colleges is is than that average
that I gave you for CPI giving
you a total number across the
board when community colleges
over that whole time period only
increased by two point three
percent the branch collar
sectors right there increases
are only two point three
percent.
And and the other community
colleges like Santa Fe community
college in New southern New
Mexico in them only increased by
seven point seven percent over
the four year period.
So branch colleges increased at
a higher rate than I mean four
year colleges have increased at
a higher rate than branch
colleges have yes but
substantially under consumer
price index indicated.
Is the overall inflation rate
which is essentially what that
is doing which was substantially
above the twelve percent.
So okay I'll I'll stop leisure
the committee please.
At.
Motion FOR do pass.
I would do a substitute motion
to table.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey.
No on the tape.
Senator Kernan no.
Center my Estes.
Senator Neville.
yes.
Senator Pinto.
No.
Senator pope.
Yes Senator souls yes.
We have a tall we have a tie.
we have a motion for a do pass
is our second for the do pass.
The
second on a do pass.
Your call the roll Senator
Brandt.
Senator Hickey yes Senator
Kernan yes Senator Maestas.
Senator Neville no.
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope nope Senator
souls no the staff is still have
a type three.
No recommendation the finance.
Yes outcome.
Senator Brandt Senator Hickey
yes.
Senator Kernan yes Senator my
Estes Senator Neville yes
Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator Hemphill no Senator
souls no but I think you did
what.
Four two forty two
okay.
Representative Ezzell I hope you
read the room that that this
should be very quick.
Keep it very quick Mr chairman
members thank you for here in
this second time at your
scheduled here I will be very
brief on this this is Philip
regarding extending the
legislative scholarship from
four years to six years and Mr
chairman I do believe that
general
of drizzle is online if you
would like to say anything at
this is this is scholarship of
was put in place in the state.
Now closed anyway this is going
to allow these students that to
have received the scholarship
sometimes it's a financial
hardship and all we're doing is
asking for the two year
extension and to the junior
college and with that I'll stand
for questions.
The questions.
Mr Chairman do best ocean where
do pass and seconded is there
any opposition if you'll call
the roll please.
Requests Senator Hickey yes.
Senator Kernan center Maestas
Philadelphia's Senator Pinto.
Yes Senator pope yes Senator all
yes you have a due process thank
you for waiting through the
other stuff for your your bills
I'm sorry thank you for waiting
through our other bills thank
you all for hearing it today yes
ma'am appreciate.
Senator.
